EPIGRAPHIA INDICAVol. XX. 1929-30.   
PUBLISHED BY 
THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
JANPATH, NEW DELHI-! 10011 
1983
Reprinted 1983   
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
1983 
Price : Rs. 40.00 
Printed at Pearl Offset Press, 5/33 Kirti Nagar Industrial Area New Delhi-110015.
PUBLISHED ITNDEB THE ATJTHOBITY OF THE GOTEEHMEHT OT INDIA EPIQRAPHIA INDICAAND   
RECORD OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA. Vol. XX. 1929-30. 
EDITED BY 
HIKANAISDA SASTRI, M.A., M. O.L., D. LETT., GOVERNMENT EPIGRAPHIST FOB INDIA. 
DELHI: MANAGEE OF PUBLICATIONS 
1933
  

CONTENTS.   
The names *>/ contributors are arranged alphabetically* 
No, 3, Three Tamil Inscriptionsof Laigudi ...,.,....40 
SOBBABMANYA, K. V,, B.A., M.E.A.S. 
No, 10. Patna Museum Plates of Ranabhanja the year 22 .,. f 100 
BANEEJI, R, !>., M.A. 
11. The Kadambapadraka Grant of Naravarman V. S. 1167 . . . . , , 105 BIKSBIT, K. K, M.A. 
No* 5. Paharpur Copper-plate Grant of the [Gupta] year 159 . . , , 59 HALDER, R. R. 
No. 9. Samoli Inscriptionof the time of Siladitya [Vikrama-Samvat] 703 *, 97 13. Babok Inscriptionof the time of Dhavalappadeva ; [Harsha-] Samvat 207 * * . 122 - No. 14. F*ur Chandella Copper-plate Inscriptions y/ ,., 125 
HiEALAt, PAI BAHADUE 
- No. 7. The Hathigumpha Inscriptionof Kharavela *...,.71 
JAYASWAL, K. P., M.A. AND BAKEEJI, R. B., Prol, M.A 
PANCHAMUKEI, R. S., M.A. 
12. Two Sinda Inscriptions from Benachamatti, Saka 1088 and Saka 1109 ... 109 
No, 6 Kotavumachgi Inscriptionof Vilcramaditya V . . . . f f t . 64 
RAO, LAKSHMDTAEYAH, N., M.A. 
No. 8. Kap Copper-pkte of Keladi Sadasiva-Nayaka ; Saka 1479 89 No, 4. A Sunga Inscription from Ayodhya ....,...,f 54 
SAHKI, BAYA RAM, M.A., RAI BAHABUB 
No. 2. Nalanda Stone Inscriptionof the reignof Yasovaxmmadeva /..,.*37 
SASTET, HIEANAUDA - 
VOGEL, J. PH., PROF., PH.B. 
No, 1, Pmkrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist site at Nagarjunikonda 1 
137 
dix A List of the Inscriptions of Northern India written in Brahmi and its Derirative Scripts from 
about A,C. 200. Bj Professor B. R. Bhandarkar, M,A., Pn.B. . ... 43266 Title-page, Contents, List of Plates and Additions and Corrections i yiij
  

LIST OF PLATES. 
1, fykrit to'ptioafrom a Buddhist site at Nagarjnaikonda (I), , betweenpages15 4 ft 2, (2) n lo19 
M)**9) ft tf # 
II 
4, PI . , betweenpages22 U3 * 5, (V). 24&w0 6, KakdjStoneliiJcriplJionofthereignofYaaovajmmadeva ... to facepage 43 IThreeTamHInioriptionBofLalgudi,' betweenpages 5U63 tt8. lakpot CopperPlate Grant of the (Gupta) year159 . . .   
^ 10. Samoli Inseription of the toe of SMtyHVi^na-S^at]703. , to facepageM H 11. Pataa Hnseom Plates of Ranabhinja-the year22 .... betweenpages102 & 103 i,12. KadambapadrakaGrant of NuaTanan-V. 8, 1167 ....,,106 ft Id? 
11 Dabok Uptionof tin time of Dbralappadera ; EH&nb]Samvat 207 to facepage 124 . . tf M liftADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.   
Page 7, 1. 26. For Kasmfra read Kasinka. 
15, 1 7 of GL For Bhatideva reaZ Bhatideva* 
5J 22, 1. 26. For mahavifha^Jrerearf Mahavi[ha*]re, 
23, 1. 11. For Tambapamna read Tambapainni. 
32i L 38. For (0.1. 12)razeZ (H. 1 12), 
35, 1. 17. For A&oka read ASoka. 
penultimateline. .For China read China* 
36, 1. 17. .For Naharallabodu read Naharailabodu. 
39, 1. 8. For he read the. 
44, In. 3. For hould read should. 
45, penultimateline in translation of Verse 1. For fislies (engraved) read makaras ( (suggested by Dr. A. Coomaraswamy, ed.). 
L 2, in translation of Vv. 4-6. For asif read as if. 
3,L 3 J5 V. 9, For copiousread copious, 
55 47, L 35. For Parantak n read Parantakan. 
48, L 25. For latter read later, 
L 36, For Velurapalaiyam read Velurpalaiyam. 
9>L 2 of f . n. 5. Insert ( before Stambha). 
49, 1, 6. Insert4 after Aparajita. 
f n. 5, For Tillasthanam read Tillaistlianam. 
>3 50, col 4 in the table. For PrithvlpatiI read Prithvlpati L 
>3 5S L 1 of f . n. 3. For Varaguna read Varaguna, 
51, penultimateline of the letterpress. For Ilampenmgay- read Ilamperunkay-, 53, L 5 of translation. For th esun read the sunj 
1. 5 of text of C. For 1-ppon read i-ppog,. 
53 56, L 29. For writer read writers. 
t> 58, 1. 30. For karamisra read karami^ra. 
w 61, 1. 2 of f n. 5. For Natha-6armma read Natha^armiaa, 
,, 63, f. n. 7, For mahlmatam read makimatam. 
65,1. 10. For Gomda-Bhatta read Gr6vinda-Bha,tta. 
66,120. Omit be, 
f . n. 1. For Hebbal read HebbSj. 
5J f. n, 6, For elongedread belonged. 
:J 67, text 1. 24. For bhatta- read bhatta-, 
S3 68, text L 43. For mukkyarggam read mukhyarggaih, 
>3 69, i n. 4. For m%r*faWw: read g 
70, 1. 2 of translation of LI. 46-48. For Varanasi read Varana^i 
79 a text line 6. For Baja=s[u]ya[in]read Rajas[u]ya[mj 
83, 1 . 2* For Kalingapatanam read Kalingapatanam* 
86r, t n. 5 1. 3. For Bhattoji read Bhattoji. 
87.J u31 1 . For Fori nstaace read For instance,
IB EHGKAPHIA MCA, [V i.XX. siiitZi^nr ,ziii!!!!r^..........* ............. ""......... ................ --"""'................'".-"'- ..... -' -'.'-..' '".-.....- *-* " .....' "--'-"--' --- ....'...... ~*""'''' '' "*"jji!i!i!i!1 " i . . 'I'ui'iu_______,JT...... i" 11   
Paje88,in,6.-lorD,P.J,fi(IK,P1 J, 
9, 1, 5 of translation of 1, 15,-for Sindhula ml Sindhll 
99, f, n, 2,-ftrTiramitrodaya mi FiMMqa, 
91, 1, S.-Jor Mi,hmkri$ id J 
92, L U,-Ar Girnar nod Sirnar, 
95, translation of LL 19 f,-Jor hmlk 
96, 28 Shorter- refliKa 
91, L 2,~ta a commao/hrSamkara-setti, 
text L 11,-ftrtftlfari 
extl-JS^orDakhitbtijiiia-pafpalli- reu(JDaklii(kslii)i)apa(pa)lh 
103, text L 4Wfor Bhn(BM)mi -wi bk(bliii)ink 
text U2,~ftr -samka 
H(),L5,~jPorYoge5vara- rdYogeivara-, 
II') 
jj ilU}it v*r
EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. VOLUME XX.   
L PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM A BUDDHIST SITE AT NAGARJUNIKONDA. BY PROFESSOR J. PH, VQGEL, PH. D., LEIDEN. 
In March 1926 Mr. A. R. Sarasvati, Telugu Assistant In the office of the Assistant Archae ological Superintendentfor Epigraphy at Madras, made a discovery of great interest at the hill of Nagarjunikonda which belongsto the Palnacl taluk of the Gu^tur district of the Madras Presi dency.1 The hill, which is described as a big flat-toppedhill some 200 acres in extent, overhangs the right bank of the river Kistna or Krishna, the Rannapenna or Ka^navanna (Skt. Erishmvarna) of Pali literature, at a distance of some 15 miles from Macherla and on the border of the Nizam's Dominions. The topof the hill shows traces of fortifications, now in ruins. The find of a Buddhist sculptureled to the discoveryof three vast mounds of large bricks in different parts of the valley, each, apparently, marking the site of a stupa. In the vicinityof these mounds marble pillars were found, some of them standing erect in rows. Several more were reported to lie scattered in the neighbouring villages and on the other side of the river. Among the pillarsleft on the site there were three, one on each mound, bearing inscriptionsin Prakrit and in Brahml characters. 
At the requestof Dr. Hirananda Sastrl, Government Epigraphist, I undertook to edit the inscriptionsin the Epigraphia Indica. A set of excellent estampages prepared under instruc tions from that officer, reached me in September 1926 ; but it was not until the end of that year that I could find the necessary leisure to decipher and study them. Early in March 1927. Dr. HirSnanda $astri informed me that trial excavations carried out on the site of Nagarjunikonda by Mr. Hamid Kuraishi, then officiating as Superintendent of Archaeologyin the Southern Circle, had yielded no less than eighteen more inscriptions and that their estampages would be sent to my address, in case I should be willingto edit them. I gladly consented to undertake this laborious but attractive task. As, however, there was a likelihood of the recently discovered inscriptions being of some helpin elucidating doubtful points in those foimd previously,I suggested that the epigraphicalfinds of NagarjunikoEuJa might be best dealt with in one article. Dr. Hirananda Sastri accepted this proposal and in October 1927 supplied me with a complete set of estampages admirably executed. 
During the cold season of 1927-28 the excavations at Nagarjuniko94a were continued under the supervisionof Mr. A. H. Longhurst, Superintendent of the Archaeological Survey, Southern Circle. These explorations have resulted in the discoveryof a number of very remarkable Buddhist sculptures* some of them bearing inscriptions. The style which they exhibit is clearly that of 
1 A preliminary account of the discovery will be found in the Annual Report on South-Indian Epigraphy jor the year ending 3.Ut March 1926, Madras, pp. 4 and 92 f. C/. also Annual Bibliography of Indian ArcMogyfor the ywr 1926, Leyden, 1928, pp.
EPIGRAPHIA INDICA.[VOL. XX   
Amaravatl, although perhaps they cannot boast of the high artistic merit which wo admire in the best work from that pkce. Among the sculptural decoration of the two pillars discovered by Mr. Longliurst there are figures which clearly betray Roman influence. The full report of his excavations will be received with the greatest interest. There cannot be the slightest doubt that Nagarjunikonda represents, nest to Amaravati, the most important Buddhist site hitherto found in Southern India. The results which Amaravati might have yielded have, for a lar^c part been irreparablylost owing to the deplorable vandalism perpetrated on that monument more than a century ago. It is all the more gratifying that the site of Nagfirjunikonda is now being systematically explored so that no pieceof evidence is likely to be overlooked.' M?. Longhurst estimates that the complete excavation of the site will require three years more. 
When in February 1882 Dr. Burgess excavated the site of the Jaggayyapeta stupa, on the Paler river, a tributaryof the Krishna and about four miles north of their junction, he chanced upon three inscribed pillars, bearing each an identical dedicatory inscription in Prakrit.1 These epigraphs record the gift of five ayaTca-MMmbJias at the eastern gate of the Mahachetiya or Great Chaitya by a certain artisan (avesani) Siddhattha in the twentieth year of King iladhariputa Siri-Virapurisadata of the Ikhaku dynasty. The corresponding form in Sanslarit would be Mathariputra Sri-Virapurushadatta. Dr. Burgess expressed the opinion that the Jaggayyapeta 
inscriptions"belong to about the third or fourth century A.D., but are possibly earlier." Dr Buhler8,while editing them, placed the reign of King Purisadata in the third century of our era" and"before the accession of the Pallavas to the throne of Vengi."' ' The position of such aya&a-pillars on the monument to which they once have belonged becomes perfectly dear from the c^a-slabs which have been found in such remarkable numbers on the rate of Amaravati. These cAc%a-slabs exhibit the effigyin relief of a cMtya or stupa in all its details, in other words, they represent the great monument which they once adorned. Now one of the most prominent features of the main edifice-a feature not met with, as far as we are aware in other parts of India-is a row of five columns surmounting a kind of projecting balcony which seems to form part of the procession-path running around the body of the monument. These pillars invariably occupy a position right opposite the entrances to the sacred enclosure, and as the stone railing surrounding the sanctuary has an entrance on each of the four cardinal points it follows that the monument, when entire, must have had four seta of such pillars. They do not appsar to have had any structural function as supporting members, but, besides carrying well- known Buddhist emblems, they were utilised for dedicatory inscriptions, as have been noticed at Jaggayyapeta.The word ayaJca-Jchantifa mentioned in these epigraphs is evidently the technical term by which they were known.3. 
There can be little doubt that the great stupaof Amaravati, when entire, was decorated with I imBTw' ^-BudfM^o/Amarwati and Jaggayyapeta; London," 1887, pp. 110 L, plates LXII a^d 
such pillars, but only a few fragments have been recovered.* In the case of the monument of "/r,^:'L^'^^B/fflta^'1 ^^.No8.12(M!4aM{aj../fi<l.l VoL X, app., pp. 139 f ,. Q BShler, indiscJte PalaograpMe, p. 44.w vv ' '"' 8 Ind. Ant., Vol. XI (1882), pp. 256 ff. 
' Ih* woid oyofo occurs also in the 
and oompowds ddMfrdyife (Burgess, AmarmaH. etc., p. 86, pi. LX no , <**, p. 93). whfah have bean rendered the south entrance and"tho northern Kt 
tfor^ofci 
trarlation is correet The word"gate"is renere y ( probably the word ayofa. indicate*, that part of the monument where the 6yakaMaMha veto placed '^'T;.1 "*- ThefiM8t8Pe<^iB ^e 8quare lower end of . pillar decorated on the Buddhist symbok-a ttupa, a 6a-tree, a cJWa-hall and a wheel ThS t
No. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS NAGABJDNIKONDA. 3   
Jaggayyapetathree inscribed specimens were found, only one of them being complete* These, as we have seen, must hare belongedto a set of five such pillars which were placed on the east side. Dr. Burgessnoticed large pillars or stelae at three of the sides of tke stupa, but it would teem that those lound oa the other sides were uninseribed* 
The explorationsat Nagarjunikondahave brought to light no less than seventeen specimens of Sya/b-pillarSiall inscribed. In thirteen cases the inscriptionis complete or nearlyso. The technical execution ol these epigraphsis as remarkable as the state of their preservation. Evi dently,these pillars once served the purposeof adorningthe main monument of the site, mentioned in the inscriptions under the name of Mahachetiya (Ski Mahachatiya), i.e*, the Great Ohaitya. It is clear that here, too, there must have stood a row of five such pillars at each of the four cardinal points,their total number being twenty. The original position which each of the seventeen columns so far recovered once occupied, could still be ascertained, A completelist of the inscriptionswill 
be givenbelow. 
The mound which covered the rains of the Mahachetiya is nowadays known by the name of Mbagutta.Close to the east side of the great monument the excavations revealed the remains of an apsidal temple containinga small cJiaitya as an objectof worship. The floor of this shrine retains the record of its foundation ip an inscription (E)of two very long lines, remarkably well 
preserved. 
At a distance of about a furlongto the east of the Great Chaityathere is another mound called NaharSHabodu. Accordingto Mr. Longhurst,this site contains the most important groupof monastic buildings, including a large monasterybuilt of brick and plaster, and the remains of two 
At the side of the former building were found the remnants of another apsidalshrine or Here, too, a long inscription (F), incised on the floor of the temple, was found to be the record of its foundation. 
There is a third mound known by the name of Itikarallabodu to the north-west of the Great Chaitya and at a distance of about two furlongs from it. Here a number of stone pillars, apparently still occupyingtheir original position, indicate the existence of another ancient building. From the inscription (G) found on one of these pillars (this inscriptionis one of the three recovered in March 1926),it appearsthat the edifice in question was a vihara somewhat later in date than the buildings previouslynoticed. If this conclusion is correct, the stone pillars may have formed part of the verandah enclosing the central court-yardof the convent* 
A third vihara must have stood in a locality now knom as Kottampalugu to the north of Nagarjuniko^da. Here, too, the record of its foundation is inscribed on a stone pillar. The in scription (H), which is one of the three copiedin March 1926, is probably the latest in date, the writing beingsmaller and less distinct than in the case of the earlier inscriptions* 
The Jaggayyapeta inscriptions, as we have noted above, are dated in the twentieth yearof the reignof a king who calls himself Ma<Jhanputa Ikhakunam Siri- Virapurisadata. The epigraphic al records now recovered on the Buddhist site of Nagarjunikon4arefer to the same Ikhaku dynastyof Southern India. They mention not only MadharlputaSiri-Virapurisadata,1 ia whose reign the principal sanctuaries of this locality were founded, but also his father, Vasithiputa Siri-Chamtamula, and his son and successor Vasetihiputa Siri~Ehuvula-Chatamula.a In a passage which occurs in several of the inscriptions, the former is eulogizedas a performerof the 
1 This is the usual spellingof the name. The more correct form Siri-Virapurisadataoccurs in inscr. G^ 2 It is somewhat difficult to decide whether Chazhtamula or Chatamula is the correct form of these twft names, In some cases there appearsto be. the sign of the anuwdra over the a. WQ may, therefore, asaame. elsewhere it has been omitted by mistake.
EHGRAPHIA ItfDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
Vedic sacrifices Agnihotra, Agnishtoma, Yajapeya and A6vamedha. It follows that Siri-Chanita milla was a devotee of Brahmanism. His sop, Siri-Virapurisadata, though partaking in the religious merit, does not seem to have had an active partin the foundation of the religious monuments of Nagarjunikoi^a, They owed their existence to the pietyof certain queens and princesses belongingto the royal house of Ikhaku and evidently devotees of the Buddhist faith. 
The principal founder was a lady called Ohamtisiril(sirinikain inscr. B 3) who is praised for her munificence in a passage which recurs in not less than nine of the <%a&a-pillar inscriptions . In these inscriptions she is called the uterine sister of Siri-Chamtamula and the paternal aunt of Siri-Virapurisadata. She was married to the Mahasenapati, the Mahatatavara Vasithiputa Kamdasiri of the Pukiya8family, and, in consequence, she herself bears the title of Mahatalavan* Moreover, she is called the mother of Khamdasagaramnaka. In one of the pillar inscriptions (B 5) it is distinctly stated that it was she who erected the Great Chaitya of the Great Vihara or Monas tery. It is curious that here the instrumental plural (mahatdavarihi Chamtisiri^iMM) is employed, but it will be noted that several ladies of that name took part in the donation, Or, can it be a pluralis majestatis? The date regularly found at the end of the pillar inscriptions the sixth yearof Siri-Virapurisadata, the sixth fortnight of the rainy season, the tenth day marks* no doubt, the time when the great monument was consecrated. Chamtisiri was, moreover, the foundress of the apsidal shrine (No. I), built opposite the eastern or principalside of the Great Chaitya*3 This is distinctly stated in the long inscription (E) cut on the floor of that building. In this document the edifice founded by (MiMisiri is designated first as a chetiya-ghara, and subse quently as a stone ma%4apa surrounded by a cloister (chatusdla-parigahitam sela-mamtavam).* The building was dedicated to the acMryas of the Aparamahavinaseliya sect. The time of the dedication is expressed by the date found at the end of the inscription the eighteenth year of Siri-Yirapurisadata, the sixth fortnightof winter, the fifth day. The date is given both in words and in figures. 
It deserves notice that in the earlier inscriptions Chamtisiri is called the paternal aunt (pituchM)*of the reigning king, whereas in the later inscription (E), noted above, she refers to the king as her son-in-law. It would seem that Siri-Virapurisadata between the 6th and the 18th years of his reign had married the daughter of his aunt and consequently his cousin. 
Two of the pillar inscriptions (C2 and 4) mention another sister (sQdara bhagM) of Kin*? Siri-Chamtemula, whose name was Hammasiri or Eammasiri^ika, and two of her daughters named Bapisiri^ika and Chhattnsiri. Both these princesses were married to the rekninAinu their cousin, and consequently bear the title of Mahadevi. 
The same title of MaMdem is borne by a lady, Eudradharabhatarika, whose name occurs in the inscription on the fiffli pillar of the southern row (B 5). It may be concluded that she, too was a consort of the reigning king, though in the inscription she is not expressly designated as 'snob She to have been a princess from Ujjain (Skt. Ujjayini), the well known town in Central E*^.^^^j^fed k mij*S^Deling Ujanika maharaMika of the text into moftoa^Ub. Among the rulers of the house of Chashtana, the so-called ^ 
ap^ars 
nsnatrapas, TOOK capital was Ujjam, we find a certain preference for personal names , the name of the god Rudra. such as Rudradaman, Rudrasena and Rudrasiniha. This
No. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIEOtfDA.5   
all the more plausible to assume that the Queen. Rudradharabhatariki, mentioned in the inscrip tion belongedto that illustrious house. 
The pillar inscriptions acquaint us with three more noble ladies who were associated with Chamtisiri in her pious foundation. The one mentioned on the second pillar of the south side (B 2) is called Adavi (?)-Cha[m]tisiri. The inscriptioncalls her the daughterof KingSiri-Chanita mula, the sister of King Siri-Virapurisadata, and the wife of the MahdsenapatiMahatalavara Mahadandanayaka Khamdavisakhamnaka (*Skt. Skandavisakha) of the house of the.Dhanakas She herself is distinguished by the title of Mahatalavari. 
The other lady, who was the donor of the fourth pillar of the southern row (B 4),is called Chula-Cha[m]tisirinika, i.e., Cha[rii]tisirinika the Less or tlie Younger,the adjective chula evi dently being added to distinguish her from her namesake, the foundress of the Mahachetiya. The junior Cha[m]tisirinika, as stated in the inscription, was a daughter of the Kulahakas and the spouse of the MaMsenapati Mahdtalavara Vasithipiita Khamdachalikireriirnasaka of the Hiramnakas. She herself bears the title of Mahasenapatini. 
The fifth pillar of the western side (C 5) was dedicated by a lady whose personal name is not mentioned, but who is called the wife of the MaMsenapati Mahatalavara Vasithlputa Maha kamdasiri of the Piikiyas and the mother of the MahasenapatiMahdtalavara Vinhusiri (=Skt. Vishnr^rl). She is, moreover, distinguished by the title Mahatdavan* If we may assume that Mahakamdasiri and Kanidasiri are one and the same person,it would follow that the anonymous lady of the pillar-inscription C 5 was a co-wife (sapatm) of Chamtisiri. 
We must now consider the two separate pillar-inscriptions G and H which, as we have noted above, must belongto a somewhat later date. The inscription0- is found on one among a number of pillars, decorated with lotus-rosettes, which were found standing about two furlongs to the north-west of the Mahachetiya. Mr. Longlmrst informs me that the topsof these pillars are each provided with a mortice evidently meant to receive the beams of a wooden roof. This would well agree with our supposition that these stone columns once belongedto the verandah enclosingthe' central court of the vihara. The inscribed stone shows several cracks running throughthe inscri bed surface and the letters are worn owing to exposure. 
The inscription records the foundation of a viMra by Mahadevl Bhatideva who is called the daughter-in-law of Siri-Cha[m]tamuk, the wife(?)of Siri-Virapurisadata, and the mother of a Maharaja, whose name appears to be Siri-Ehuvu]a-Chat&mula. The three syllables which we read fatvula are uncertain. The same is the case with the one or two initial syllables of the word following the name Siri-Virapurisadata, so that it is doubtful what relation existed between that king and the lady Bhatideva. The word in question, however, can be hardly anything but Vhayaya. Thus it would follow that Bhatideva was the consort of the king. The last two lines of the document seern to have contained a date, but unfortunately this part of the inscription has been obliterated to such an extent that our reading must be regarded as conjec tural Evidently the vihara was founded during the reignof Bhatideva's son, the Maharaja whose name is mentioned in the inscription. 
The inscribed pillar of Kottampalugu is also the foundation record of a vihara. The foundress was a Mahddem who was the granddaughter of Siri-Cha[m]tamula, the daughter of Siri-Vira purisadata, arid the sister of Maharaja Vasothlputa Siri-Bhuvula-Cha[rii]tamula. It is, moreover, stated in the inscription that she was the consort of the Maharaja of Vanavasa. Her personal name is soraewhat indistinct but rnny be read as Kodabalisiri. It will be noted in the sequel that Vanavasa, the ancient name of North Kanara, occurs also among the countries within the ehaitya-inscription F are stated to have been converted to Buddhism by the (Jcylonese monksu
EPIGEAPHIA IND1CA. [ VOL. XX*   
The pillar inscriptionof Kottampalugu is dated in the eleventh yearof the reignof Siri-EhuvuJa- Clia[m]taniuk. 
The historical information furnished by these inscriptions regardingthe three fnltim of the Southern Ikhaku dynasty, whom they mention, is very meagre,Siri-Chathtamula is extolled in a passage winch recurs in several of the inscriptions but which appearsto be entirely conven tional. It has been pointed out above that the king must have been an adept of Btfthntaiusm, Prom the expression Virupakhapctii-MahaSma-parigaMtasa, which is applied to ChaiMam^la* ifc may perhapsbe concluded that he was a votary of the god Mahasena or Skanda,* s the lord of the Virupakhas". The term Virupakha (*Skt. Virupaksha) seems to be used here to indicate the hosts of which Skanda is the lord and leader.1 Dr. Biihler's assumption, based on pal&eogra* phical evidence, that Siri-Virapurisadataflouiished in the third century of our era, may bo accepted as probably correct. 
Although the inscriptionstell us nothing about the faitset gestes of these kings,it IB interesting to meet with a line of rulers, settled in the Telngu country, which claimed descent from Ikhaku, i.e., Ikkhaku (*=Skt. Ifahvaku), the mythical progenitorof the famous Solar dynasty of Ayodhya* It is well known that not only Kama belongedto that illustrious house, but the Buddha, too, is called a scion of the race of Ikshvaku (Pali OJcTcaka). It is clear, in any case, that these Southern Ikhakus were rulers of some importance,as they formed matrimonial alliances jaot only with th Maharajas of Vanavasa, but also with the kings, presumably the descendants of the Satrap Ohash tana, who resided at tJjjayimin Central India. The nomenclature of these {Southern Ikhaku kings, couplingtheir personal names with metronymics like Madhariputa and VasitMputa seems to be a practice borrowed from the earlier rulers of the JLndhra dynasty. Ifc will hardly be neces* sary to quotethe instance of Vasithlputa Siri-Pulumayi and Gotamiputa Sataka^ni. On the other hand, there are in these inscriptions certain expressions which are also found in the Prakrit copper-plate grantsof the early Pallavas, as will be pointed! out in our glossary. 
There are two more pointsto be noted in connection with these kings. We see that the name Chamtamula, borne by the father of Siri-Virapurisadata, re-occurs in tte name of the latter's son. This seems to pointto the custom of naming a child after its grandfather, which, && far as we are aware, is not an indigenous practicein Indifc,* It further deserves notice that among the consorts of king Siri-Virapurisadata we meet with two of hia Cousins, 
Chaihtisiri, the sister of king CShamtamiila, was married to a personage who bore the titles of Mahmenapati and Mahatafavara. The same is stated with reference to other prilacestfes of the ruling house. The title MaMsenapati (lit*"greatchief of the army"or general) denoted feudatOiy chieftains in chargeof rashtraS or districts under the Indhtafi, and the same meaning may perhaps 
be assumed here. The woid is, therefore, to be takett ftg a title of nobility. We may Compare the Anglo-Saxon heretoga (Dutch hettog, Gerinan h&rzog), which etymologically means an atmy-leader? ?tfit has become a title of nobility. The tford Mah&slnclpaK could, therefore, be best tendered: by 15 duke." 
ttie fctiriotis tefra faahatttlai>ar& which is ftlso Met with in othet inscriptions of Southern India, must likewise denote a high dignitary whose exact function, however, is not cleat. The second r of the compound is not a Sanskrit word, but aeemis to be a term borrowed from some 
1 HhQ word rirnpakha, (Skt. Virvy&fatha), indicating a class of snakes, occurs in an ancient snake-charm a fifrtom (ed. Oldenberg), Vol. II, p. 110 ; &'3. A, Vol. X p. 76. 
Pto irastom was kaoWn to fievertit ftOing families Of aaifieftfc India, auoh ad tie Gupta, the d l4e Pwlav^ (6f. vl Smtti tidL Ant* VoL XXXV, p; 125). Bestto, <ir ahown by the . ...ftgrop\ttiT^.9^ *m t ^r: 
it bid a ^aetroic sanotioa behind it, -Eki.]
No. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUXIKONDA.   
Dravidian language.1 Evidently it penetrated also into Northern India, for there can "be little doubt that it is identical with the mysterious word taravara which, coupledwith ma/iapratihdra ("a great chamberlain ")is found in the legendof one of the clay seaiings excavated bythe late Dr. Bloch at Basarh, the site of ancient VaisalL This document belongsto the Gupta period. It was suggested by Dr. Bloch that the word tarika, which occurs in lists of officials in mediaeval copper-plate charters, may quitewell be a corrupted form of taravams 
In the inscriptionsof Nagarjunikonda not only frequent mention is made of persons bearing the title of maMtalavara, but they also contain the feminine form mahaialamri (more correctly talayan) indicating the wife of a makatalamra. In the same way the consort of a mahdsendpali bears herself the title of mahdsendpatini (Skt, senapatni).It is found in B 4 (1.5). A third official title, which occurs in B 2 (L4),is the well-known term mdkada^andyaka. The early use of this expressionis also attested by a fragmentary inscription, found at the village of Mat in the Mathnra district, which contains the name of KingHuvishka. The first apsidalshrine (No. I), as we have seen, was dedicated by Chamtisiri, the foundress of the Mahachetiya,at the foot of which it is built. The other buildingof this type, on the contrary. as stated in the inscription F on the floor, was raised by a simple updsikd,Bodhisiri by name, who does not appearto have been related to the royal family of the Ikhakus, Her relatives, who were to share in the merit of her pious enterprise, are enumerated at great length* They include a Eoth[3]kdriJca (Skt. Rdstyhdgarika),either a treasurer or, perhaps,a- superintendentof a royal storehouse.8 
The inscription openswith an invocation of the Buddha who is extolled in a long string of latidatory epithets. Next comes the date which unfortunately is incomplete. This much is certain that the inscriptionis dated in the fourteenth regnal yearof a king Madharlputa, who in all likelihood is identical with the Madharlputa Siri-Virapurisadataof the ayafca-pillar inscriptions of Jaggayyapeta and Nagarjunikontda. The shrine is further stated to have been dedicated to the fraternities of Ceylonese monks who had converted Kasmira (Kashmir), G-andhara, China, Chilata (Skt. Kirata), TosaH, Avaramta (=Skt. Aparanta), Vamga (i.e., Bengal), Vanavasi (i.e., North Kanara), Tavana (?), Damila (?),. Jura and the Isle of Tambapamni (i.e., Ceylon). Some of the countries are mentioned in the Mahavamw among the territories which had been converted to Buddhism after the Third Council, namely, Kasmira and Gandhara, Vanavasa, Aparantaka and Yona.4 We may also compare two passagesin the Milindapanha mentioninga number of 
*At the end of the Kon^amutji copper-plate grant (IBp. Ind., Vol. Vi, pp. 315 ff,) the late Dr. Hultzsoh read Mahfttagi-varena maMdaih$<mayakenaBh&p(Mnavammena kafati. There can be little doubt that matiatagivarena is a mistake, due either to the scribe or to the engraver,for mahatodavarena. This term occurs also in a fragmen,. tary Prakrit inscription found at the village of Allurii, in the Nandigama toduJc, Kistna district. Cf. Annual Report on South-Indian Epigraphy, 1924, p. 97 and A. S. R. for 1923-24, p. 93. 
We must leave this question to the decision of students of South-Indian languages. Can the word have any connection with Tamil talavay (*a general), Tamil'talaiyari (*a village watchman), or Canarese talavara, talavara (a watchman, a beadle)? [The Mahatalavaras are mentioned in early Jaina literature along with 18 Oa^amjas. So Mahatalavara must be taken aa a title of nobility. C/. KalpasMra, (ed. Jacobi, Leipzig 1879) 61,1121-25. The SvbdtiMM, a Sanskrit commentary on it by Vinayavijaya <Nin?aya-sagara Press, Bombay, leal 60, 11. fr-7) espkins the $erm tolcwara, thus : ^wr# ^fr-bhvpala^tdalla Rajasthantyal. In the Punjab there is a sub-division of high class Khatrfe (= Sanskrit JS>Aofc%<w) wljioh goes by the name of Talwar.~~Ed.] 
* A. 8. JS. for 1903-04, p. 108, No. 16 ; plate XL, 6. 
*C/.Jb$waZainSohgaura copper-plate inscription (Liiders, List, 3o. Wt) ad bhaMaJcanko, ift scription (Liiders, List, No. 1141). 
* Mahavafaaet, Gh. xij. Cf. Dipamfim, Ch viij
EPIGRAPEIA INDICA. [VOL. XX   
regions which used to "be visited for purposesof trade.1 In these two passages the first countries mentioned are Saka-Yavana and CMna-Chilata. The printedtext has Vilata, but, as has been pointed out by Professor Sylvain L6vi,a this is an error for Ohilata. The Chilatas are the same un-Aryan tribe often met with in Sanskrit literature under the name of Kirata. In a well-known verse of the Panchatantm they are characterized as dishonest traders. We find them, moreover, referred to both in the Periplus and by Ptolemy. The former says:"Beyond this [Dosarene], the course trending towards the north there are many barbarous tribes, among whom arc the Cirrhadae, a race of men with flattened noses, very savage." Ptolemy locates them along the Gulf of Bengal,"beyond the Ganges mouth called Antibolei." "Their country is saM to produce the best malabatJirm (tamdlayattram). In his chapter on Trans-Gangctic India (VII, 2," 15) the same 
author describes the Tilddai (V* 1. Piladai), also called the 8aesdai, as hairy dwarfs, with a flat face and a white skin. Evidently this passagetoo refers to the Kiratas, the name TiUtlai (TiXdtSoa) being an attemptto render in Greek the alternative form Chilada.8 
It is very interesting to meet here with the name TosalL It will be remembered that A6ka's two separate Rock-Edicts of Dhauli are addressed to the Governor and the magistrates (Idaho,'* malras) of Tosali. 'This enables us to locate Tosali in Kalinga. James rinsopidentified it with the"Tosalei metropolis"of Ptolemy, althoughthis place is located in the legions beyond the Ganges. We may, perhaps, connect the name Tosali with, the Dosara of Ptolemy and with. DosarenS, the name of a country beyond Masalia mentioned in the Peripfas. The name Dosarene is usually explainedto be the Greek renderingof Sanskrit DaSarna,4 but there are serious difficulties in the way of this identification. First of all, a Prakrit form of Da&ania, from which the Greek form must be derived, would certainly not have retained the r which we find in Dosara and Dosarene. The longo-vowel of the Greek would also be difficult to account for. Besides, the tribe of the Da^arna, as far as we can make out from Indian sources, appears to have been settled in Central India and not along the coast.5 On the other hand, Dosara may have been a dialectic form of Tosala. The Periplusstates that Dosarene yielded the ivory known as Dosaronic. Hiuen Tsiang in his account of Kaliaga says that it produced the great tawny wild elephant which was much prized by neighbouring provinces. 
Avaranta (Skfc. Aparanta) is the designation of the tract of the country lying along the west ern coast of the Peninsula, the capitalof which was Sopcara. According to the Ceylonese Chronicles, it was converted to Buddhism by Dhammarakkhita. A66ka mentions it in his Fifth Rock-Edict in connection with the appointment of Dhamma-mahamatas. 
Vanga is the ancient name of Bengal. Vanavasi, also mentioned as VanavSsaka in inscrip tion H, is North Kanara, the name being still preserved in Batiavasi, a village or small town in the Shimoga district of the Mysore State in latitude 14 33', longitude 75 5'. The Mahawmm mentions Rakkhita as the apostle of Vanavasa. 
The three words following Vanavasi are uncertain. The first one can be hardly anything but Yavana, the aWiaras ya and va being still legible. Next comes a name which I read tentatively asDamila, meaning the Tamil country. The third word seems to consist of three afakamx the second and third of which are clearlylu and ra. It is tempting to restore the name as Palura the town mentioned by Ptolemy and identified by Professor Sylvain Levi with Dantapura "the Town of the Tooth"on the coast of Orissa.6* 
*Mttlindapanha (ed. Trenckner), pp. 327 and 331. * $tv-<les Asiatiques, Vol. II, p. 24. 
""""""""*~ -*
* S ylvain LSvi, op. cit., pp. 23-24. Of. Bijdragen, sixth series, Vol. VI, p. 7 uo 2 by W H. Sckoff, p. 253, and H. L. Bey, Geogr, Diet., 2nd U,Wp. 54, ,. Kabdau in his Me'ghaduta locate* the DaSarnas between the Vindhya and Vidisa * 
'Penplus transl. 
* 
,VoL CCVI (1925), pp. 46ff, j andlncL 4nfc, Vol. LV (1020), pp. 04iiNo. L] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 9   
The latter partof inscription F enumerates the various pious foundations several of them evidentlyadditions to existing buildings dedicated by Bodhisiri, and mentions, moreover, the localities at which each of them was found. It is a point of considerable importance that this list includes"a stone ma^apa at the eastern gate of the Mahachetiya at Ka^takasela." Evi dentlythis locality Kantakasela (Skt Kantakasail^ lit."Thorn-hill ") must be identical with uthe emporiumKantikossiila"which Ptolemy mentions (VII, L 15) immediately after"the mouths of the Maisolos.1 *It follows that the river known to the Greeks under the name Mai solos has been rightly supposed to be the Eostna.1 The country watered by the lower Kistna is consequentlycalled Maisolia by Ptolemy. The Periplus speaks (62) of"the regionof Masalia stretching a great way alongthe coast before the inland country," and adds that "a great quan tity of muslins is made here." The ancient name by which this partof Southern India was known to the Greeks is preservedin that of the town Masulipatam. 
We are perhaps justified in identifyingit with the country which Hiuen Tsiang describes under the name of T'o-na-kie-tse-kia.2 This seems to correspondto Dhannakataka, Dhana kataka (Skt. Dhanyakataka),found in two inscriptions from AmaravatL3 The country in questionthe Chinese pilgrimlocates between the Andhra country and that of the Cholas, the latter being situated at a distance of some 1,000 li to the south-west. In the course of his description lie says:"The convents are numerous, but are mostly deserted and ruined;of those preserved there are about twenty with 1,000 or so priests. They all study the law of the Great Vehicle.'1 
Hiuen Tsiangfurther relates that to the east of the capital on a mountain there stood a con vent called PurvaSila and on a mountain to the west was another, called Avara&la. Perhaps it would be preferableto render the names of these two monasteries by Purva&aila and Avarasaila, the Sanskrit word for a mountain being 6aUa, whereas 6S& means* sstone." Now, it is worthy of note that among the localities mentioned in inscription F, we meet ,with the name Puvasela, which is clearly a Prakrit form correspondingto Sanskrit Purva&aila. A name, meaning **Eastern Mountain or Hill," may, of course, have been used at different placesof India. But it is a point worth considering whether the remains of Nagarjuniko$4&can possibly represent the ancient capitalof DhanBakataka, which archaeologists have soughtboth at Dharanikofca near Amaravati and at Bezwa<Ja 
Another pointof interest is the mention of Siripavata (i.e., Siripawata)in inscription F. The Prakrit word correspondsto Sanskrit Snparvata. Now, there is a tradition preserved in Tibet that Nagarjuna spentthe concluding partof his life in a monastery of that name in South ern India.4 If this convent is the same as the"vihdra on the Siripavatato the east of Vijaya* pun"of our inscription,it would follow that the association of the greatdivine of the Mahayana with Ais locality has been preserved up to the present day in the name Nagaxjuniko$<Ja. We may confidently hope that these and other questionsof great importwill be finally settled by fur ther systematicexcavations. 
Among the religious foundations enumerated in F, we wish, to draw attention to the two monasteries, called Kulaha-wMra and Slhala-wMra. The former appearsto have owed its exis tence to the same noble family which is mentioned in one of the aya&a-pillar inscriptions (B 4) 
* E. H, Warmington, The Commerce between the Roman Empire and India, Cambridge 1928, p. 116. *&-y-&t, transl. by S. Beal, VoL II, pp. 221 ft ; Thomas Waiters, On YuanChwang*a TrweU in /<fe>f VoL H, pp. 214 ff. 
9 Prof. Lfiders' Zist, NOB. 1225 and 1271. The form Dhatfinakota occurs in the MayidawMu eopper-pUt* grant of the Pallava Yuvamahar&ja Sivaskandavarman. 
* W. Wasailjew, Der Buddhianva, Vol. I, pp. 220 f.
10 EPIGSAPHIA INDICA, UOL. XX.   
tinder the name of Kulalmka. The other, if we may judge from its appellation, must have been a convent founded cither by a Sinhalese or, more probably,for the accommodation of Singhalese monks. ThisficCeylonese Convent"appearsto have contained a shrine with a Bodhi-tree (Bodhi-nikha-pasada=Skt., Bodhi-vriksha-prasada) which is, indeed, a necessary adjunctof the Buddhist monasteries of Ceylon up to the present day. Not onlythe mention of a SihaJa-wAara, but also the dedication of a dieliya-ghara to the them/as or"fraternities"of Tambapam^i point to relations which must have existed between- the Buddhist community of Dhafmakataka and 
their co-religionists in the Isle of Ceylon. The existence of such relations can be easily accounted for from the sea-borne trade which was carried on between the portsof the Island and Kaiitaka sela, the great emporiumon the right bank of the Kistna river. 
This trade was, no doubt, al&o largely responsiblefor the flourishingstate of Buddhism ift this partof India. The devotees of the Good I/aw were largely recruited from the commercial classes and it was their wealth which enabled not only the merchants themselves, hut also their royal masters, to raise monuments of such magnificenceas the great stuya of Amaravati. Both Amaravati and Najrarjunikondaare situated on the right bank of the Kistna, the former being situated at a distance of.some 60 miles from the mouth of the river. Nagfirjuniko^da lies consider ably higher up the river, the distance between this place and Amaravati being another 60 milea a? the crow flies, but considerably longer by river. On the oppositeside of the river we have Jaggayyapet-a, containing another monument of the reignof the Ikhakus. The village of Alluru in the Nandiganm taluk of the Kistna district has yielded a fragmentary Piukrit inscription, referred to above, which' appearsto record a donation to a Buddhist monaster)'. At the village of Gummadiduru in the Kistna district the remains of a large stupa, adorned with marble reliefs in the Amaravati style, have recently come to light together with the remnants of monastic buildings. All these monuments attest to the piety and the wealth of the Buddhist community in these parts duringthe second ami third centuries of our era: In the days of Hiuen Tsiang the monasteries were mostly deserted and ruined. The collapseof Buddhism on the lower Kistna may have had various causes ; besides the general wane of that religionall over India, there may have been economic agentsat work, like the decline of the sea-borne trade with the West, which had caused vast quantitiesof Roman goldto pour into the Peninsula* Thfcre was -al&o the -conquestof Southern India by the Gupta Emperor Samudragupto and the rise of powerful dynasties devoted to Brahmanism .like the Pallava in the South and the Chalufcya in the West. 
In connection with Buddhism attention must be drawn to the motion of fleet-names' in the Nigarjunikomja inscriptions.In- Nos. C 1, line 10 and E, line 2, the dedication, is stated to be made for the benefit or 'acceptanceof the Aparamahavinaseliyas. In both cases the sign -for i over thfe fifth -akskara is quite distinct so -that we are not allowed to read *mahawna*9 as was done by Drs, Bttrgess and Hitltzsch in the-- case of an Amaravati inscription.1 The lattefr was inclined to associate the name with the Mahavana^ala at Vassal!, well-known from the Buddha legend, The Amaravati inscription in question, however, Kaa certainly MtthavinaseUyanarh'* At tlwj end of , the< fragmentary Prakrit inscription from Alluru we -read : c^wana\m\ Puw&eli* y23fc4i} nigayasa (Skt. arya^m Purva&ailiyanam niMyasya), 
The Pali chromcies^f Ceylon make mention- of the Bubla- and the Apara^jselikas, the two sub-divisions of the Mahasanghikas.8 The latter of those two expressions is perhaps an abbre* yial-edform.of.the.AvaramaJiaviaaseliyas in our inscriptions. Can it be that the two sects, 
^Bargess, Anwavatt, p. 105, No* 49 ; aB&HultJzseV f. D. M< Q., Vol. XXXVII, pp. 660 f,, 4 JVoMvarfwff, Vt 1S? a&d J>3paea<ft*, V, 154,
No, 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 11   
known as Pubba- and Apara-selikas, originated from tlie two Buddhist convents of Pnbbasela and Aparasela which, accordingto Hiuen Tsiang, existed on the Mils to the east and the west of the capitalof Dhannakataka ? 
The inscription G, line 8, contains the name of another Buddhist sact Bahusutlya which correspondsto Pali Bahusuttiya (Skt. Bahusrutlya). Besides, we have Ayira-harhgha (Skt. JiTya-sangJia)in C 1, line 11 and C 2, line 10, and Mahi[sa]saka (Skt. Mahlsasaka) in H, line 12. 
Language and Script* 
A considerable difficultyin the way of interpreting the Nagarjunikonda inscriptionsis the want of precisionof which they show ample evidence. Consideringthat these inscriptions were meant to be perpetualrecords of pious donations made by ladies of royal blood, the careless manner in which they have been recorded is astonishing. Not only single syllables but whole words have been omitted We find, moreover, that onlyin one instance it has been considered necessary to correct such an omission, i.e., in the word M^Jidchetiya( E, line 1) whera the akshara ha has been placed under the line. In other instances syllables have been repeated (C 2, lines 1 and 3), or interchanged (e.g., IhamJcham for JchamlJiam in C 4, line 7). Very often the lengthof the vowels a and I is not marked. Even the name of the reigning monarch, Siri-Yirapurisadata, is written with vi instead of m exceptin a very few cases where we find the co.rect spelling with 1. Much less frequentlythe longI has been substituted for the short one, e.g., in Mahachetiya. Consideringthe frequencyof the omission of the 5-stroke, we have ventured to assume that this omission has twice taken placein the long compound sama^a'lamhajia'kava?^a'-vaiiija'dln--d' nugaha-veldmiJca~ddna-patilihuga~vochhina-dk^ which re-occurs several times in the passage relating to the principal donor, Chain! isiri. This compound, as far as we can see, does not yield an intelligible sense, unless we read -dtin+fipatibhag-dvochhina, thus assuming that the two adjectives required here are apat<ilhaga and avochhina. With regardto the latter word we may comparethe use of the Sanskrit equivalent avyavachchhinna in the followingline from tLe Harivarhia (verse 3580) where we read : avyavachchhinna-dMr-aughaih samudr-augha-samair** dhanaih. 
The signfor dha is sometimes substituted for that of tha, whereas a certain confusion seems to prevail between tha and tha. The loopedcharacters ta and na are very similar and are not always clearly distinguishable. The same is the case with the aksharas, the initial a and su. 
1 he signfor anusvdra too has often been omitted, while in several cases it is difficult to decide whether what appearsto be a dot over the aJcshara may not be a depression- in the surface of the stone merely due to accident. In consequence,there prevails a certain amount of uncertainty with regardto the correct form of the personal names Charhtamula and Chamtisiri. In several cases where these names occur, there is no trace of an anusvdra, but as in a few instances such a 
sign can be made out, we are perhaps justified in assuming that its non-occurrence is due to the inadvertence so noticeable throughoutthese records. 
This want of precision becomes especially manifest if we compare the various redactions of the inscription recordingthe grantof a stek by the chief donor, the lady Chamtisiri. It is clear that these redactions are all based on the same text, but none of them produces that text without some omissions or mistakes. We may refer the reader to the test of C 3 given below with the various readings found in the corresponding inscriptions 
It is difficult to say who is to be held responsiblefor the negligent treatment which we have noticed in these epigraphs. The additional passage found in two of the pillar inscriptions of Chamtisiri, namely C 1 and 2, mentions a"Bhadanta Inanda, carrier of the Digha- and the Majj&i* ma-nihdya"who acted as the navakammila of the Mahachetiya. In the case of tbc apsidtil temjple
12 EPiaEAPHIA INDIOA, FOL. XX.   
and other religious works founded by the updsikdBodhisiri there were even three navakariimikas, the ihera* Chamdamukha, Dha&manandi and Naga (F, lines 3 & 4). As the navakammika was the monk commissioned "by the Sangha to superintend the foundation (navakamma) dedicated by gome lay-member,his responsibility may be supposedto have extended also over the itiscriptional records of the deyaihamma.It is, however, quite possible that the author of the inscriptions was some other learned member of the Satiffha. We may perhapsassutae that, the text of the inscriptions having been fixed, some copyist, either a bhikkhu or a professional writer, was employed to prepare one or more copiesin the very ornamental writingof the periodfor the use of the stone-mason. At the end of inscription F we find the name of the stone-mason (sela-vadhdki) Vidhika recorded immediately after those of the three navakariimikas. It must be admitted that, as regardsits technical execution, not only this epigraph but also the sixteen a^a&a-pillai: inscriptions leave nothingto be desired. It is noteworthy that inscription H which, as we saw, must belongto a somewhat later period, shows at once a marked deterioration in technical 
skill. 
Withreglirdto the style of writing us ^d in the Nagarjunikonda inscription* it will suffice to refer to the observations made by Dr. Biihler with regardto the inscriptions from Jaggayya peta.1 Here we wish only to draw attention to the use of la in Sihala-, taldkam>and alamda in F, BB 3, and to the occurrence of the following ligatures: dra in Rudradhara? (B 5, line 4), nhd in sumnhdnam (F,line 3), yhu in Vinhusirisa, mha in bamha$a (A 3, line 6 ete.) 9 mhi in imamhi (A 3, line 2) and mahdchetiyamfii (C 4, line 2 and X, line 8), and tti in nattiya (H, line 8), 
The inscriptions contain th numerical symbols for one, three (F, line 1), four (F, line 1), five (E, line 2), six (passim), seven (F,line 3 and H, line 4), eight (B, line 2), ten (passim), seventy (B 5, line 6), and hundred (B 5, line 6). 
As regardsthe language,the following peculiarities may be noted : 
The ri vowel is represented by a in kavaqa (Skt. kriparia) and vasabha (Skt, v^ishabha), but elsewhere, by u. Examples : IJtMuno (F, line 2) from Skt. bhartri- ; pituno (F, line 2) from Skt. pitri- t bhctiuno (F, line 3), bhdtunam (F,line 2) and bhdtuputdnam (F, line*2) from Skt. bJiratfi- ; matuya (F,line 2 and G, line 7) from Skt, mattf- maMmatuMya (F, line 2) from Skt. wa&8- matri' >* dhutuya (F,line 3; H, line 9) from Skt, duhitri- ; jdm[a]tukasa (B line 1) from Skt, 7*amari~ / matuk[d] (C 1> line 11 and 2, line 9) from Skt* matrikd. 
We notice Swrabhakti in bJiariyd (passim) from Skt. bhdryd ; mahdchetiya (passim) from Skt. *chatiya ; aoh&riya (passim) from Skt, dchdrya ; barisa (F, line 1) from Skt* harsha ; tarisa (F, line 1) from Skt. tarsha ; darisana (F, line 1) from Skt, darSana ; and mahds$ndpatini (passim) from Skb. pctini. O/. Pischel, Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen, 135. 
The pbetween vowels 
Jeaw$a (passim) from 
(F, line 3) from Skt. 
from Skt. Gopagrdma (?) ; mamtava (E, line 2) and mam$ava (F, line 3) from Skt. The media is changedinto the tennis, in koth[d]karika* (F, line 2) from Skt.kdshfdffdrika- ; mwmtaw (E5 line 2) from Skt. m&wfapa. But else >vhere mamdava (thrice in F). Cf. also deyat 
-paricMko from Skt. <parityaga-, in the Alluru fragmentary inscription, line 14. The tennis has been changed into the media in Pugiydna[m] (E, line 1), but elsewhere Puki ydnam o? Pukiydnam, and sugJidya (G, line 10) from Skt, sukha-. Cf. nigayasa from Skt. nikaya in the Alluru inscription. As regards PuUya and Pugly^ it is, of course, possible that the latter is the more correct and original form. May it be conn^p|;ed with Skt. puya**" betel-palm"? ~ 
1 6. Biihler, Znditchp Pal&ographit, p 44. 
!"?
'No. 1.1 PKAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIRONDA. 18   
The initial Ji in some personal names appearsto have been developed from $. Examples: Bammasiri (0 4, line 5) ; Hammasirinika (C 2, lines 5-6 and 7; C 4, line 7) ; Haghamna (F, line 2 ) . Also, Ayira-hamghdna (C 1, line 11;C 2, line 10} from Skt. Arya-sangMnam, But samgham (H, line 13) and mah(fohikhu-sd[m]ghasa (E, line 2). 
We wish also to draw attention to the following forms : ayira- (C 1, line 11;C 2, line 10) from Skt. drya ; lihaya for the more usual lhariya from Skt. bhdryd ; and Chilata (F,line 1) from Skt. Kirata. 
LIST OF INSCRIPTIONS. 
a. Inscriptions on the ayaia-pillarsof the Mahachetiya.1 
A. 2. East side, second pillar. One large and two small fragments. The large piece Contains lines 17 (sidJiam to ~vachhald ma~), line 7 being incomplete. Besides, there is a gapon the right hand side by which several aksharas at the end of lines 2-4 and 6 are lost. One of the smaller fragments supplies the initial aJcsharas of lines 610, and the other, a few aksharas of lines 78. 
TJie inscription, when entire, must have consisted of 10 lines, 24| inches long.It records the gift of a pillar by the Makatalavari Chamtisiri (name lost), the sister of King Chamtamilla and the paternal aunt of King Siri-Virapurisadata. Date lost. 
A 3 East side, third pillar. Inscriptionin two pieces. One large piece contains the in scription almost complete exceptthe middle portionof lines 1-2. This missing portionis supplied by the smaller fragment containing17 aksharas of the first line. The inscriptionconsists partly of 10 lines, 25 inches long.It records the donation of a pillar by Chamtisiri (of. sub A, 2). Date, the 6th yearof King Siri-Virapurisadatain last short line. 
A. 4. East side, fourth pillar. Two large and one smaller fragment. The one large piece contains 11. 15, incomplete and partlyobliterated. The other contains lines 511, wz.> the latter half of the inscription, almost complete, although partlyindistinct. The small frag ment supplies the initial aksharas of lines ] to 3. The inscription must have consisted of 11 lines, measuring from 21 22 inches in length. Donation of a pillar by Chamtisiri (of. sub A. 2). Date as above sub A. 3 in last short line. 
B 1. South side, first pillar. One fragment, containing lines 16 in their full length, but with central portion completelyobliterated. Lengthof lines 16 inches. Name of donor and date 
lost. 
B 2 South side, second pillar. Inscription completein 7 lines, measuring 20 to 22 inches ' 
Gift of a pillar by the Mahatalavan A<Javi-Chatisiri, the daughterof King Chamtamula. 
in kngth 
Date as above. 
B 3 South side, third pillar. Complete in 10 lines, measuring21 to 23| inches in length. A few 'aksharas at the end of lines 5-9 missing. Donation of a pillar by Chamtisiii^ika, evidently the same personas Chamtisiri (of. sub A. 2). Date as above in last short line. 
B 4 South side, fourth pillar. Completein 7 lines, 17| to 22 inches. Gift of a stone pillar by the" MaMs&ndpatmi Chula-Cha{m]tisiri^ika. Date as abo^e in 6th and short 7th line. B. 5. South side,fifth pillar. Completein 7 lines, 20 to 22 inches. Gift of a pillar by Eudradharabhat[a]rika. Date as above in last short line. 
Besides theayaJba-piUar inscriptions enumerated here, twenty-threesmall fragments have been found wWcfe must have belongedto this class of inscriptions.
EPIGRABHIA INDICA. [Voi, XX.   
C. 1. West side, first pillar. Two pieces: the smaller piece, containing lines 1 to 6 (1. 1 com plete, 1. 2 with, the first akshara, missing,11. 36 incomplete),fits wedge-likeinto the larg'er one, which consists of 11. 3 to 13,11. 3 to 6 supplyingthe missing portionsof the upper piece* The inscription, when complete,consisted of 13 lines, 21 to 23 inches long. Donation of a pillar by Chamtisiri. Date as above. 
C. 2. West side, second pillar. Two pieces. The larger piece contains II. 1 <? complete, besides the initial and concluding portionsof 11. 79. The smaller piece supplies the middle portions of these three lines and the remainder of the inscription, viz., 11. 10 12 entire. Twelve lines, 19$ to 22 inches long. Gift of a stone pillar by MaMdevl Bapisiriiidka, the daughter of Hamroasirinika and wife of King Siri-Virapurisadata. Date as above in 11. 11 12, the concluding 
line beinga short one. 
G. 3. West side, third pillar. Two pieces. The smaller fragment has 6 lines, viz, 9 L 1 com plete, whereas considerable portionsof 11. 2 6 are missing and onlya few aJcsharas at the beginning of L 6 remain. The larger fragmentcontains the missing partsof 11. 2 6 and, besides, 11. 7 15 entire. Thirteen lines, 20 to 22 inches long. Gift of a pillar by Cha[m]tisiri Date as above in last short line. 
C. 4. West side, fourth pillar. Complete in eight lines, 19 to 22 inches long* Gift of a pillar by MaJiadevl Chhathisiri, the daughter of Hammasiri[nika] and wife of .King Siri-Virapurisadata. Date as above in concludingline. 
C. 5. West side, fifth pillar. Complete in five lines, 19| to 2QJ inches in length. Gift of a stone pillar by the wife of Mahakamclasiri. Date as above. 
D, 2, North side, second pillar. One piece containing11. 1 5 complete, tho initial and concluding portionsof 11. 6 7, the first six aJcsharas of line 8 and only one akshara opening Jine 9. The inscription must have recorded the gift of a pillar by Chaifttisiri, Date lost. 
D. 3. North side, third pillar. Only a fragment containing 1L 1 2 almost complete, and besides, a few aJcsharas of line 3. Date lost. 
D. 4. North side, fourth pillar. Complete in ten linos, 19J to 21J inches long. Gift of a piUar by Cha[m]tisiri. Date as above in last short line. 
X. Original position unknown. Complete in nine lines, 24 to 25 inches in length. Donation of a pillar by Chamtisiri. Date as above. 
6. Chetiya-ghara inscriptions. 
E. Inscription on floor of apsidal shrine, No. I, immediately to the east of the Mahachetiya. Inscription complete in two lines, measuring 14 feet 5 inches. Average size of afaharas ^ to f inch. Inscription well preserved except first portion of the second line. It records the dedication of a dketiya-ghara or stone mamtava, (Skt. mayfapa) provided with a cloister (chatusala) at the foot <f the Maliachetiya by the Hahatalavan Chamtisiri, mentioned in several of the aydb-pillar inscriptions, who here refers toKiiigSiri-Virapurisadata as her son-in-law, for the benefit of the Masters of the Aparamahavinaseliya sect. Date, the eighteenth year of King Siri~Virapurisa4ate 
F. Inscription on floor of the apsidal shrine, No, II, on the mound NAarSUabSflu, consisting of three long-lines, 18 feet 4 inches to 19 feet in length, and of a fourth short Hue of 1 foot 9 inches Average size of obftaw f to f iuch, The inscription is fairly ^eU preserved; here and there Borne dtiharas have been lost. After a lengthy invocation of the Buddha it records the foundation 
riaoA^-ffioreand of various other religious edifices by an uvasiM (Skt. upasika) named Bodhisrn, together with her relatives, for the benefit of the fraternities (Obriyo) of the Cevlonese* monks who had converted a number of countries which are enumerated at great Wilt Date, the Uurteenth year of King Mathariputa (=Sm-V!rapErisadata.'<)**
No. 1.] PK1KRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 15   
e. Detached pillar inscriptions. 
G. Inscription on a stone pilkr or stele decorated with carvings, at a distance of about two furlongs to the north-west of the Mahachetiya. It consists of tea lines of. writing. The inscribed surface shows three cracks and the right hand portion damaged. Some three or four aksaaras at the end of 11. 1 5 are lost. Lines 9 and 10 are partlyobliterated. The lines, when complete, must have been 15 inches in length. The averagesize of the aksharas is | to Jinch. The lettering has become worn owing to exposure to the weather. The inscription records the foundation of a whara by Mahddevi Bhatideva, who was the wife (?) of King Siri*Virapurisadata and the mother of King Ehuvula(?)-Ch[m]UmuIa. The date in 1L 910 is no longer legible. 
H, Inscription on a stone pillar or stele found at Kottaxnpaluguto the north of Nagar jtmikonda* It consists of fourteen lines of writing, measuring about 12 inches in length. The inscriptionis fairly well preserved, but here and there some aksharas have become indistinct, The execution is fair, but less ornamented than in the earlier inscriptions. The size of the aksharas is from fto | inch ; they miss the long-d?awn strokes of the earlier inscriptions and the lines are placedclose together. The inscription records the foundation of a mhara by MaMdevl Koda[ba"|Iisiri, who was the daughter of King Siri-Virapurisadata, sister of King Ehuvula Cha[m]tamula, and wife of the Maharaja of Vanavasa. It is dated in the llth yearof King Ehuvuk-Cha[m]tamula. 
d. Inscriptions on sculptures, 
J. Inscription alongthe lowar edgeof a frieze showing the adoration of the Wheel of the Law (first sermon at Benares) in the centre and an amatory coupleor mithuna on both sides. These three scenes are separated and flanked by railings. The frieze is supported by a row of crouch ing lions. The inscriptionconsists of two lines, measuring 38 and 16 inches in length. The execution is fair and the preservation, satisfactory. The averagesize of the aksfraras is J inch. The inscription opens with an invocation of the Buddha and records the donation of a slab and of a coping stone at the Mahachetiya by an individual of the name of Chhadakapavaticlu and by his housewife Padumavani together with their sons and daughters. No date. 
K. Inscription along the lower edgeof a long sculptured beam found on the inound Polu gubo<Ju.It consists of one line of. writing, the beginning and concluding portionsof which are almost entirelyobliterated. The inscription, as far as preserved, measures nearly five feet in length.It records the donation of a slab (?) by a person whose name 'is lost, together with his sons, daughters, sons-in-law, grandsons, granddaughters,relatives and friends. The preserved portions contain no date. 
TRANSCRIPTS AND TRANSLATIONS. 
AyaJca-pillar inscription 03. 
The text of the SyaXw-pillar inscription recording the donation of suck a, pillar by Cha[rh]- tisiri occurs in nine redactions, namely, A 2, 3 and 4, B 3, C land. 3, D 2 and 4, and X, seven of which are complete and two (A 2 and D 2) are incomplete. In C 1 there is an addition at the end, whereas in X the invocation of the Buddha opening the document has been OTaitted. It will be eu&cient to reproduce the text-only once, as givenin C 3, noting* such vatiae let&ones as axe found in the other redactions; The additional passageof C 1 will be'giVen separately*
16 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. FCL. XX.   
TRANSCRIPT. 
(1. 1) Sidliam namo1 bhagavato devaraja-sakatasa supabudha-bodhino* savamfiuDO (L 2) sava-sat-anukampakasa jita-raga-dosa-mclia-vipamutasa mahaga$i-vasabha~ (1. 3) [gath]diia hathisa saniiaa-sam[budb]asa dhatuvara-parigahitasa mah[a]chetiye3 maharajasa (L 4 ) Virupa khapati-MaMsena-parigahitasa4 Mra^a-koti5-go-satasaliasa-hala-sa- (L 5) tasaha[sa-]dayisa savathesu apatihata-samkapasa VasitMputasa6 Ikhakusa (1. 6) Siri-Ckatamulasa7 sodari bhaginirarimo Macjhariputasa8 Siri-Virapurisadatasa (1. 7) pituchha mahasenapatisa* mahatalavarasa Vasidhlputasa10 Pukiyanaih11 Kamdasiri[sa]xa(1. 8) bhariya samara b'ampi^aija-kava^Mranijal^Mm^^ (L 9) chhirfina16- dhara-padayini sava-sadhu-vachhala maJiadanapatini17 mahatalavari Khamdasagaramnaka 18 mata (L 10) Ch[a]fcisiri19apano ubhaya-kulasa atichliitam-anagata-vatamanakauam80 parinajnetimam21(L 11) ubhaya-loka-luta-sukh-avaliathanaya22 atano oha nivSjjia saihpati-sainpadake (1. 12) sava-loka-hita-sukli-avaliathanaya24 cha imara khaiiibhtaiii patithapitamti (I. 13) Eariifio Siri-Virapurisadatasa sava 6 ya pa 6*11 diva 10 
1 Invocation of Buddha omitted in X. 
8 8u$abudka-1)odhino up to aammasatfibudhaaa omitted in B 3, 1, 1 ; C 1, L 1 ; D 2, 1. 1 ; B 4, 1. I. 8 imammhi maMchetiye in A 4, L 3 ;D 4, L 1 (mahacheffye) ; imamhi mah&chetiye in A 3, 11. 2-3 ; D 2 1 1 i mah&chetfye in A 2, 1. 3."' Vif&pa^pati.Mahas*m-parigMtaaa~omitted in B 2, 1. 2. 
* 
after -parigahitasa in A 2, II 3-4 ; A 3, 1L 3-4, A 4, L 4 ; -pangahftasa in B 3, L 2 ; D 4, L 2. *&trafJipa.fa)#- in A 2, L 4 ; A 3, L 4 ; B 3, L 3 ; D 4, L 3. 
Fcwi^f|MtoainA3,L5; A4,1.5; B3.L4; X,1.3; VfaethSputasa in 1, L 4 ; FfettH* in 
* in D 4, L 4.> "1 ** 2, 1. 5 ; A 3, L 5 s A 4, L 5 ; 1, L 5 ; D 4, L 4; X, L 3. 
5; D4,L5 ; Ma$hariputaa* in A 4, L 6 j X, L 3. 
omitted in X, L 4. 
B 3, 1. 6 ; X, L 4. 
"Z**Mm8ainA4,l. 7 ; D 4,1. 6 j X, 1. 4. Omitted in A 3, L 6. 
"-t?fja-iIiA3,L6;.ca?y-a*a.inA4,L7;B3,L6 ; Cl,1.7;D2,1.5:D4 L6-X 1 5 twitemiio in A 4, 1. 7 ; -vel&mi. in B 3, L 7 ; D 2, 1. 6.' 
Bed ! po(%a,theadingofA2,L7 5 A4,U.7.8;B3,L7;Cl L7-D2>6iB4 I ^WainA27 ^ L6; tfnt omitted in B 3, L7;D2, L6;D4, L 7. 
raA?Wia.inA3,L7 J A4,].8;C 1,1.8 ! X,i6. JTAfa. in B A 1. 7. D 4 L 7 
Oto**WtoA8L7,A4,1.9,Ol.L8,X.L. CUMMrf^in B 3, L 8' 
3, L 8 ; D 4, L 8 ; X, L 7. 
j; 1.7, 
7. Omitted jn B 3 L
PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM A BUB   
12
C-3. 
IST SITE AT NAGAEJUNIKONDA (I). 
C-l. 
: vfy&^ffiW% "' ''; 
fi . .-..< I \ 
' *l*8r   
7 :, 
8 
10 
*MCJei .; uvB-l.   
6 6
-2..   
CAUiOftC-THtRO.
:o. l.J PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGABJUNIZONDA. 17   
TRANSLATION. 
Success. Adoration to the Lord, the Supreme Buddha, honoured by the Lord of the gods, omniscient, compassionate towards all sentient beings, freed from lust, hatred and delusion which have been conqiicred by him, the bull and musk-elephant among great spiritual leaders, the perfectly Enlightened One, who is absorbed by the best of elements (i.e., by Nirvana). At the Mahachetiya,the MaMlalavan Cha[m]tisiri (who is) the uterine sister of Maharaja Yasithaputa Ikhaku Siri-Ch5rm]tamula -absorbed by Mahasena the lord of Virupakhas, the giverof crores of gold, hundred thousands of kine, and hundred thousands of ploughs (of land), unimpededof purposein all (his) aims, (she who is) the paternal aunt of King Madharlputa Siri-Yirapurisadata, (she who is) the wife of the Mahasenapati,the Mah&tcdavara, Vasithlputa Kamdasiri of (the family of) the Puklyas ; and the mother of Khamdasagaramnaka, she who, out of compassion for $ramaru&, Brahmins, and those that are miserable, poor and destitute, is wont to bestow on them a matchless and ceaseless flow1 of Velamic gifts, she, the great mistress of munificence, devoted to all the virtuous, having due regard for the past, future and present (members)of boh the houses to which she belongs,for the attainment of welfare and happinessin both the worlds and in order to attain herself the bliss of Nirvana and for the attainment of welfare and happiness by all tjae world, has erected thispflkr. In the 6th year of (the reign of) Uing Siri Virapurisadata, th 6th fortnight of the rainy season, the 10th day. 
Additional Passagein C I.2 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(L 10) achariyanaih. Aparamaharmas[e]liyana[ih] suparigahitam imam mahachetiya navakamma [m] (1. 11) Taiimagama-vathavanam Digha-Majhima-pa[ni]cha-matuka"OSilva3- vachakauam achariyanam Ayira-hamghanafm] (L 12) a[m]tevasikena Dlglia-Majhima* nikaya-dharena bh&jamt-Anadena4nithapitam imam navakamam mahachetiya.ni (L 13) khanibhi cha thapitati ramno Siri-Virapurisadatasa sava 6 va pa 6 diva 10 
TRANSLATION. 
J For the benefit of the Masters of the AparamahavinaseUyasect this pious foundation of the Mahachetiya has been completed by the Reverend JLnanda, who knows the Dlgha- and the Maj* jhima-nikayas by heart, (who is) a disciple of the Masters of the Ayira-hamgha (Ski Aryasangka) who are resident in Pariirjagam.a and who are preachers and preceptorsof the IKgha, the 
Majjhima~[nikaya] an*J of the five Matiukas* This pious work, the Mahachetiya, was completed and the pillars were erected. In the 6th yearof (the reign of) 'Bang Siri-Virapurisadata, 'the 6th fortnightof the rainy season, the 10th day. 
L 
TRANSCRIPT. 
*(L 1) Sidhath maharajasa .... -sena-parigahitasa Agiho-(L 2) t-i.g;thorQ$rYaji ......[hi] rana koji-go-sata* (L 3) sahasa-hala. . . .savathesti apati- (1. 4) hata-sa[ih]ksipa9a 
1 My translation is based on the assumption that we mus 
3Cf. the corresponding passage in lino 8 of the ai/aia-pillar inscription 2, in/ra 
* Read : .&**&*. (G 2, L 9). 
*Boftd : bhadamt.Jn<irtde (0 2, 1. 10).
18 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ Voi   
Chatamulasa bhagini- (L 5) ya mahatalava[rasa] ---- [si]risa bha[riya]ya ma- (1. 6) ] 
variya ____ mah[a]r[a]jasa 
'[The inscriptionis too fragmentaryto admit of translation. It, evidently, opens wi string of epithets eulogizing King Siri-Cha[m]tamula. The donor, whose name is los perhaps, a daughterof Cha[mltisirL] 
Ayalca-pillar inscription B 2, 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(L 1) Sidharh mahlrajasa Asamedha-yajisa aneka-hiramnakoti-go-satasahasa,-hal; (L 2) sahasa-padayisa savathesu apatihata-samkapasa Vasithlputasa Ikhakusa Siri-Cha[m]taraulasa duhuta raiiino Siri-Virapurisadatasa bhagini mahusenapatisa maha talavarasa mahadarhdanayakasa. Dhanakauaiii Khamdavisakhaiiinakasa bhaya mahati (L 5) A(Javi-Chatisiri apano ubhaya-kulam parinameftujna atano cha ubhaya-loka-hita-suk hathanaya (L 6) bhagavato samma-sabudhasa2dhatuvara-parigahltasa, Mahachetlye kharhbham patidhapamta1 ti (1. 7) ramno Siri-Virapurisadatasasaiiiva 6 va diva 10 
TRANSLATION. 
Success. The MaMtalavari Adavi-ChStisiri (who is) the daughter of the MaliSrftja VHsij:. Ikhfiku Siri-Cha[rn]tamulas the offerer of ASvamedha, the giverof many crorcs o hundred thousands of kine, and hundred thousands of ploughs (of land), of unimpeded p in all (his) aims ; (who is) the sister of King Siri-Virapurisadata, (and who u*) the wife c Mahasenapati,the Mahatalavara, the MaMda^andyaka Khariidavisakhamnaka (of the J of the Dhanakas, having due regard for both the houses to which she belongs and for the t ment by herself of welfare and happinessin both the worlds, has erected this pillar at the Ma tiya of the Lord, the supreme Buddha who is absorbed by the best of elements (i Nirvana), In the 6th year of (the reign of) King Siri-Viraptirisadata, the 6th fortnight< rainy season, the 10th day, 
jLyaka~pillar inscription B 4. 
TRANSCRIPT, 
(L 1) Sidham aamo bhagavato devaraja-s^katasa supabudha-bo[dhino*] gava; sava-sa[t--](L 2)uukampakasa jita-rSga-dosa-moha-vipamxitasa mahagfujd-va gamdha-ha[thisa] 
(1. 3) saiiiiua-sariibugasa* dhatuvara-parigahitasa mahacheti[ye] Kulah; [ih]' balika (L 4) mahasenapatisa mahatalavarasa Vasithlputasa HiraikfiakaBiiiii J 
' 
dachalikiremma^akafsa] (L 5) bhaya mahasenapatini Chula-Chatisiririika apano ubhay** Hta-sukha-ni- (i 6) va^thanaya ima* sela-kharhbham patithapitarii ti ramfio Virapurisadatasa (L 7) sArhva 6 va pa 6 dira 10 
TRANSLATION. 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord, the Supreme Buddha, honoured by the Lord of the wifch perfect enlightenment, omniscient, compassionate towards all sentient I freed from lust, hatred and delusion conquered .by him, the bull and musk-elephant amon* pptol leaders,ab^rbedby the boat of elements (i.e., Nirvana), At the
^lightened 
C-s.   
6 
8 
1O 
12 
12
C-4.   
-- 
V^o
8 
No. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDl, 19   
Mahasendpatini Chula-Cb&tisiri^ika, (who is) a daughterof (the family of) the Kulahakas, anil the wife of the Mahasenapati, the MaMtalavam, Vasithiputa Khamdachalikiremmanaka of (the family of) the Hiramnakas, for the attainment by herself of welfare and happinessin both the 
worlds and of Nirvana has erected this stone pillar. In the 6th yearof (the reign of) King Siri Virapurisadata, the 6th fortnight of the rainy season, the 10th day. 
AyaJca-pillar inscription B -5. 
TRANSCRIPT, 
(L I) Sidhaan' namo bhagavato devaraja-sakatasa supabudha-bodhino savamnuno sava-sat- [anu-*] (1, 2) kampakasa jita-raga-dosa-moka-vipanixitasa mahagani-vasabha-gamdha-hadhisa1 (1. 3} samma-sambudtbasa dhatxivara-parigahitasa mahachetiye Ujanika2 maharabaJika8(L 4) mahadew Rudradharabhat[a]rika imam sela-khambham apano hita-snkha-niva^iadhanaya* patith[a]pitarh (L 5) mahafcalavarihl cha Plkiyanam Chamtisirinlkahi imasa mahaviharasa mahachetiyam5(L 6) samuthapiyamane mahatalavarfa ubhayitadinari-masaka satari-satam: 100[+*]706 khambho cha (L 7) ramno Siri-Virapurisadatasasaiiiva 6 va pa6 diva 10 
/ TRANSLATION. 
^Success ! Adoration to the Lord., etc. (see above, sub B 4). At the Mahachetiya the MahadevI Rudradharabhatarika, a Maharaja's daughter from Ujjeni (Skt. Ujjayini) has erected this stone pillar for the attainment by herself ol welfare and happiness and Nirvana. And while the Maha chetiya of this Great Vihara was beingraised by the ladies, the Mahatalavaris, Chamtisiri^ika of (the family of) the Pukiyas, one hundred and seventy (100+70) dindri-masakas and a pillar have been raised by the HaMtalavari.* I& the 6th year of (the reign of) King Siri-Virapurisadata, the 6th fortnightof the rainy season, the 10th 
AyaJka-pillar inscription2. 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(1.1) Sidhani namo bhagavato devar&ja-sakatasa samma-samma-sambudhasa7 dhatuvara- (1. 2) parigahitasa8 Mahachetiye maharajasa Virupakhapati-Mahasena-parigahitasa (L 3) Agihot Agithogithoma9 - Vajapey-lsamedha-yajisa hirana-koti-go-sata- (L 4) sahasa-haJa-satasahasa padayisa savathesu apatihata-samka,pasa (L 5) Vasithiputasa Ikhakusa Siri-Chatamiilasa sodaraya bhaginiya Hamma- (L 6) smmmkaya balika ramno Siri-Virapurisadatasa bhaya mahadevi Bapisirinika (L 7) apano mataram Haiiimasmpkaiii parinamatuna10 atane11 cha Bivaiaa-sampati-sampadake (L 8) imam sela-thambham patithapitam achari[ya]nam Apara* mahavinaseliyanam suparigahita[m*] (L 9) imam Mahachetiya-navakamam Pam^agama vathavanaih Dlgha-Majhima-pamda12- m[a]tuka-desa[ka^va*][chakai}am](1. 10) arayana[m]13' 1 Bead : hathisa, 
2 Bead: Ujenika, 
8 Bead : maharaja-baliM. 
4 Bead : nivayathanaya, 
* Bead : mahachetiye. 
6 The meaning probably is that the Queen Budradharabha^arika, besides dedicating a pillar a sum of 170 dinari-masahas towards the expenses incurred by hamtisiri for the buildingof the 7 sct'fhma- has been written twioe by mistake. 
8 Perhaps pcerigamhifasa. 
* Tho two aics'lmras gi flia have been written tivioe b,y mistake. 
^ 
10 Bead : parinametuna(m). 
11 Bead: atom* 
11 Bead : pamcka {<?/. above, 01,1 11}, 
11 Bend r
20 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. {VOL, XX.   
Ayira-taghana[ih] amtevasikena Dlgha-Manigayax-dharena bhadariit2xiaxhdeiia (I 11) nithapita[ih] ima[m] navakamafih] mahachetiya[m] kharnbha cha thapitati raihuo Sari Viripurisadatasa* (1. 12) sathva 6 v pa6 diva 10 
TRANSLATION, 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord, the supreme Buddha, honoured by the Lord of the gods, absorbel by the best of elements. At the Maliachatiya the Hahfidavi BapasiriQika (wfi u) the daughter of Hammasirimnika, the uterine sister of Maharaja Visithtputa Ikhiiku Siri-Gh&tamula, etc., (see sub C 3) and (who is) the wife of King Siri-Virapurisadata, with due ropard for iter mother Harhmasirimka, and for the sake of attainment by herself of the bliss of Nirvana, haa erected this stone pillar. For 'the benefit of the Masters of the Aparamah&vinaacliya ftect has this pious foundation of the Mahachetiya been accepted. This picas foundation, consisting of the Mahachetiya, has been completed and the pillars have been set tip by the Reverend lnanda > who knows the Digha- and the Majjhima~(nikayas) (?) by heart, (who is) a diseiplo of the Musteis of the Arya-sangha who are resident in Paiiinagama and who are preachers ami preceptors of the DSjjfAa-anA the Majjhima-(niMya$), and of the five Matiikas, IB, the 6th year ef (the reign of) King Siri-Virapuriaadata, the 6th fortnightof the rainy season, the 10th day. 
JiyaJca-pillar inscription C 4, 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(1. iy Sidhain namo bhagavato devaraja-sakatasa Bazhma-saibbudhasa dhatuvara* ^ 
parigamhitasa (1. 2) mahadetiyaihhi8maharajasa Virfipakhapati-MahaBeiia-parigfthltaw Agihata 4(L 3) Aptkoma-Vajap^-i^^ (I. 4) sahasa-padayisa savathesuapatihata-sanikapasa Vasithlputasa Ikh&kusa (I 5) Siri* Chamtamulasa sodaia-bhaginiya Hariimasariya5 balika mahSrajasa (L 6) Ma^harlputasa Siri-Yirapurisadatasa bhaya mahadevi Chhathisiii apano (I 7) mttaraA HaduuairiQikaxta parinametuna atanam6 chaniv&^-saiiipati-earhpadake imaA bhaihkhaTti7(L 8) pitain maharajasa Siri-Vir^purisadatasa sava 6 va pa 6 dSvaft 10 TRANSLATION. 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord, <*c.,(see above, sub 2) the MahSdevI Chha^hisiri (Skt s th^(who w the daughter of Hammasiri, the titettoe aiater of Uahtrlja VSaithlputa Ikhlku Sm-Chamtemiila, etc (see above, sub C 3) and (who fe) the wife of MaharSja Ma^harlputa Siii 
with due regard for her mother Hammasir^kli and for the sake of ttMnmttt Virapunsada^ 
herself of the bliss of Nirva^, has erected this pillar. In the 6th year of (the reiyn of) King Sin^Virapurisadata, the 6thfortnight of the rainy season, the 10th day, /? Jy 
inscription C 5, 
TRANSCRIPT, 
(1. 1) Sidham namo bhagavato ^ma-sambutdha^sadhatuvara 
*Bea<*; 8iriVwa*'* 
5 Read Difffa-MajUma-niMya-dharena (c/. above, C 1 1 
Bead : wMtfotiyamki* 
4 P^ead : AgiJiot*A*t 
6 Kead : &ir$ya. 
Kead.: atano. 
1 Head :
No. L] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FHQM NAGARJCNIEONDA. 21   
bhaya inahasenapatisa mahatalavarasa Viiihusmsa mata inahatalavari apano (1. 4} ubhaya kulam parinametu[na*]atano ubhaya-loka-hita-sukha-nivaijathaya cha imaiii (L 5)sela khambham patithapitam maharajasa Siri-Virapurisadatasa samva 6 va pa6 diva 10 
TRANSLATION. 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord, the Supreme Buddha, absorbed by the best of elements. At the Mahachetiya the Mah'dalamn (who is) the wife of the Mahasenapati,the Mahatalavara Vasithiputa Mahakamdasiii of (the family of) the Pukiyas and (who is) the jnotherof the MahS* s&napati, the MaMtalavara Yinhusiri (Skt. Yish$u4rl), with due regardto both the families to which she belongs, and for the sake of her own" welfare and happinessin both the worlds and Nirvana, has erected this stone pillar. In the 6th yearof (the reign of) MaharajaSiri-Vira purisadata, the 6th fortnightof the rainy season, the 10th day. 
first Apsidal Temple inscription E. 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(L 1) Sidhamnamo bhagavato Budhasa choti/a-ghara maharajasa Virtpakhapati*Maha sena-parigahitasa Agihot-[I]githoma-Vajapey-Asamedha-yajisaaneka-hirana-koti-go Sfvtasaha3a-hala-satasa[hasa*]-padayisa savathesu apatihata-sainkapasa Vasethiputasa Ikhakulasa1 Siri-Chatamiilasa sahodar[a]- bhagini mahatalavarasa- Vasethiputasa Pugiyana[m*] Khamdasirisa bhariyfa] mahatalavari Khanidasagaramnaga-m[a]taChatisiri apano jam- [a]ttikasa rano M[]tliariputasa Ikh[a]kunani Siri-Virapuiisadatasa ayu-radhanike vejayike (1. 2) apanocha ubhaya-[loka-]hita-sukha-[uivai?athai3aya samma-sariibudhasa ,dha-]ft uu-parigahitasa raahachetiya-padamule8 pavaiitanaih nana-desa-samanagatanarh sava-sadhunarii mahabhikhu-sa[m]ghasa apa[nocha u-]bhaya-lodasa aticbhita[m-]anagata vatamanake nikapanike cha pamametunam Aparamahavinaseliy[a]narix parigahesava* myuta[m] chatusala-parigahitam4 sela-mamt3.va[m] patith[a]pitam ramno Siri-Vira purisadatasa samvachharaiii athara sarii 10[+*]8 hemanita-pakhaiii chhatharh 6 divasam pamchamaiii5 sava-satanam hit[a]ya sukhaya hotu ti 
TRANSLATION. 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord Buddha. A chetiya-gJiara (dto%a-hall).Chatisiri (who is) the uterine sister of Maharaja Vasethiputa Siri-Chatamuk-of the house of Ikhaku, who is favoured (absorbed ?) by Mahasenaj the lord of Virupakhas,the offerer of Agnihotra, Agnishto ma,Vajap5yaand Asvamedha, the giverof many crores ol gold, hundred thousands of Mne, and hundred thousands of ploughs (of land) and who is of unimpeded purposein ail (his) aims, (who is) the wife of Vasettiiputa Khamdasiri of (the family of) the Pugiyas and (who is) the mother of Khamdasagaramnaga,for the longevity and for the victoryof her son-in-law, King Matbati puta, Siri-Virapurisadataof the house of Ikhaku and for the attainment by herself of welfare "and happinessin both the worlds and of Nirvana, having due regardto the past, future and present bliss (?) of the great community of Buddhist . monks consistingof all the holy men who have renounced the world and who have penetrated (?) into various countries, and of botfc the houses to which she herself "belongs, has erected a stone shrine surrounded by a cloister and provided 
i Probably Ikhabu-kulaact. 
1 The afoJutra* placed between square brackets arc tUl partlytaraceable, 
* Tbe atehara ha is written under the lioQ. 
* Bead :
BPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [VoL. XX.   
with everythingat the foot of the Mahachetiya for the benefit of the Masters belonging to the sect of the Aparamahavmaseliyas.In the eighteenth year, a mo 18, of King Siri-Virapurisadata, }n the sixth 6th fortnight of winter, on the fifth 5th day. May it be for tjie welfare and 
happinessof all sentient beings. 
Second dpsidal Temple inscription I. 
TBANSCRIPT. 
(1. 1) Sidhaih namo bhagavato Ikhalm-raja-pavara-risi-sata-pabhava-vamsa-aambhavasa deva-manusa-sava-sata-hita-sukha-maga-desikasa iita-kama-kodha-bhaya-harisa-tariBa-moha dosa-sada(il)pita1-Mara-bala-dapa-mana-pasamana-karasa dasa-bala-nmha(fi)balasa a$ha[i;hr| ga-maga-dhai&achaka-pavatakasa chaka-lakhana-sukumS-ra-sujrita-charayasa taru^a-divasa kara-pabhasa sarada-sasi-soma-darisanasa sava-loka-chita-mahitasa Budhnsa rarfmo M[atha]riputasa- 10[+*K' hemarata-pakhaiii chhathaih 6 divasam teraiii lO[+*]3. . ,ta [ra] jachanyaimm8 Kasmira-Gamdhaxa-Chm^ 
Da[mila-Pa]]ura 4Tambapamiii"dlpa-pas[a]dukanam , thtriyanarii Taihbapaf'rhjimkanurii euparigahe (L 2) Siripavate Vijayapuriya-puva-disa-bhSge vihfi.ro Clinla-Dharimiapirlyaxh clietiya-gharam sapata-saiiitharaih sachetlyam sava-niyutam karitaiii uvasikilya Bodhisiriva apano bhatuno Budhi[m]nakasa pitnno cha se Govagama-vathavaaa Hevata-gahapatina 
matuya cha sa Budhamnikaya bhatunaiii cha se Chamdaraukhanasa Karuxhbudhina'sa Hagharhnasa bhaginlya cha Eevatitiinikaya bhatu-putanam cha Maha-Cliarhdamukha-G^hulj Chamdamukhanam bhagineyanam cha Maha-Mula-Chula-MulaBark apano cha ayakaaa Miilavaniyasa ayikaya Budhavaniki[naya]matulaka 5[sa cha] ko^hfftJkurikaHa Bhadasa BodMsarhinasa Ghamdasa Bodhikasa mahamatukaya Bhadi[la]ya Boclliiya** clia apa;0 pitunc Budhi[va]niyasa m[Stuya] . . . . (L 3) bhatuno Mxilasa bhagintawfa* Budhwimikliya Mulamnikaya Nagabodhinikaya cha dhutuya Vlramnikaya putanath Nagatfmasa VlraihaaVa 
cha sumnhanam cha Bhadasiri-Mislnam e^am-eva cha Kulaha-vihareohetiya-ghatarii Slhak vihare bodhi-rukha-paado Maha-Dhammaginyaih ovarako 1 mahuvi[M*]re marfi<java- khambho Devagiriyam padhana-sala Puvasele tajikam a[laih]da 6ma[iii*]4avo cha Kaii^akasele mahachetiyasa puva-dare sela-mamcjavo Hirumuthuve ovaraka tim^ti 3 Papilayaiii ovaraka sata 7 Puphaginya[m] sela-mamdavo Dhaijb7...... vihare6elarna[rh]<JavQ etarii cha savaxh warivamiji 8[tam....sa]dhu-vagasa9 achamta 10 hita-snkhaVa thavitaih savaFsa] ch^ lokasa imaih navakammam timhi na.vaka[ih]mikehi karitam Charlidamtikha-therena chi (L 4) Dhammanamdi-therena oha Naga-therena cha sela-vacjhlkisa Vidhikasa kaiiimarii ti 
1[I \vould read ^moJia-dosasa dapita-Mura -Ed.]' ' ...... T -*--***. 'The aksMra fb, ofMaputo,*is partly preserved. After this word some five or aix oUharaa are Icwt In the absence of any traces of t strokes, the missing word cannot have been Siri.PurMata,*. In all probabiUtv it -was sawuooMorotfi, followed by a word expressing"fourteenth"(chodnfo 1).prooaDiuty -*Perhaps bhadaihla.ra.j-&cha,riyancuii ? 
wl theThe words which I read Favono-DamiZa-Patoa are not q-uite certain. The Da of Damila i 8 .tfl] leffibl<i ong-drawn top strokes of the remaining two afeWo, have led me t the conj 9otural llfl^ ! body of the otoftara being partly preserved. The fa of Palura IB conjectural8 ^' W gen^ve ce, one would espect .MU**. but the dUbr. ka show9 no trace of IT S " 
The afoto-aw of maiufafawa is conjectural. As the word is followed by several 1*1*0! , ,, ^-^ 
ttManw are lodt atter 
* The afahara tafo is conjectural Perhaps ta*aNo. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS PROM HAGARJUNIKONDA. '2$   
TRANSLATION. 
Success! Adoration to the Lord Buddha, born of a race (whieh is) sprangfrom hundreds of sages and excellent kingsof Ikhaku's lineage ;who has shown the road to welfare and happiness to go^s and men and all beings, who has conquered, and put down the pride and. arrogance of M&ia's hosts called lust, anger, fear, desire, thirst, delusion, and hatred ; who, greatof power, is possessed of the ten powers, who has set in motion the Wheel-of-the-Law (pertaining to) the Eight-fold Path, whose graceful and well-formed feet (are marked witKj the signof the Wheel, whose splendouris that of the newly risen sun, whotfe sightis lovely as that of the autumnal 
moon, and who is magnified by the thoughts of all the world. In the fourteenth Mth^(year) of King Mathariputa,in the sixfch Sfch fortnightof winter, on the thkteenth-7-13th day. For the benefit of the ..... masters and of the fraternities (of monks) of Taiiibapamria (Ceylon) who have converted Kashmir, Gandhara, China, Chil&ta (=Skt. Kirata), Tosali, Avaramta (=Skt, Aparanta), Vanga, Vanavasi, Yavana(?}, Damila (?), Palura (?) and the Isle of Ta^mbapaiii^i (Ceylon). At Siripavata (=Skt. Srlparvata) on the east side of Vijayapur!at the Convent on the Lessei Dhammagiri a chaitya-tiall with a flooring of slabs, with a ch&itya"tod providedwith all the necessaries, was^caused*o be made by*the female lay-member Bodhisiri (Skt. Bodhi&rl)for the sake of her own husband Budhimnaka, and .of his father, the householder Revata residing at Qovagama and of his mother Budhamnika and of his brothers Chaiiidamukhana,Eji.runibudhina (md) Hagharhna and of (his) sister Revatimnika and of (Aw) brother's sons Maha-CbamdamukKa (=Skt. Maha-Chandramukha) and Chula-Chamdamukha (=Skt. Kahudra-Chandramukha) and of (his) sister's sons Maha-Miila and Chula-Mula, and (forthe sate) of her own grandfather Mula vfiniya and of her grandmother BudhavaniMna and of her maternal uncle(s) (?), the treasurer1 Bhada (=Skt. Bhadra), Bodhisamma (=Skt. Bodhi&rman), Charfida (=Skt. Chandra) (and) Bodhika, and of her maternal grandmother .......... Bodhi and of her own father Budhivaniya and of her mother (?) ---- ,of her brother Hula, of her sisters Budhamnika, Mukmnika* and Nig&bodhinika, of he^ daughter Viramnika, of her sons Naga^ona and Virarana and of her daughters-in-law Bhadasiri (^Skt. BhadrakI) and Misi (=8kt. Miki). And even thuswise a chaitya-'h&ll at the Kulaha-vtAara, a shrine for the Bodhi-tree at the Sihala-^'Aam one 1 call at the Great Dhammagiri, a ma^at7a-piUar at the Mahavihara, a hall for religious practice at the D^vagiri, a tank, verandah* and ma^w at Pnvasela (=8kt. PurvaSalla), a stone mawfava at the eastern gate of the Great ..Chaitya atKantakasela3 (=Skt. Kantaka^aila), three 3 cells at Hirumuthuva, seven -7 cells at Papila, a stone ma%4ava at Puphagiir(=Skt. Pushpagiri), . ............ a stone maqdava at the ..,*.. .viham. And all this above described has been dedicated for the endless welfare and happinessof the assemblyof saints and for .that of the whole world. This work was caused to be made by the three superintendentsof works, the ih#m Chamdamukha, and the thera Dhammanamdi and the thera Naga, (It is), the work of the stone mason Vidhika. 
Detached Pillar inscription G. 
TEANSCEIFT.4 
(1, 1) [Si]dharii namo bhagavato teloka-dhamma-dhura-vahasa mahSigj8[sa ViiS-] 
(1. 2} [pa]kkpati-Mahasena-parigaMt^sa Agihot-Igithoma-[V^jape-T (1. J)! y-lsamedba-y*. & KotMJcarika - Skt. 
*If .alatidd is the correct treading, it may perhaps be taken for anotlisr form of Pali alind*"a 
aterrace'v. ^ 
The vovel-mark of the fourth oMora has the appearance of an 0'strok, but thia I beJiave | tc an error not tmfreqwent in these insoriptionfi. 
The fiwt half of the inscription ha heea restofe4 nith the ^id oi the corresponding passage in other
24 EPIGEAPHIA INDIC.A. [ VOL. XX,   
[%i(ji)sa Mramna-koti.go-satesaha[sa-halaH3ta-] (1. 4) sahasa-padai(yi)sa savathesu apatihata samka[pasa]..(l. 5) [Vajsethiputasa Ikhakunam Siri-Chatamulasa Bun[ha]ya [mahfiruja-] (1.9) sa Madha[ri;|putasai Ikhakunam Sir-Virapurisadatasa bhayaya8ma-(l. 7}lmrajaaa Siri-Bfh}Hmja-]CltatamiiIasa* mStuya mahad[e]viya BLatidevaya (1. 8}... [i]mam viharo sava-jata-myuto* ehariyfa]naih Bahusutlyanam (1.9) patithuFpito].. .'."i'ra "pu naxh budh3na....[samvachharam]..[bitiyaifa] (1. 10) [gimha-pakharii] ............ sughfiyo ti TSANSLATION. 
Success ! Adoration to the Lord, the Leader of the Law of. the Three WorM^.-MahmlPvi ,/u llS '"\ ,daufter-in-lw of MaMr5Ja Vasethiputa EBri-OltatamQIa, of (the ho.se. of) the Ikhakus etc., (see above, sub C 3) ; (who is) the wife of Maharaja MiujlLurl^uta Wiri- Vlni- unsad o the house of the Ikhakus; (and who is) the mother of Maharaja Wid-Ehu ,ul. (f ). this monastery provided witha 
PiZZar inscription H, 
. TEANSCEIPT. 
idharfl b sam|-saril- 0- 2) budhasa n Tt-i auhanjosa - uanosa puto.. (1. 3) IkhakunamSra-Ehuvala-tChatalmulasa sava 10r+*ll fl 4) 1 H 7 i - - 
jam Yiharo'cha (1 12) %*.,.* i /rn i7 [ jdaWwmya nimiii thani TEANSLATION. ^^Inthenthyoarof^^0/) 
i 
day. Mal^S,:!^^^tlle^^the l.t (for- 
^hlputa, 8W^.^ol( ^f^1'^'-' "Maharaj. daughter of Mah&aja Matharfputa Siri.\2aDuri! J1^%??(f"^C' 3) ;^}i *) ^e <) the sister of Maharaja VaseLputa.Sri SSS S^*"*"/}^IIdulk" H'^
b -'* 
following W, oortaialy ,,. Ittthoot]lor 
(pK)per namo"""*
No. 1.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAQARJUNIKONDA. 25   
lor the benefit of the Masters of the Mahi[sa]saka sect, on behalf of the community of the Four Quarters, and for the sake of the welfare and happinessof all sentient beings. (It has been] carried out by the Master, the great preacherof the Law, the thera Dhariima[gho]sa. 
Sculpture inscriptionJ.1 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(1. 1) Sidham namo bhagavato aga-pogalasa Budhasa Chhadakapavatich[e]na Paduma- [va]-niya gharaniya sagaya saputakanaih Hagas[i]r[i]sa sagasa Nagatarasa cha sabhaja[sa] (1. 2) saputikana[ni] cha deyadhem[o] pato unisa cha mahachetiye patith[a]vito 
TRANSLATION. 
Success. Adoration to the Lord Buddha, the best of beings. 
A meritorious gift (consisting of) a slab and a coping stone, has been dedicated at the Great Chaitya by Chhadakapavaticha, Padumavani his house-wife, together with their sons Hagasiri and Nagatarawith Jiis wife and together with their daughters. 
Fragmentary Sculpture inscription K. 
TRANSCRIPT. 
(1.1) saputak[a]na[m] cha Dhamasa Padumasa cha [Bha]dasa Hughasa saput- [i]k[a]na[m] cha had[a]ya Budh[a]ya Padumaya M[isa]ya Chula-Budh- [a]ya N[a]k[a]ya cha saj[a]m[a]tuk[a]na[m] san[a]tuk[a]na[m] sanat[i]fca[m] cha sanadi m[i]ta-ba[m]dhavana[m]cha deyadham[o] pataniba sapadaka.2, . , . 
TRANSLATION. 
. . together with his8 sons Dhama and Paduma, [Bhajda, Hugha and together with his daughters -hada, Budha, Paduma, Misa, Chula-Budha, and Naka, together with his sons-in-law, together with his grandsons and granddaughters and together wit!h his relatives, friends, and kinsmen, a meritorious gift [consisting of] a slab 
Postscript. 
Extract from a letter dated Oslo, 2nd October, W28> from Prof, Sten Konow3 Ph.D. "In the first placeI should like to draw your attention perhaps unnecessarilyto the suffix a^aka in Visakhayaka, Sagararhnaka, formed from ViSakha, Sagara, respectively. This same suffix is frequentin names from the Bombay Presidency ; c/. Lttders, Nos. 985, 993, 1000, 1018, 1020, 1033 (Ka^heri), 1063, 1064, 1065 (Kutja), 1088, 1091, 1097 (Karli), 1109, 1111, (Bedsa), 1141 (Nasik), 1171 (Junnar). It evidently belongs to a dialect with a Dravidian, per haps Ka-narese, substratum; The h for s also pointsto Kanarese. Moreover, some of the names 
seem to find their explanation m Kanarese, Thus kanda means*child'in Kanarese, and chali 'cold,* Chalikirerhma^ka probablyis Ckalikira^aka=6Moon,' It also strikes -me that Kanarese ka^ambu means 'envy.'I have not access 'to a Telugu- dictionary. But it seems to me that Kanarese is more likely. The other characteristics which can be gleaned from your quotations do not helpus. They show that we have to do with a Standard Prakrit, re lated to Pali, -which was, as you know, used over a large territory. The changeof -p- to -0- is 
1 The transcript and translation of inaoriptions J and should be regardedas provisional. *Perhaps sapaduka-patfo. [Perhaps the readingia 'patani be sapbdukani \ meaning two slaba with foot* 
prints, Ed.] 
His, hor, or their, as the oase may bo.
86 
[Vox.. XX. 
general m most Prakrits *nd cannot, be used for loealking the diakot. A flimilar atoonsadintheEharainBciaptions. 1 -would tierce <be inclined to .define the d of   
: Weale&ced.m1iha.normalked Bemi.literar7 Piatdt) uS d by 
, TTM ^^^and P10babl7 Kanarese' If J am *, we should a to mfer that the Ikkhakus had come to the Kistna country from the 
actois fromi. .85).' 
Glossary. 
*' 
*., atiehekhfta "^^or 
preserved in the (H, 
L 8- A 4 
meaning-of he ffi.1. . U- 10-11, and 
.fl-a-^^svJ^^JS "a^plC,* ' ' ' 
aect. See
1.) HIAKEIT INSGBIPTIONB FBOM.BTAQAajUNIKONDA.   
longevity, power and fame of (hi*) am family tod race." (Biuhler) hi the Hira ha<Jagalli grant of the I>allava king SiTastaadavarman, L 9,^ JFmt, VoL I, p. 6; omha-veiayike [dka^^dy^al^m^mke "for conferring on ourselves 
^tory (m war) and for increasing- ^) mam^ length of life, and- power-. (Hultzsch) m the MayidavSlu plates of Sivaskandavarman, Ep.Ind.Vol VI p 87- amharhayu-bala-wddhamyaih~katuw "making (it) a meana fot iwrwing oui length- of life and power." (Hultzsch) -in th^Britisk' Museum pfcte of Chanidivl, Ep. Ind., VoL VIII, p. 146. The Sanskrit equivalent of th* term- is found m the Chammak and Siwan* grants of Pravarasena II .(flu,* facription*, pp. 238 and *8) and in the Uruvapalli grant (Ind. Art., VoL V, p. 52). <?/. also chhatrapusa saputra-darasa ayu+Ma-vardhfc m the laadla plate- of Jfotika (Ev Ind., Vol. IV, p. 56> and/, fi. J.^. for 1924, F, 402. 
(F> I. 3), perhaps Skt oZ^tfa m. "a terrace in front of the h<wifl**door," Pali Vinayv PifaJcam (ed. OMenberg) VoL I, pp. 247 1; OhuUa^g^^B9 5 and 
alinda ^& terrace or verandah outside a house." Mah&vagga VI 36 * 14, l7w* P^., VoL II, pp. 153 and 16^, The- Omda is not necessarUy a terrace or Verandah outside,a building, as is proved by MaMvaihsa XXXV, 3, Tatheva Lohap&sad* Thupatamuposathavhaye fa*3feAK-a^nw& Ureti. twhchhi alin&m eva cAa "He made. n iiuier pourtyaid and aat ian^r Teraodah in the Lohapaaada.*' C/ !>. K. Acharya, Dictionary of Hindu ArcMteXme, pp. 54 ff., and A. K. Coomafas^anay, Ju4.0^, VoL XLyjII, p. 552. 
Schariyu (C 1, 11. 10 and 11),, written mtsk shoirt initiaJ a in line S of inscription C 2 s=Skt. acharya> Pali fichariya,"a teacher*" 
(C. 1, L 12; C 2, L !)>;, Ananda, ar perscmat name. 
a*w, i.e., IAifc*afcu=Sktk /foAvafa*^ Pali OfeMH. the legendary progtnitot -qi the Solar 
F,, L 
u,n epithet of- the Buddha. 
(H^ 1. 13)- C/. Skt. ud&i&y*, Pali ntSatma (absol. of tiW&<*{iJt"* point out ", "on behalf of, out account, of," 
unisa (J, L 3)=SktK- ushifiafau, coping-stone." frequently met with, in, Amaravata inscriptions. T?he word appears to designate not only the c0pingrstone which forms the crowning member of the 'railing enclosing,/ the. <upafc but also- the frieze running 'along, the top of the 'scidptswed facing!of, such a Daoaument. Adkw*ry% ep. <?*., pp, 
(A 3, L ^^o., passim) and 
(B 2, L &). C/., Spencer Hardy,, Eastern Monaohisn^ p, 229. 
L% ^e., M^*<iSkt ^r^too^te from tt&JAa^SJrt. tfeditw... ".(?/ Pisohel, {rrammatik, 300. ' 
(F, L 3)^Bkt. upa^ivar^itce, 
wdsika <F, L 2)^Skt, upasika. 
(F, L 3)<ca "ceir^akt, ^^at^ra^ Cf.LZdt^li&l; Index 
uyaraha, uvavaraka, ovaraka. 
L % ,e^v passim), 
,k >,* jmmtai 
(A 3, 1. 6; rtc.,)*Skt J^gw^, Bdi i^Wfa, ^900% wmninH> wietohed, m * 2
BPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [VOL. XX.   
Eulu/taka (B 4, L 3), name of a clan. 
K.'Wa-vihara (F,1. 3), name of a monastery, 
LTf1i[a]karika (F, I 2)=Skt. koshthagarika, "a treasurer, a superintendent of a royal store house/' Gf. kothagalain Sohgauia copper-plate inscription (LUders, Lut9 No. 937). 
\Ko]da[ba]lisiri (H, L 11), a personal name. 
JWSffHzya (H, L 12) "a pillar" (?). <7/. Pali kha^u, Ckilders, Pali Dictionary, sub Corrigenda, p. 622, under JM%u. 
Khariida, i.e., Khanda (ia personal names)=8kt. Skanda. 
KhamdacJiaUkircuma^aka (B 4,1, 4), a personal name. Dr. Ston Konow suggests Kanarcse chalikira^aka=moon} from JKanarese cWi=col(L 
Khamdavisakhanaka (B 2, L 4)=Skt. Skanda-vMkha, a personal name, KJtamdasagara[m]naka (A 3,1. 7, eto.,) and Khamdas&garamna^a (E, 1. l)Skt, $kanda*> sayara}a personal name, 
khambha, i.e., khanibha (passim), "a pillar," from Vedic skambh* G/. Pischel, O'ram wafii, 306, Also in sda-Khambha (j^.). 
ffo^apati (F,1. 2)=Skt. g?ihapati. 
gharani (J,1. l)=Skt. gyihi%%. 
(F, 1 1 )8kt, ckira-ZaMa^a ,an epithet of 
the Ikddlia. 
(F, L 3)=Skt, Chandmmukha, a personal name. 
Clamdamul'hana (F, 1. 2); c/, Skt. Chandramukha, a personal name. 
CMihtcnnula; see, Siri-Chdmtamula. 
Chamtisiri (A 3, 1. 7, do., passim) or CUmtisirtyim (B 5, L 5), a petBonal name, dmtudisa satiyha (H, 11. 1243)=:Skt! chaturditab MAghafc 
chStwda^,I 2), i.e., chatuwla, Skt. ctou^a, Pali <Aodiiflto, **a quadxtnguto build f-^7^JSTttd 5; XXXV'8^^C^(No. 10 ImciiptH L. i 
ingbuilt round an inner courtyard, a cloister or quadrangle.1 'Of. JJff^MAa- , *o(fiS (ed. Stenzler) p. 46. L 20; mMmjh mhatu^hmi Km* III 13- 
By. Jni, Vol. VIII, p. 78. Acharya, op. %., p. 193. 
Chula-Chaihdamukha (F, 1. 2)=Skt. Kshudra-Chandrmum<x, a peraonal name Chuk-QMtisirivika, (B 4, 1, 5), a personal name. 
Chula-Budha (K)=Skt. Kshudra-Buddha, a personal name. 
Chuk-Mnla (F, L 2)=Skt. Kshudra-Mula, a personal name A L 1 -dF. U.. aad 3)==8kt. .^j^ .^ S6 eml ed with 
XXXI, 52. 
. , wf, Index , r 
(E, L 2; F 1. 2), i.e., <**#."sixth ,Skt. dUlffa. ,in the pet80nal name CMofton (0 4, 1 6)
No. L] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 29   
(A 2, L 2, 6^0==Skt.^te.r%a.^e^a-moAa.w>m^^a, epithet of 
the Buddha. Ruga, dosa, moha, "lust, hatred, and delusion"are the three Aggis, KmohanaH, or Akusala-mulas symbolised in the centre of the "Wheel of Existence"by three animals : a dove or cock, a snake, and a hog. tarisa (K, L l)~Skt, tarxha "thirst." 
tan^a~dimmkara**pahha (F, L l)a=8kt. prabha, a,n epitlxct of the Buddha. talaka (F, L 8)-^Kkt. ta4ayti> "a tank or cistern." 
Jt'tw (F, L 3), instr. tMi, (F, L 3) "three," 
tera (F,1. 1) "thirteenth." 
telokadkarimadkum~vaka (G, 1. l)=Skt traildbja-dharma-dkum-vaha, an epithetof the Buddha. 
thambha in sda-thambka (C 2, L 8)=Skt. stanibha, Pali thambka "a pillar, a column, a stole." 
tfAera, combined with personal names (F,11. 34; H, L U)Skt. sthavira, Pali fAera, ua senior monk, an elder." 
theriya (F L 1), dorivml from i/^ra, adj "belongingto theras" subst.c *fraternity, cora muuity." 
darisana (F, L I) --Skt, (farSana, Pali rfawana. C/. Piachel, (?rawmafo'&, 135, dasabala-makabaift (F, L IJ-^Hkb. datiabala-mahabala, an epithetof the Buadha. dinanm<1mk(t> (B 5, L 6); Skt, dinara, from Latin denarius, *'an Indian coin struck 
in imitation of and called after the Roman Denarius" and Skt. masha(ka)> ua curtain weight und monetary value," Manu VIII, 135, 298, .392. divam (K, L U)-.<Hkt. dimsa. Elsewhere (C 2, L 11) abbreviated as diva. Dlgha*Majhim*pa[tklcha~m&uand D$gha-Majhima~niMya~dham (C 1, 
il. I!- 12 and C 2, 11 940); corrected reading. C/. Vinaya-dhara and Mahavi naj/n-dharain Amnr&vatl inscriptions. Burgess, Amaravati Stupa, p. 37, No, VIII, and p. 102, No. 25. The word -dhara in these compounds must have the same moaning an Arabic bSfi$"one who has the whole Qur'an by heart." 
duhuta (B, L 3)Skt. duhm"a daughter", gen.,instr, sing., dMuya, (F,1. 3; H, 1.9), Ha-maja^mfej (F,1. l)*Skt. deva-manwTiya-sarw-sattvor 
ika, an epithetof the Buddha. 
ja*akato (A 2, L 1, eto., passim) -Skb dewraja-satkrita, an epithetof the Buddha* a (C I, L 11u oM*a"; C 2, L 9 "<bw") "a preachef. 
Dhanaka, (B 2 L 4), a clan name. 
ZVb?fima (K, L l)Skt. DAarma, a personal name, 
DAa^ma^AoMj (H, L 14)Sfct. DMmagMa, apersonal name. 
Dhavhmanavhdi (F, L 4),.e. ( Dhwnmanandi, a personal name. 
(B 1 L 3, to., passim)-Skt. dhatuara.pangrih%aabsorbed by the best of elements (dBWte),i.^. by 
(K) in mnatuka, i,e> f $anattukaBkh sanaptr 
(H, I 8)Skt. napl|i,ua grayid-daughter". 
i rim totHpiiUtai I ow, to the courtesyof M. L. da la T.U. 
ve.
INmCA. Vfot. XX,   
and navakvhma (C 1, L 12 ; C 2, L 11 ; *, I. 8)-Skt. nawtermoM, Pali ttawitomina, "a religious "building dedicated by some lay-memberto the Saftgha", , The procedure by which a superintendentof works (namJcammifa*)is appointed by the chapterof BhiKVws in order to supervise the construction of a nova* Jcamma is described in Ghullamgga VI, 5=* Vinay* PifaJcam (ed. Oldenberg), VoL II* 
pp. 159 1 (8. B. E.> VoL XX, pp.189 ff.)."If the buildings were for th Bhikkhus, then a Bhikkhu, if for the Bhikkhunls, then a Bhikkhunl, was appointed to superintendthe works in order tp ensure the buildings beingin, accordance with the rules of the Order as to size, form, and objectof the various apart ments". C/.also Sutta-vibhanga, J5MAHun?-w6ian^a I, l**Vinaya Pitahm, VoL IV, p. 211. The word mvalcamma frequentlyoccurs in dedicatory in 
scriptions. 
namkajhmiJca (tf, L 3)'"a fihikBm or Bhifckhun! appointed 'by $xe Chapter as a super intendent of the bunding operationsof a wavdfcomma, (see preceding article) Cf. Ltiders, tiist, NOB, 154, 773, 987 and 1280. A synonymoim term la'' m-adhitthayaJca, Mahavam&a> XXX, 98* 
*^M-|S)=Skt. N&gfy a personal name. 
Naga (F, L 4r)=*Skt. Ndga,a personal name* 
Nagatara (J, L 1), a personal name. 
Nagamna (F, L 3), a personal name. 
(F, L S), a petaonal name* 
B> L 2)4 *'assetnbfed X*) **#* Various countries**, 
(E, L 2); & word of uncertain meaning. 
nithapUa or rtfyhapita (0 1, L 12 j 2, L 11), Jfrali 'rt^gftApft^ past participle of 11to ^cotttple^^ MaMvdih8a9 XXXI, 1, 2. Of. Pali ^fA^a' compleiied,w tfnitthite yeva, Mahavamsa, XXIX, 53; ^w^ anifthitarh kam-mam ntyhdpehi OJdE,9 'XXXII, 2. 
%Mtitt-ra4^^^5^*e (A 3, L '9, eft?., #dfcsim)=sSkt; ni 
(, t 2} "fifth". 
{J, L 2 .and K) **n slab;" frequently in " Am&tSVatlinsorijJtiom ; seeLtdirrf, Mtew. Abo Sn impound ^p^-m^Wa (S,1. fe),* with a ioot of (^o^ slabs (A 2, 11, 6-7, etc., passim) in 'compound j?atia?ia-6awiAa?kia. Th^ word 
sponds with1Slit. 'fytdtJbhatfa,*ftili' ;p^A^a=*counterpart, liteaess- Bittv tikr word wanted here itf ^i&A5gf4 tali apfatibMga**unedited, tuipai^UeM, *itotd!i (A 3, L 9), *.., patitMpita, Skt. yftel^ftaijwtel "eye^fced, M u$*, d^dfoated* 
less." 
faduma (K)=8kt. Padma, * personal name. 
PadmnaoSni' (J, L 1), a personal name. 
SPocfawS (E)feSkt. P<ii6rt4, k personal name* 
-*m (F, 1. 3}=*Skt. pradJ&m-m&,4ia fiatt io^r pMtJttetog Migkto 63taroiBe>f, from Pali padh&na "exertion, tofcrgetio efloit, tftd^ixig;v>> e^ 
C/. f^hana-mal^a^o inAmartviitt JntKseijptioni. 'Bux& 
Ifa. 49 j LtkdeiSj Xw, No. 1230 and eoireotiou, p. 179f 
<E* 1. SHSkt. fHir^oA^ 'PlH poritgafa, ^.gc^ce, favour." 
gift* or'aiuHNi- fti^-ld.] p*Io4otdby
No. 1.] PBAKEIT INSCRIPTIONS P$OM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 31   
parin(hnetuna{m] passim, absolt^ivum of pamo*He&"<^i3k{;r pari^amayati,Pali (rauB.of par9amat)<(t-to bmd $o, to \chang$ into, to turn to use for lody, to apportion, to destine*'* M^JWM B&pi$irj,tyilca apano matwam Haw m ^nn&notuna (C 2, 1. , 7) a&d MaM&epi Chha$Usiri apano m&arovfa ih parinametuna (0 4, 1. 7), It is clear that pqriwmetunais 
bore in the name sense als pur$to Icpdwnam, m the Jaggayy^peta ip.scfiptioi\s: mtitaraik NtyaiKitfiji* pwftto fatiunqmfM.aving ^ssoci^d [with tim] #& inothr NSgalini'*(BtlWer^ IB itk esjpres^B apawe> ubk^y^Jc^lam parim&etwtp (B a, 1. 5; C 1, L 8; 5, L 4)it is *lso ^od ^ith Ae objectin tte apouaa tivo. Blwewhete we find apano ubk^^-M^sa &j$Mtam-anw&P^WWfa <W imf^m&mkSnam in ^hioh tlM oopinectiw, , ^t tiw absolutism parinwm&un<* P act dwr. <7/ Buddhist Sfeb. 
309), 
(Rt L 1), ie,f p0wafi^Skt-. , w E, L IHBkt, pwWWa^e Budd^t faith , n hdhi-rukha^&da (F L , 
(A 2, I 5, 
(F, L 8) 
(KP ), **., 
eastern 
worrl rMra is frequently met with in <tap*MB iw*ipWBfc 
***&*** <?\H;*!^ tTfl 2) P^ (, I- 1). lan *me- Pukii/u, ridn/ti (A 2, L 6; U o, L f v/ o,i. ^; r-wy*^ \ i / Bappl^ (tf^to /Mim 9. M3),, 3w>p^mw (jMK IV 10^ <**^^249 BaM M*> "^ V8**- - rtw/m, p. 249), BappM It 
Cy. M. Waller, Die (B 4, I 3; B 6, 1. 
;C 2,1. ;/t 4,* .> 
(F, 1 8V *' 
nwne. 
jBwttnoia <F L 2), a peifonai name. 
JBwUU[A]^|M( t(K. 14 %>, 
JtaMi ff. I .gJ^Skt.. 
. - . 
bjtlwi 
(G,1. 7),
S2 EHGRAPHIA INDICA. C Vol.. XX.   
bkatuno, gen. sing. (F,1- 2)=Skt. 
Bhada (F,1. 2), i.e., J8JlWo=Skt. BAorfra, a personal namo. 
BJiadasiri (F,1. 3), i.e., 3ftWawi=Skt. Madmxri, a pwrsonal name. taam/a (A 2, 1. 6, efc., passim) and Uay3 (B 2, 1. 4 ;B 4,1. 5)-Skt. Milrfa Full 
bhariyii* 
bhdgineya (F,1. 2)=Skt. IMgin&ja, "a sister's son"* 
ttfiww (F,1. 3) gen. sing.=Skt. ZArSwJ ; Vhatwuim, gen. plur.Skt. bhdtu-puta (F,1. 2)=Skt. bhratri-putra, "a brother's son", 
Majhima-nikaya,see Digha-Majhima-niMya. 
mamtava, tnamdara (F,1. 3)=Skt. maiicla'pa. 
MaMkamdasiri (C 5, 1. 2), a personal name. C/1 Karhdasiri, 
mah^ani-vasabha-gamdha-hatM (A 2,1. 2, eto, passim )Skfc. woAaflra Aartin, an epithetof the Buddha. For vwMgani cf. MdhSmmm XXIX, 30, Maha-ChaihdamuJ&a (F,1. 2)=Skt. Maha-Chandramuklia, a personal name. Mshaehetiya and Mahachetlya (A 2, 1. 3, do., passim)Skt. MaMchaitya, "Great Clmitya," loo. sing, MaJiacMiyamU (G 4,1. 2, ea? conjecture*), 
makaialavam (A 2,1. 6, efc., passim),a title of uncertain meaning, evidently denoting ua high dignitaryor a feudal lord". See above, p.6. 
mahatalavari (A 3,1. 7, etc., passim),uthe wife of a maMt,alaiwa?\ 
maMdamtfanayaka (S 2, 1. 4)=Skt. mahadantfanayakaua high, probably judicial,offi cial". Cf. J. R. A. &, 1924, p. 402. 
maMdanapatini (A 3,1. 7, etc., passim) =Skt. *w,ahudanapatniua mistreas of munilicence" an epithetof Charhtisiri. C/. mahdddnapatiin Taxila plate inscription, A'p., J^,.Vol IX, p.56. 
maMdew (B 5, L 4; 2,1. 6; G, 1. 7; H, 1. 11), a title borne by the consort of a rulingchief. 
mahadhammaMthiJca (H, L 14)=Skt. mahadharmaMthikaaa great preacher of the Law." Cf. Burgess, Amaravati Stupa, p.94, 
makSbhikkU'Sa^hgJia (E,1, 1), i.e., maJiabhikkhu-sangha. 
makamatuJca (F,1. 2). (7/. Pali makdmatd "a grandmother", 
Ma&a-MSa (F, L 2)=Skt. HaJia<*Mulat a personal name, 
mahawMra (B 5, L 5; F, L 3). 
makasendpati (A 3, L 7, e&., passim)=Skt. mahds^ndpati, lit,"Commandftr-in-Ghtef** but here used as a title designating a feudal lord. According to the late Dr. Fleet it"denotes equal rank with Maharaja and Mahasamanta." (Gupta /n*0rip tions, p. 15, n.). See above, p.6. 
mahdsendpatini (B 4, 1. 5), Skt. *mahdsendpatnluthe wife of a mahas&ndpati" Mahlsd]saJca (G,1. 12), Skt. Mahitdsaka, Pali MahimsasaJca, name of a Buddhist sect, It was a subdivision of the Theravadins and appears to have flourished in the Indira country. Cf. M, WaUeser, Die SeUw des alien Buddhismm, pp. 7 and 22, 
(A 2, L 5, etc., passim) and Mathariputa (E, L 1; F. L 1 ; Ht L 8)* Skt. Mathanputra,) metronymic of Siri-Virapurisadata. 
(A o, L 7, e&., passim)"motherw?ace. sing, mdtaram (G 2, L 7; C 4, L 7.) msir. and gen. sing. ^o%a (F,1. 2; G, 1. 7). 
see pameha-mStu&a* 
Mm (f, L 3), i,e>t Jfwf^=Skt. K^r?, a personal name,No. I.] PRAKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROMNAGARJUNIKONDA.   
Mulct (F,1. 3}, a poroonal name. 
Mutamnika (F, 1. 3), a personal name. 
MMavuniya (F,1. 2), a personal name. 
y Tging to thcruiiiig house f 
(h 5, 1. 3)=Skt.RudradharabhattariM, 
2), a pronal name. 
Reimtimnika (F,I. 2), a personal name, 
(F, L 4)~8kt. tariftatt, Pali wfflaU, Hindi fc^ta, 
y.** in Karle inscriptL/ m Sanehi inscription, ibidem, No. 490. Ininscr. F 1 the word 
carpenter 
and 
OOCUFB m the compound *eh~va$haki^Skt. tailwardhaki, "a stone-mason" CY Pah i($kamm<!<ikaki "a brick-mason," Mahammsa XXIX, 5, 30 and A K (Jociinawwwamy, /. 4, 0. 5., Vol. XLVIII, p. 272, 
a) (A 3, L 15, d<^ passim) ^Buddhist Sanskrit vanfyata, vanipakacta beggar a menaiwit," Examples; Dew na ky&ha Kundld^ndhaka esha va patnya mka diwuy y^am$yam*avatiMtafa Divyavaddna, p. 4U, l. 18; tiityapff rfw-atif^ J)i^ p< 83, L 19; 6rfflmaVa* S jirrwwtia^ v& anya^j w^i, t?an%aia, Mahavastu, Vol. I, p. 188, L u. (C 1, L II ; F i 2), ie, t;aAawa=Skt, wtoya"residing at".* 
ftfcftafo (0 I, 1, II; C 2, L 9, restored), "a preacher". 
i>4 (A 2 L 3, eto,, passim) and Vastfhiputa (G, L 5; H, 11, 7 and 9), i.e., KSw'^ipwttassSkfc V&ttwtyMputra, metronomic of Siri-Chamtamiila, Kamdasirii 
' 
Khamdacltalikireifamapka (?) (B 4, L 4) and Siri-Ehuvala-Chatamula (H, L 9). iri (C 5, L 3)8kt* Vishu*r^ a personal name. C/. Vinhuka in Sanchi in ncriptions, JSp, lnd.t Voi II, p 95, 
Vidhiba (F L 4), a peraonal name. 
Vir^pakkapati'MaMsena^mgMta (1 2, L 8, etc., passim) =Skt, Virupabhapati-MaMsena parigrihito> m epithetof Siri*Chaintamiik In the Milindapaftha, pp.6 fi., Mahlnfuia figurai as a demputta who becomes incarnate in the sage Nagasena. mh&m (F, h 2; G, 1. 8; H, L 11),aa monastery", 
(F 1, 3) a pemcmal name, 
(F, L 8), a personal name. 
ttt!&nt*(ia) (B 3, L 7, eto#f passim ; once vail&mika A 4, i 7)' in compound samana IkrwAa^- * The word appearsto be an adjective meaning, "belonging to Veiama." Buddha (/SlaJte, Vol. I, p. 228; Cambridge translation, Vol. I, p. 101) refers to the time of VelUma when he (Buddha) "stirred up all India by giving th seven thingsof price, and in [his] largesse poured them forth as though [he] had made into one mightystream the five greatrivers." He then preached th^ VoIfimaka-SuttA (VMmaka-Suttarii kathesi) which is also mentioned in Suman* j/aia-FiBtttfi, Vol. I, p* 284, L 11. It would seem, that Velama was a legend ary personage renowned in Buddhist tradition for his munificence like Vessan tara with whom his name is combined in Vibhangattha-htihd^ p, 414, L 6. 
Mr, Ifolmer Smith has drawn my attention to a passagein Anguttara-NiMya, Vol. IV, pp. 894-390 where the Buddha praises the liberality of a Brahmin with whom he identifies himself in a previousbirth. 
vwkchMnm (A 2, L 7, etc,, passim)in compound *ama^a-&a^a^-Skt pant participle of vyavaefohhinatti, passive vyamckMidyatt, Pali
34 BPIGRAPHIA INDICA.f VOL. XX.   
vochhijjate "to be cut off". The word wanted here evidently JH avothhina, Pali abbochclMnna, albhochohUnna "not cut off, uninterrupted, continuous". samvachhara (E, 1. 2)=Skt. sdmiMsq,ra, "a year". Elsewhere (A 3, 1. <), rfr., 'passim) abbreviated as samva, or swh (E, 1. 2). 
sata (F, 1. 3), i.e., sato,=Skt. soyto, "seven". 
aatari-satam (B 5, 1. 6), i.e., sattari-satam"one hundred and seventy," Cf. Piaohd f,V 60. 
saMiara in sapata-samthararh (F, 1. 2)=Skt. sowi^am, Pali *an^m( mnthiim"layer stratum, couch, flooring". C/. Mdhawnisa XXX, 70.* - 7W^ 
t (A 8 11 6-7, etc., passim) -=Skt. 
..an-ap-a^ammna-^am-pra^ini, . n o pithotof ChSrh n. C/. above, under fa**!, w^a(te), ^ami(fe), patilMga, and 
, 
of 
(A 2 1 1 
2 1 5 ./, /' and 10)> a Pwonal name. 
'' 
- | 
-MM\E s; i5)T)-1kr'^s?r u^ "a^ 
,a personal name.( ' 
^a (F, 1. i. H 1 ijtskTT' f"^^epiftefc f ih 
^-to (C 1, 1 10. n 2 "1*" ~pfln w*a' 8ra . acceptance". 
kt ""*'Pali ^% 
S-ed, acc' -' 
by-' 
*-",b ,? *;rf,'"* 6)=stt <**-i'"8toM (B *, 1. 6; B 5,,1 4. C 2 1 ft n K , . 
*M *
No, L] PRAKBIT INSCBIPTIQNS FROM NAGABJUNJKONDA, 35   
Hagasiri (JI. 1), a personal name. Of. Liiders, List, No. 1284, 
Haghamna (F,1. 2), from Skt. sangha (?), a personal name. 
Hamgha, i.e., JfJa%&a,==Skt. Sangha,in personal names. CJ. Ltiders, List, Nos. 1240, 1262, 1271, 1272, 1274, 1281. 
Harkmasirinikd (C23 11 5 and 7 ; 4, II. 5 and 7) or Hammasiri (0 4, 1. 5), a personal name, 
harisa (F,1. l)=Skt.harsha. 
Hiramftaka, i.e., HiraMaka (B 4, 1. 4), a clan name. 
hiramtya-koti~go~sata$ahasa-hala^ (A 2,1. 4, etc., passim);see aneJca 
Hugha (K,1. l)Skt.Sukha (?), a personal name, 
(E, L 2; F, 1. 1) Skt. hemanta-paksha. 
Geographical names. 
AvararMa (F,1. 1), i.e., 4twaia, Skt. 4yar5na(M),Pali A?aranta(ka), a country of the Western coast of the Peninsula, correspondingto the Northern Konkan, the capitalof which was SSyara,the ancient Surparaka.1Aparantais men tioned in Bock-Edict V of Asoka in connection with the appointmentof Shanrna mahamatas, in Nasik Cave III inscr. amongthe dominions of Gautamiputra gatakarni (Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII, p. 60) and in the Junagadh rock-mscnptionof Budradamajx. It was converted byYonaka-Dhammarakkhite, UJ*.VIII 7 
(B 5, 1. 3, i co^torafor <<C^M'>), U. Pa^ adj. from C7??em bkt. W Pali t/eni, G, 'OC^ (Ptolemy,VII, 1, 63), modem U]]ain, 
#(**** XII, 4 and 34. Of.also Mfcda. p. 331, Luders, tot. Nos. 965, 1013 Arpa'lrariitika (?), 1123. Skt. Aparantaka. Cj. Baghu.1V,53 
G, Kavraxo^a ^o>ov (Ptolemy, VH, 1, 15) a town i 
to be meant. 
CM*. (F,1. 1),
36 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [Vox* XX,   
Chhada]capamt[i]cha (J, L 1), perhaps an adjective from Chhatokapaiwta. Cf* [Chhada]* kicha "art inhabitant of Chhadaka"(?) Liiders,r No. 1220 (Amarfcvatl), Tambapamrti-dipa, i.e., Tambapa<$<q,i*dlpa and adj. Tatiibapaihif&ka (F,1, 1), Skt. T&m* 
raparria-dmpa, Gr, TocTtpopaviq (Ptolemy, VII, 4, 1), the Island of Oylnn. Tosali (F, 1. 1), a country and town on the coast of Kalifiga, mentioned in the two separate Kock-Edicts of Dhauli and two copper-plate inscriptions from the Cuttack district (Ep. Ind., Vok IX, p. 286 and' XV, p* 1); TcooraX>) pjTpOTroAlC erroneously located by Ptolemy (VII, 2, 23)in Trans-Gangetie India. Perhaps identical with AfcXTapoc (Ptolemy, VII, I, 77) and AoxiQCpTQVif (Periplus* 
47), Cf. above, p.7. 
Damtta (F, 1. 1, reading uncertain), Skt. Dravitfa, Pali Dcmifa, the Tamil country and people on the coast of OoromandeL 
beragiri (F, 1. 3), a hill (?), site of a padhana-sala founded by Bodhuriri, Dhammagiri (Maka- and CMa* in P, 11 2 and 3), i.e., Dhammagin Skt, Dkarfmyiri, a hill The Chula-Dhammagiri was the site of a monastery, whero Bodhiairi founded the chetiya-ghara or apsidal shrine mentioned in intior. F. It appears, therefore, to be the ancient name of the hill now known as Nahar&Jlabftjta. Pamyagama (C 1, 1. 11; C 2, I 10), i.e. 9 Pa^^ama, Skt, Panorama (t), a village. Papild (P, 1. 3), a locality. 
[Pa]lwa (F,1. 1, first syllable restored), a town in KaMga, identified with Duntapura (S. Uvi, J. A., Vol. CCVI, 1925, pp. 46 fl.; Ind. Ant., Vol. LV pp. 04 ff ,). Ptolemy mentions IlaXovpa rcoXt? cv FaYY^TWO) xoXTt^ (I, 5, 16) and UaXoupaTtoXtCat the western-most mouth of the Ganges. 
(F, L 3), i.e., Pupphagiri, Skt. Pushpagiri (" Flower Mountain1'), a hill (?)> 
Puphagiri 
^ 
site of a selama%<}ava or stone shrine founded by Bodhisiri 
Pwasek (F, L S), i.e., Pumuda, Skt. Purvataila (" Eastern Mountainn) f a hill MaM-Dhammagiri (F, 1. 3), see Dharhmagiri. 
Yava[na] (F, 1, 1), Skt. Yanana, Pali Tona, designation originallyof the Greek* (Ionian*), Jm?^?7,f ther f reign nation8' Converted by MahSrakkhita, Utpw. VIII, 9, Jf<OA;. XII, 5 and 3940, Cf. Saka*Yav<*ne in Milinda, pp. 327 and SSL (F, L 3), U, Vanga, Skt. and Pali Fa%a, modern Bengal p I 1) and 7*k*ofa (H, i 10), Skt. and Pali Fotkwflw, Gr. Bavoc{3cat (nolemy, VII, 1, 83), a country corresponding to North Kanara, The village of Banayasi is situated in latitude 14* 33', longitude 75 5' in the Shimoga dBtnct of the Mysore State, It lies close to the border of Mysore territory 
?TT .^ 7&m^ Was converted to Buddhism by Raklddt*. V 23 l'^ ' 
-V, 23 (ed. BUhler), p. 34; tfattmfc* XII, 31, XXIX, 42, 
unJL 2), a town (?) to the east of which the 
Bodhwn wasapsidal temple founded by situated. Cf. Ltiders, JUaf, No. 1285,
No. 1.1 TWO ADDITIONAL INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAQABJUNIKONDA. 37   
TWO ADDITIONAL INSCRIPTIONS FROM NAGARJUNIKONDA. 
By J. PH. VOGBL, PH.D. 
Aftor the above paper had been completed, Mr. Longhurst sent me estampages of two more inscriptions discovered by him in the course of his excavations at Nagarjunikonda," Both are found incised on sculptures. 
One of these inscriptions occurs on asfootprint slab.' It consists of one line of writing and comprises tweitty-three akshams, the concluding letter being written below the line owing to want of space. The aksharas measure from Jto 1{ inches in height. The letteringis distinct, except some of the vowel-marks, It will be observed that the inscriptionis crossed by a series of nine vertical 
lines which possibly have some connection with the footprint carved on the slab. The inscription records the donation of a patipada.It would follow that this word, corre spondingto Sanskrit pratipadd, ought to indicate the object on which the inscriptionis engraved. The technical term, however, by which a footprintslab is indicated in the Amaravati inscriptions, is padufahpafia (i.e., padukapat>tct), or patuJccf, patuka (i.e., padnka). 
The donor was Budhi (i.e., Buddhi), the sister of Moda, the Saka. If this interpretation is correct, the mention of a Saka or Scythian is a pointof specialinterest. In this connection it should be noted that among the sculptures excavated by Mr. Longhurstat Nagarjunikonda there are two showing a warrior in Scythian dress. 
In the* word haJcinii/a correspondingto Sanskrit Hhaginyafa we note a disaspirationof the initial consonant ami a hardeningof the media gainto ica. 
TRANSCRIPT. 
Sicl[dham] Sakasa Modasa bak[i]n[i]ya Budh[i]ya pat[i]pada deyadhama TRANSLATION. 
SUCCCBB ! A patipada, the pious gift of Budhi, the sister of Moda, the Scythian. 
The second inscription occurs on a carved stone slab. It consists of only three ahJiams which I read :Dhamasa 
meaning"Of Dhama". Whether this is the name of the donor or the mason, it is impossibleto decide. 
No 2 NALANDA STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE EEICJN 
OF YASOVARMMADEVA, 
BY BJBANANDA SASTBI. 
The inscription which forms the subjectof this paper was excavated at Naianda, the well known ancient site of Magadha, by Mr. J. A. Pagein the official year 1925-26^ It was found buried in the debris of the southern verandah of the old, riMrMow calledMonasteryI-which has yielded not only a large number of bronze or copper imagesof various kmds and the very valuable copper-plate inscriptionof DSvapaladevathat has been published above,* but also the earliest remains so far discovered at Naianda. 
This interesting document is engraved on the top bed of a stone capital-bracket and covers a spaceof ITttoAeBby 11 inches, It consists of twenty-onelines of writing and, excepting <' i ged A & Jfc, 1925*20, pp181 & 158. 
yoL XVII, plate between pp. 320 and 821.
EPIGEAPSIA INDICA, { VOL. XX.   
for a crack at the middle, is fairly well-preserved. The execution is neat ami calligraphic, The lecord is a prahiti drawn in florid Sanskrit and, but for the initial symbol and the words ap elia coming between the sixth and the seventh stanzas, is entirelyin vtno. The oharaotan, in which it is written, belongto the nortfcera class ol alphabetsand present a very marked developmentin contrast with those of the contemporary and even somewhat later inscriptions* which have been found in Northern and Eastern India. They largely resemble the character* of the AphsaS stone inscriptionof Idityasena* and would, thereby,indicate that the development, we notice in them, must have taken place not later than the first half of the sixth centuryof the Christian era, i.e., the time to which this inscription belongs.Till now, the Gay& inscriptionof AJ>- 588-89 was considered to be the earliest inscription to illustrate such forms* But tho epigraph under publicationis decidedlyanterior to that record and, therefore, tmcomea the earlmot known inscription to represent that development. The alphabetto which these characters belong may well be called acute-angled (Btihler)* or SiddhamatfiM (Berfinl)8 in preferenceto tint term*nail headed' or'Jcutila*. Devanagarl is an outgrowthof this Upi The prawnt wc<ml USIMH the bipartite form of ya throughout,as does the B5dhGayS inscription of MahinBman.* N&lamlS is not far ofi from Bodh-Gaya.This epigraph, therefore, will not countenance the supposition that the use of the bipartite yain the Mahanaman inscription was"premature," The tripartite formofyaisfound even in the Udaypur inscription of Aparajita,5 which belongs to the StHkvat year 718 (=AJX 661). It is to be met with not onlyin the inscriptional records named above, but also in the Horiuzi palm-leaf manuscriptsof Japan which are believed to have oxi&ted in the second half of the 6th century (A.D,) To regard an inscription as late or early merely on the groundthat it uses the bipartite or the tripartite form of ya would not, eotwitiquftntly, be quite accurate. The alphabet used in this inscription is, to a large extent, identical with the modern Devanagarlor NagaxL The chief pointsof difference which it presents aw* them* ; Th a-matra is generally indicated by a sort- of small wedgeattached to the rightof the top line* 
whereas in N&garlit is expressed by a full perpendicularstroke* In the caao of $9, however, a somewhat different mode is adopted by slightly bending tfoe right end and extending it up wards beyond the top towards the rightside. The u-mHtrS is slightly differtmt in shape, as, e.g.,in 6Mn, 1. 2, The e-matra is marked in two different ways, sometimes in an elongated form of the Nagari symbol with a bend at about the middle, as in MtwW, L 1, aud sometimes by a short curve appended to the left of the top line of the aktfara to which it belongs,as in artWn, L 1, or in tafifya, 1. 21, Similarly, the ai-wSM is expnmed in two ways. In fcch*aisha, occurringin the penultimate line, it is practically similar to the NS$arf symbol, whereas in the majorityof cases it is expressed by the hook-like mark attached to the left of the top line and the slanting g-wSra, as, e,jr., in WcWJ, I 21. The fl-wftrS w ahowu by the symbols of the 3 and the e-matrSs combined, see, for instance, m&Jcshdya and ydin I L The aw matra is also different, e.g.} see gaura in L 6, ot jauddh$dan$r in L 9. 
As to the initial vowels, only the 3 and the i retain theit comparatively oarlwr forma. The former keepsthe hook attached to its leg as in ftfettf,L 12, and the latter, the two small circles placed above the reversed crescent, as in ity*tL 20. 
In the case of consonants, the omission of the top line of the so, the ma and the ya symbols 
5s noteworthy. So, also, are the forms of the letters Mo K gha and /a; The symbol for dk* is also dissimilar and still preserves the old form, as oes the letter fa. The form of r in conjunction with a Mowing consonant is also antique and noteworthy ; e.gr,, see Admr^ fa L l or in L 2. , 
m> No 
yr^ fc . > I. In Vol. m, plrte XII A. ij^ Ind., VoL IV, pUt. facing p. 30.
No. 2J NALANDA STONE INSCRIPTION OF THR REIGN OF YASOVARMMADBVA.S4   
In respectof orthography, the points which call [or remark are (1) the u*o throughoutof ? for 6, </;in vftlhi, 11. 15 and 17, or in Valaditya, 1, 19, ;ni<! (a) the use of tho $-like symbolfor tho conjunct #, as in $nnwiwhu>rt*]anma\ 1. 17, 
The inscription contains two \vordn of special torziixil intiuvst. One is tihtu which occurs hi v, 14 and ficmns to be used in tho sense of aword personifiedo command.1 Tho otlwr is Tikina wbich comes in the third stanxa and must be a foreign title, aw is bljuwu below. 
The inampi ion, as 1 havi? stated abovo, is a protasl! and its object is to rword that Malada, the son of the minister (mantrfn) of Ya&6varmmadeva, nmdi- certain &i ft*,'specified herein, to the templewhich king Baladitya had em-ied at Nalanda i:i honour of thw "Sou of iSud<lhodaJia \ /.^,, the Hudllui. It eousistsof fifteen beautiful stunwis wriirm in three different metreis, namely, Hu.r<ltUlIavilai(litJun, VaantatiUka and Sn^adhara and ^ a Buddhist record, Commewins with an in vocation of the HutUIha, it extols tin- ^rreut ktn^ Va.sr>v;tnrimade\ra us the Lokapala,i.e., piardisin of the world, who hud rlen like- tlte sin; after *lihpllin^ the darbit^ m the form of the enemies uud ufte,r ph'M'in^his foot ou thu heads of ;tl! tin ki.'ips th'w^h. uaiortu nutely,it does not luemion ihe dynastyto which he lu'lontiiMj ,?( the country over wliieh he rvilml. It, tlien, intruduces the <lnor Mriliida ;;nd drsminw him as tliM wise, mag>iauijiv)us, l)enov<ilent' and vii tori"Us sou of YuHuvanunuidrvu's rniuister, \vlnnn it culls tha Slarcjapati as well HH Udlclilpciti and /M'ttt'trt' Tikina, though it !OHS nor rive his n^nieor uuy other particulars about/ hiiih Mfdaxlu is nientiotuMl here as the brother of Nirrnrnal&(v 1 1), Mn(t>>an4anu) of BaBdhu niatl und scion of a n<dle family, whono nani is not stated, (living a vivitl descriptionof tin* inairnilieient t(niple which king Baladitya had built at Nalandu like a column of victory const nietwl aftci coin|iu*rin^ tho world (vv, J-lOj, tlto inscription spociiles the benefactiom which the, donor made, for that sanctuary, us wall a:*, for the Witehu* or Buddhist monks The uiftH conttistcd ol t/ftt^ t curds, a brilliant, lamp, purn\vator mi.ved with ft^urfold frugruni objects (chain* *i~*tukti\* and refresh itj^j lik<Hecta,r, and ,i pennuiwni; endovvmeut (akshaya-nai], the nature <d which lias not boon made <|nito clear. Wo uro further informed that MaLlda 
list ribute<l delicious food aiuUce.nted water In the. bhiMw* and, purchusiuji} a /a^a/ta and otht^ fchiiiKs fnm the%revcsred *SW<///w;gavo thcia hack to tho numbs, herein called Sakgaiimja* ( -the (Npiritml) sons of the Bu<1dha) o',opl.iii? a chlvarikii (monk's robe) and jwwfefo* up to 
and b(\yond Narddarikfu The afore-iueTitioned f^ifte Malutla brought himself out of his grut <lnvoti()ii f<r the liuddha when he wiwv awakened'or euliyhten^d by the illustrious monk Pilr^^indrasona and jjavo them to tho nioiikH for thw welfare of hk parentsas well as uf other relations, At the i-losw* of the inscription wo are loM that the klrtti should be respected not onlv because of th lear oi committuig the five sins (panchtlYMt<,tarya), which accrue front the infringement of such pious deeik but, also, because of the fear of tins sword1 of km* Buluditya,the nuhduer of tho enemy, 
S<w AwtraMu, VnMaMjndnMM and also Mnniw WilHamn* RawMt-Engliih Dictionary Oi, dow thi w<ird wfr tn tin imagou! the Buddha (&<*) which might have boon sot up by Baladitynia tho torn pie ho had built, ai Nalaudu (oo v* r", uf tho text) 
Tho four fragrant article wo: (3) Ttw*. '. /M^oo nami9 (2) *, ^,, Cardamom, (S^otafa, t-t.. 
, 
C^w and M) -V^ritoow,or 3/wa RoxburghiL CJ. Mfawgtotf* u>& Bhavcprakaw quoted m thu Mum 
- -i 
The exact atgnifloMico oi this tern IB no* olm Possiblyit meant eome placufor fcimselJ, if not his
40 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
The last stanza tells us that the pratasti was composed by Sllachandra mid the celebrated Rar<Hfiik Svimidatta under the inviolable command of the Safujha. 
The inscription is not dated but supplies sufficient data to fix the time to which it belongs. It was written when Baladitya was ruling and when king Yas^varmmadeva wiw holding the reins' of sovereignty. That the Baladitya of this record must be identified with th hormmymous chief whom Hiuen Tsiang eulogises as the subduer of Mihirakula and the founder of th.i grand temple at Nalanda need not be dilated upon. The inscription itself mentions him us tho builder of a jaagnificient sanctuary at Nalanda. That it is silent about his subjugation of tho well-known Huna king of Sakala (the modern Sialkot in the PanjaK) is either due to'his having had very little to do m the matter, as has already been suggested by Vincent Smith,1or, iwhajm, to the fact that this inscription came into existence before that event.* Baladitya flourinhmi eir 530 after Ohmt. Accordingly, YaSovarmmadeva, his suzerain, must have ruled about the same a &> the question arises : Who was that suzerain ? He cannot be the homonymous rulr of Kunaui who was routed by Muktapida Lalitaditya of Kashmir and is better known to history as th. 
Srtd ^td" \ J TT*PlayWright' beCaW h^a OUPI() f ' f <Wlt *** * who^V'6;^r. r?17 of *e Christian' who could beera - l kn f^i TtiS 1 
period. The Chandel chief of tte same name is also out of the question, for h fwlon-m to a still identified with the overlord mentioned in this inscription. But a noworf, 1 ,f Ae name of YaSodharma b known to have flourished at the time when B, ,W Zr 1 ,d asir triiaSatst" -ST-**" <%
buttheappellationas iven in ti A^mes. 'endm in df"**notunkaown, that we should call the sovee ffi^^! Wmld 
under pubhcationloob more enable and more 
-r-by the name of n-JSLSTS^J^"^^^f tb C 
down of the power of the Hflnas to lldl 7 , v7 rMPon8lbl *^ th ftfa mscription induces him and BHldi^ ^' ^^the , 4th edn., p. 386--
t 
No. 2.] NALANIUOTONE INSCRIPTION OF THE REIGN OF YASOVAtolMADEVA. 41   
the real name of the Hutuluor of the Hunaa in Northern India, as stated above, though,unfortu nately, It ilooH not add anything to our knowledge of his ancestry or of his successors, whoever they won^That it lowta an additional support to his claim for fame and that it provesfor certain that what is Htatwt about him in the above-mentioned epigraphs is not a mereeoriental hyperbole* but rents on facts n<w<l not; be emphasized** 
Now COIWH the difficult problem of identifying the minister or mntrin who is spoken of aft MartjniMti, IhtWipnti and pratUa*Tikina in thisinscription. But for the reticence of tho composers of the pw&Mti on the nationality and other particulars including the name of this peMona^, onu nwld liavo known Hometlimg definite about him. Margapati literally means the guardian >f road or roads, but from the similar expressions occurringin the chronicles of Kashmir one could take it to mean the guardian of the passesor the frontier, The Mdrgesas figure very prominentlyin the narratives of the later chronicles of the'Happy Valley'as Sir Aurel Stein'3 has already pointed out* They were ako known by other names like Margapas, Adhvapas, AdhtWMWt to., uml were generallyreferred to in the pltual and in connection with some particular routes or passes acroan the mountains, like the Ataliks of the Muharnmadan times. Besides, they were the feudal chief* who held hereditary charge of specific passes and were bound to furnish garriaonMfor the frontier poHtw on these passesin return for the revenue of certain lands assigned to thorn. In the inscription under notice, on the other hand, only one such'guardian'is men* tioned* He i upoknu of in the singular number and is called the'Lord of the North* and m hunter of YttAflvarwmadSva, the protectorof the world, Apparently, he \vaa the Ohief of aneh Uuardiang of Passes whose official status must have been higher than that of the Drfmt/^mor AlfirgMM of the Kashmir chronicles. What the wZfe&i or north of this record formotciH cannot bo stated definitely but, possibly,it may not be wrongto take it in the sense of the North- WVnt Frontier of India. Th is UdJchlptdior the Lord of the North was, it would seem, the Chief of the Uumdians of Passes in that region, This personageis further described as franta-fikwiand the meaning of this epithetis to be determined, Thafc pratlta(prati^+ ita)is a SanHkrit word minifying*distinguished?or4 well-known'requires no proof. Tikina is not a SanHkrit word aib all I)r. Htcn Konow very kindlytells me that it "is evidently Turki tif/in, tegin, tOyin.ft means"a princeof the blood ', and is especially used about the son or the brother of the Kbfin. Tho dhinew render it as fo-Mn. It was one of the words first recognised by Thomncm in the Orkhon Inscriptions" and we "find several instances of its use in (lhavam':, M^wwW mr to Iou~kiue (Tun*)Oocfantaun". The authors of the 
i, it would ppar,were not aware of other particulars about this6stranger'and therefore d him by 1m rank or office only, The name of his son, the actual donor, was known and could nob haw bmn omitted. The inscription givesit as MalMa which is also not Saaskr*-- tboiiKh a forced Sanskritic derivation may not be impossible.' Theother^detaiisglven about the donor arc that he was a acion of a stainless family and the delight,*. aon, of Bandhu matl and brother of NirmmalS. Bandhumatl and Nirmmala might have been the proper nanum of the two ladi*nvbin mother and his sister, or their epithets only. The formeir 11> known to IMI the nanui of neveral women. Both ate undoubtedly Sansknto and c.uld have.been applied to ladiM of foreign deBcant also. Malada was, as is evidenced bytins ~P^J 
devout BuddhiBt and mighthave been a proselyte,The offermgsof a lamp ^scented 
water, *>.. which ha brought to Nllaad* out of his Mote of devote to theg^a*m tah5diina\ tttw^^ 
Tj, A A. ft, Vol. XIIV (1914-17), ,.W5. 
the R^m&gi^ Vol. I P- tli 'J^ ^ ^w xr SV and of 
. 
,it rmfudu m. of lblda of the JfeHUfe* (Sabha XXXJ, fl and ot 
Ho, 1* r M>-
42 EPIGRAPH!! IStHOA. f TOT, XX.   
Asian countries are seen bringingto the imagesof the Buddha at Kaskl in the Gdrakhpur district or at Bodh-Gaya and other sacred places even now. 
The remaining persons spoken of in the pradastiare the monk Fiirp-^indrasitttt and the two poets who composed it. Whether the former belongedto Nulanda itsolf or do somn othor localityis not definitely stated in the record but it does not look improbable that h** was ono of the great teachers. of Nalanda itself. Of the two authors of the composition ftvfimidatta is de scribed as a prathita-kamtyiJca, i.e., a celebrated officer in chargeof documents. No particulars are given about the joint author, namely, sSilaohandra* 
As to the identityof Naianda no remarks1are needed, for it is too wall- known to roquift any. A few points about this locality, however, seem to be worth metitxmwK HWN The fiflrt is its designation which is certainly Nalanda (endingin long vowol, *>., a) ami not Nfttenda (endingin short vowel, i.e.9 a) as is sometimes erroneously supposed to bo.1 Th* nam* endingin the long vowel not only occurs in this and other inscription but in literature atoo, both Buddhist as well as Jaina. lam not aware if the locality iignnw in Brohmttnical literature at all. It goes back to the time of MahSvIra, tlw twonty-fourt.il Jina, and of Gautama Bftddh% i.e., at least five centuries before the birth of Christ Tin* Jiuna account^ would show that it was a very prosperous and sacred MkiriM or suburb of KSjatfriha whore Mahavira spent fourteen cMturmasyas. Early Buddhist literature* abo toHtifles to its pristine glory; But it looks curious that in neither of them it figure m a tmivflwify w centre of learning. Possibly it grew as such later, i.e., about the petio,cl when tlm groat pilgrim of China, namely, Hiuen Tsiang, came to study there. Tlio description of the B^^a^mdmalay^et^as given in this interesting documTOt, ho 
that the pilgrim's description of its splendour must have been baaed on fact* 
w r. Western WcM pp. 167, etc aoid The"^^'*^ from Aswlife of Nagarjum from Tibetan and Chinm ffoinw by M, Wdkw M^ort Hirth Anniversary Volume, Leipzig, pp. 15, *jc,). *(1) See SMra1crim*4at 7th Lecture (Chapter bn Kalauda), of tbe Second Book 
(2) Sap,** of Bhadrabahu (ed. H. Jaoobi), Leipzig, m> pt 64, para. 123. 
RayagihaA nagara* Jfalaihdaiii oha babinyaifa- -* 4.""'**wj,*tuu.jJ4,eiioa) auiiiiijil 
Eau<Ja lokaprasiddha te Ba<Jagama kaMjai 
Solaprasadatiham achcfchai Jmabimbanamljal 
(4) Tlie Sam'mi^kharattfthamW. is more explicit if^^^1 
BahHNaJazhdopado^'^^ort. records i 
Vira chaudaraiia chanmSaa 
Hau(?a Batjagaroma nivasa 
Bhhhndehare ekaso pratima navilahi I Sodhani ga^iima. 
-.-14 
NALANPA STOIE INS   
*-' r\ v . "i.,"1, t HW1V ->\ '*U."K& >.2s:.'i .-)=<f^'^^^i 4* ^^ 
s^ 
m&
^'/>! i> ^f 
*&i 
fa *a 
H5.-V."- 
7\;:-'-:: ::--:;:> 
-.^-^fl^ 
^:y;^,,; ,,,:;^;^^ 
<, ;i""-\viffi ,,,, ". .i **. T*. ''*"' ***' 4V"*' "Sifli 
*'i 
^^^|f^^|^ fv'^v,^'%' ;';\iIf^M... r-'^f:--, ;. ^k'.v:^4 
K^^MHi
K^iA,,,;.Bi^'-;^v.:^- 
IP1, 
-11'JM: 
IK/Ai' *W i .' 
' 
; |f'|tAMANDA SA8TKJ.; 
' ''''Ij.' ,' *I ..i'tAi^-.. . , ,/ .. _n..i.:i.> 
. ,;Ji3diF- 
)PTHE OF   
-.. . -. -,
No.3.1 NALANDASTOXK [XKCRIPTIONOF THE -REIGN OF YASOVARMMADEVA. 43   
H- Nurdtlivrikii ownmu<,' in this record, at might have been an ancient 
VH t<i tin* iiiV 
'nl. NiUinla. 
streamlet- or " 
TEXT, ' 
Lin 
tft [i*] t5!: 
Mttro
44 EP1GKAPHIA INDICA. [VoL. XX.   
Line 12 
f \\[^\\*] 
is sft fawt^ ajjft 
15 ?f 
I ^*t JI?rt?T 
16 
17 
18 
1 
19 ^r ^fiR^tfT Il[^t8lt*] 
1%T 
20 
21 
5 ?awtaMkki^Tlie lost oMan ol the flat ^5^a should
No. 2.] NALANDA STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE REIQN OF YASOV4RMMADEVA. 48   
TRANSLATION. 
(Verse L) Continual salutation to the Buddha who made up his mind to emancipate living beings from the strong tanglesof the world and who felt exceedingly delightedafter giving (his 'own) body to the supplicant, whose foot-lotus is rubbed by the gods, including India, with the fishes (engraved)in, the diadems on their heads and who is conversant with the real nature of all the categories. 
(V, 2.) The illustrious, prosperous and highly glorious YaSdvarmmadeva has risen after placing his foot on the heads of all the Mngs and has completely removed the terrific darkness in the form of all of his foes by the diffusion of the raysof his sword. He is the celebrated protector of the world and the cause of the excitement of all the Padmini women of the earth. He shines above all in every quarterlike'th resplendent Sun, who has risen after spreadinghis rays on the tops of all the mountains and has torn asunder by the diffusion of severe rays the foe in the form of terrible darkness, who is the well-known protectorof the world and cause of the bloom 
ing of all the lotuses of the earth. 
(V 3 )MiUUi was the illustrious and magnanimousson of the well-known Tiktoa (i.e., Itoriai who was Ins (Ya6Sviirmmad5va's)minister, the Guardian of the Frontier andI Buler of the 
North, He (Bttlid*), the unrivalled and quick subduer of the enemies, fulfiller of the dam of the suppliants on the earth, resolute, of stainless family and the son .(literally, gladdener) of BandHummtl, was honoured by his (YaSdvarmmadeva's) greattavour. 
(Vv <r-6.) BllMitym, the great kingof irresistible valour, sfte havmg vanqmshed d tie feu'tad enjoyedthe entire earth, erected, aslf with a view.tosee ^^J^J*pwU, a gr at and extraordinary tanpb (pftU.)of the illustnous son of flyo*te ( ^ 
ud.mml.bd SuMto, tb. ehumiig O* of O. nobl. Tid^dhu* 
Lrr^r^^si^.M-^^-
i 
Btreams of diaputants. .,,, ftnd fame himself brought-with as 
and learn fied butter and cuidB,
46 BPIGEAPHIA INDIOA. , [ TOL. XX-   
(V, 10.) He(Malada), whose deeds were wondrous, purchased (everything of) his own hore (at Nalanda) from the revered SafyJuA and gaveit back (to the bhihhns) according to rit.i. barring the monk's robe. He also gavo away to the sons of the tfakya, i.e., Buddhist, monks, a common dwelling place (wherein)to spendtimo happily, up to and beyond Narddariku, excepting a place for himself.1 
(V. 11.) This stainless gift has boon made by him who is the brother of Nirmmulii8 whoso face resembled the autumnal moon. His fame is spread over the world awl he has been awakened by the words of the monk PflrwSndrasona, who .shines by Ms rtxecllonro, 
(V. 12.) All this gift has been given with groat devotion for the sako of tlm welfare and longevityof the parents, brother, wife, sister, son and friends of him (*,',, Malfula) who is the sole repositoryof virtue. May it be approvedso that the living oeiritfs might <TOHH the fearful ocean of the world and attain the greatfruit of the Wishing Tree in the form of the 
sacred Enlightenment (Bddhi). 
(V. 13.) As longas the Moon rfiinoB and the Sun, the lamp of tho world, with IIIH lustrous and extensive rays (shedst light), as longas this earth together with the <mcompanHing ocoiui widiires and the sky, which gives spaco, lasts, and as longas these great mountains, bearing tho yoko of the world, reinain, so longlet thia kirtti> which is purelike the Moon, whiten the cirdo of (all) the 
quarters* 
(V. 14.) Whoever interferes with this gift, which has to last B longas tho world omlums, will, void of virtue as he is, have the diro fate of one who commits the live sins- (to him hum) that the Lord Jitia (the Buddha) is hero ovnr present within, occupyingthe adamantine noa*; and that the great king Baladitya has established this command (or the image o the Buddha)/1 
(Y. 15.) Thus, Silachandra and the well-known Eam&ka Svainidatia, having placed the order of the Sa&ghaon thnir hend, without considering the weight (ofrwpmaibilit!/), compOBed at once this beautiful^ and sublime, though simple, pratiasti, although the* woallh of their knowledge is small, for, will not even the cripples4 wish to get the fruits from tJb tree on the mountain by raising (their) hand ? 
No. 8. THREE TAMIL INSCRIPTIONS OF LALQUDL 
BY K. V. SUBRAHMANYA AlYBB, B,A,, M.R.A.S,, OOTAOAM0Nt>, 
The three inscriptions which form the subjectof this article are incised on the north wall of the SaptafUxttvaxa temple at Lalgudi in the Trichinopoly district. For the sake of convenience, I call them A, B and 0. Inscription A is dated in the year opposite to the fourth (i&, the fifth year) of some king whose name is not ffiven in it. It registers a gift of money made by the Fallava king NandippSttaraiyar who fought the battle ol T^lpyn and gained victory in it, lor burninga perpetual lamp in the temple of MahMiva at Tlruttavattuyal in 
Waiyasru-nadti The amount was received by the members of the assembly of NaHimwi. galam who bound thmseh^^ oufcdaily (ow)i^of gheo< ^*^^ 
*See above, page 4L 
1 - * V- thinka 
mZ^^^the >)"!, Ug the pe^apa ra imae of the Buddto
3. 1 THREE TAMIL INCBIPT[OXS OF LAlCfUDI.   
hi.v rip! ion IJ Ls Uulecl on tiit, uay of iadaivam K'-HOT^-T.~~"",.~-"--'~* 
ot t ha usHo,,,!, v ,,| IlamporUBkay-irukkai in Idaiya^-nadu who bom^UL-,^ 1'to 
d.to.1 iu the tlurto,m,h y,w of' the roi"/of the C 1 
a T.peUU amp0 eumt k *"**pl. ***of ghee 
, 
daily. Pho assembly of ManalkSl, a &rofco%a of ZaISTa-Mrram which was a sub- division -I Va^agrarai-Mala-aacJu, received the amount given and sold a pfoco of had in o to tlio tomplo. 
Before taking up tliocjuoytiouof the date of these three inscriptions, I may point out ..- 
that they are written iu the mm hand and script and must consequently have been inscribed ltauoouBly. I may hero add tliat there is another inscriptioni* this voiy temple whi<* IB coeval ^vith these records and is, apparently, written by tie same hand though it refers itself to the Paiiavtt king Np'patiuigavaniun. It has already been published in the South- Indian J*wriVt,<M (TexU}9 Volume IV.* Jntfcriptioru* of the throe kings mentioned in these records are *!BO found iu neveral otkor places. But they are all written in varying types of the Tamil script not resembling the one iu which the three inscriptions under notice are incised. As those kiugs^Iouriahedat different periods, the records belongingto their respective reigns could not kavo beou written in the same hand. Consequently, the Lalgudi inscriptions under examination, written ug they are in tlio same hand, must be treated as later copiesof older records made probably lit the tinio when the templo whore they are found was renovated or repaired. Palaeographi eally thoy can be assigned to the 10th centuryol the Christian era. 
The inscription which 1 call C purports to belongto a ruler who is the latest among the kings mentioned iu thoso three inscriptions, The princess referred to in it figures as the queenof Paran* toka lJttfig5vB]ara m another inscriptionof Eajakesarivarman which was found at TUlaisthanam in the district of Tairjore. She is also mentioned in a somewhat later record belongingto the third year of Parakcsarivamian.3 The Tillaisthanam inscription of Bajakesarivarman, unlike the Lalgudi inscription, marks the pulli or wrSma as do the Takkolant and other inscriptions of 
RaJHkSsarivaritian, ie., Iditya I, and oughtto be assignedto the same ruler. Two other epigraphs found at TiruppalSttupw'1 refer to Tey.$ava& IJangovelar which is another name for Parantaka^ IJafigSvBlfir. Tlioy tell us that he was also called Map*van Pudiyar. One of them mentions Jh,Ss queen Kajja]ippir5JJiyar also. The name Pizdiyar givento Ilangovejar and the mention of 
his queen would show that he is identical with the Kotjumbajur chief Bhuti-Vikrarnakesari who is reportedin the Muvarkovil inscriptionto have married Ka^pili and Varagui>a*e From a Tiiuch* ehondurai inscription we learn that he had a daughter named PMi-Adichchapidariyar who was the queen of ArikulakSsari, i.e., Arinjaya6 the son of the Chola king Parantaka I. I have shown 
* Boo plato (VII) oppositeto p, 173- 
*ttouAk* Indian ln$cri^tiomt Vol. Ill, No. 113. Ibid, No. 127, 
" 
, 
1 Nos, 3$8 and 273 of At)pfturlix A to the Annual Report on Sautlhlndian Epigraphy for J903*04 and p&ra* 90 of psrfc II ol tiie Annml Report on South-Indian JSvigraphyfor 1007-08* 
6 Annual Report on Sonth-Indian Epigraphy for 1907-08, para, 90 of Park II 
* Noa 316, 317 and 319 of Appendix A to tho Annual Etport on 8outklndian Epgnph/s to 1903-04.
EPIGKAFHIA 1NDICA. [ VOL. XX,   
ebewhere1 that ixlityaI must have ascended the throne in A.D. 871. Accordingly, the Lalgnd* Inscription, which also belongs to him, must be assignedto A.D. 883-4, for it is dated in the 13th year of his reign. 
To settle the dates of the inscriptions A and B we have to consider the way in which tluiyare dated. We find that they give some year oppositeto the fourth. This mode of dating was adopted by the Pandya king Maranjadaiyan alias Varagujia-Maharaja, as is evidenced, by several inscriptions of iis reign which have already been brought to light.2Consequently, those two records also should be ascribed to the same ruler. 
We have now to establish the date of the accession-of Tellarjopnda-Nandippoftavarinan and of his contemporary Varagu^-Maharaja I, who was the grandfather of Varagin.iavarnian II and father of Srimara !4vallabha Parachakrakolahala, the conquerorof Ceylon. Tho AfahS* vamsa tells us that there was a Pandya invasion of Ceylon during the reign of Silamfyha Sena I (A.D. 846 to 866), in which the Pai^tjya king came off completely victorious and took pOBH<wmon of the capital and carried away a large amount of booty, though' he eventually moored thn Sin ghalese kingdom to its rightful king. The only early Pandya king who is known from th &uoa manr plates to have invaded and conquered Ceylon is Srimara. From the facto recorded in the MaMvamsa it can be gathered that his reign covered the last 3 years of tho ruio of Pappula and probably commenced in the year 840 and ended in 862 A.D. when his oldest BOH VaragurjaviArman II succeeded him. Srimara's predecessor, namely, Varaguna-Maharaja 1, must havo roignod prior to 840 A.D. His latest regnal year so far known from inscriptions is the Rovontwmth and we can reasonably state that his rule over the Pantjya country may have oxtondmi from 823 to 840 A.D. though it is not impossible that it might have commenced a few years oarliar, Tho date of Varagu^a I can approximately be ascertained from the chronology of the Pallava kirum from Nandivarman Pallavamalla to Aparajita. The Yelurpajaiyam plates givo m tho gormalogy of the latter Pallavas for three generations commencing from Nandivarman II JPallttvamalto They *tate that Pallavamalla's son was Dantivarman and that the latter's son wm Nandivarman III. Thu 
^informationis supplemented by the Bahur plates which tell us that Dantivarman'* v'- e a n se P ates^^ma<Ie of 
son was Nandxvarman III, who had for his que'en the Rashtmkuta princess &nkha, mA that Eampavarman and the name Kampavarman was not borne by any one of tho above mentioned fangs If Kampavannan was a lineal descendant of Nandivarman Pallavamdla, we mlAt ton- 
assume that he was another, and, perhaps, the younger aon of Nan livaZn I I ^tively 
^ename Nand^ampe^vara given to the temple at 
after gojapuram may have been caSed Kampavarman, the son of Nandivarman^ it may be pointed out Jo that tS
^^might havei
-W* that he 
No, 3, ] THREE TAMIL INSCEJPTIONS OF LALGUDI. 49   
or mth both,1 Therefore, Jt is needless to take his reign into consideration to determine the period when the later .Pallavas ruled. From the Imbur inscription dated in the 26th year of the reigaof NppatuAga, we learn that the Gafiga king Ppthvipati I was a subordinate of that Palkra km." And since it is recorded, in the Udayendiiam plates that this very Ganga king was an ally of the Pallava king AparSjita and fought under his standard and secured victoryfor him in the lattle of Srlpurambiyam against Varaguija (II),8 it might be said that Aparajita4,was 
the immediate successor of Nppatuftga. That he was the last Pallava ruler of Ranch! is known from the Tiruvilla ftg&cju plates which report that the Choja king IdityaI killed him and took possessionoC hia kingdom.5 This event, we have reasons to believe, must have taken place before AJX 891, for it is stated in an inscription at Tirumalpuram near Conjeeveram that the village of ftrxiySri3* in Magaiyil-n$4u was granted as a dadana, and as a IraJimadeyain the 21st yearof To^imatt-Arrur-tuRjioa-uiJaiyar i.e., Iditya I*. If we allow at least two yearsfor his settle ment in the nowly conquered country, it may be said that IdityaI killed Aparajitain about AJX 888* The latcwt elates furnished by the stone inscriptionsfor Nandivarman Pallavamalla, Dantivarman, Narolivarman, the victor of Tepp, i.e., Nandivarman III, Nppatuiiga and Ap arajita aro 65, 152, 22, 26 and 18, respectively. With the helpof these, supplementedto a certain extent by the light of contemporary history, we shall tryto settle the chronology of the later Pallava Hoverwffna. Keeping AD 888 as the last year of Aparajita and deducting from it 18, which b the highest regnal year known for him,7 we get A.D. 870 for his accession. This date must, therefore, be the year when his predecessor Nppatufigaceased to rule. Since the latest regnal year HO far found for him fa 26,a wo get AJD. 844 for his accession. It may be noted here that the initial year of Nppatu&f(a's reign cannot be earlier than this date because in a record of his 18th year the PSijuJyii king Varagu^a-MahSrSja (II) figures as donor9 and we know for certain that that king'n acoension took placein AJX 802.xo We have to take A.D. 844 as the laa>t year of Nppatufigft'B father Nandivarman III, the victor of Teppu The latest regnal jearfound for him in the imeriptkmn mentioning the victory of TeJJSju is 22. u But there is a possibility of his having reigned longer.l s If he had a reign of 22 years,his accession would have to be placedin A.D. 822, Thin cannot be the caao for, we learn from the Western-Qanga srants that the Bfehtiakuta king Gfivinda HI and the Palkva king Nandivarman both crowned kings themselves fastened the fillet of royaltyout the forehead of Sivam&ra II Saigotta.18 The last yearof GSvinda 
In a Tamil fattriptton of UttarfmalHIr of the time of KampftTMmandated in his 15th yeat whose text (Ho* S25) te puWMwd in the & L L (Texto), Vol VI, the donor is ^eyya-Aparajita, and he is caUed Pernmapftdlgftl* tip. JA Voi IV. p. 181 
* A /. / Vol II, p, 384* 
*It ii burnt from No, 8TO of Vol. VI of A I* I. (TaxU), that Ajparftjita 
* 8. L L t Veil III, p. 419, v. 40. Thin statement is confirmed by a stone inscription found at Tilkth&iiam which style* Adity* I M uEl^Wiarivarmatt who extended his territory into Ton4ai-na4uw No. 89). 
Annual Rtport m Sjpigrapkyfor 1007, Fart II, paras* 29 and 80. 
7 No. 435 of th* tCdrs BpigtaphioalCoUuotion for 1905. 
*,%, I ml, VollVf p. 181 
* No, 360 of tfcw Maclr Epigmphioa!ooltation lor 1021. 
* No, 705 of tho ma collection for 1905, 
No,, ISO of tfao juwieooltootlan j for 1907**, w In tip immmui epigraphsdate<l simply to the reignof Nandivannaa without the dMrtingmshing Wf** 
*Piltewniltef 0rfc XMI&rx^iniU* tkwe mwe be tome belong to Nandirarman H^ whifc to mmm^ Wof wn50 EPIGRAPHTA INDICA. [ VOL, XX,   
III being A.D. 8Hl this event should have occurred before that dato, say about AJ). 812* Accordingly, we have to take back the yearof accession of Nandivarman III by ten years, Looking at the fact that Nandivarman PallavamaUa and his son .Dantivarman had unuually long reigns, extendingto 65 and 51 years,2 it seems improbable that Nandivarman III, who mieeeecied Dantivarman, could have ruled long and, since the last year of his reign cannot lw taken earlier than A.D. 844, it will be safe to assume that his rule lasted from A.D, 812 to 8*14, Deluding 151 
from 812 and 65 from the balance we get the initial dates of Dantivarman and Nuwlivarman Pallavamalla. Their xoigns should, therefore, have extended from "A J), 701 to 812 and A.I). 696 to 761, The chronology as worked out from these facts and others noted lator on is shown below : 
Pa$dya kings. 
Pallava kings. Kandivarman II 
Western Gangaw. 
Mayavarman Rajasimha 
Pallavamalla Dantivarman 
Gdvinda III 
Sivamara II 
Yaraguna I Srimara 
Varaguna II 
Nandivarman III 
AmSgfeavarsha I 
Njipatunga 
Aparajita 
Ptithvtpati I 
'edited beio^d th^ftS 1^1^?^JTi^ ^"^ "^"^ 
jadtaiyan (i.e., Vaiajmna-MaliarEm T\ *T -u*, ,*T^Cfl I*- 6"* W loth) year of Mirag* bination (a) Dhanus, Tuesday and tii 1 1tonner glv^s the astronoiaical com* year, ie,, 13th. Beicween A.D. 800 and 85 rtn i^e ^^wm Afivtol in tl i0 aame ^S^^^^rr
. A_... . 
f>2of tl
No, 3. ]THKBK TAMIL INSCRIPTIONS OF LALGUDI. 51   
taiaed botli sots of OataHs, tho days correspondingto the combinations (a) and (&), the initial and fifth yearsof the king:- 
5th yearr 
806 A.D. 
809 
816 
3 
823 
4 
826 
5 
833 
6 
843 
7 
^^^mrr^ MilM^^^BIIIHBK**lll*i*l^^ 
> tint two givo tho fifth year equivalents A.D. "" "'nan cannot figure in them, 
to be abandoned because, according to them, 855, both of which arc later than the lower limit fixed be adoptedare Nos. 3, 4 and 6 which would giveus, fc 818 and 821. Even out of those, NOB. 4 and 5 may be the pOHsible longor rangeof reignsof b< 
bablo date for Varaguna'saccession is A.D. 811. The internal evidence furnished ia t 
Vajvikudi grant shows that A.D. 770 mus 
to be rejectedfor the y,Nos. 6 and 7 have out to be A.D. 845 and onlythree that could years A.D. 811, 
would narrow 
Museum Pktes and as at pregent^^
reiga of Parantaka Nedunjadaiyanto whoso Varaguna I, onlya single kingintervened, *. 
was an eventless one. Therefore, the periodof forty than sufficient to cover the rest of the reignof P^antaka Ana...alai mootd and the eventless rule of Rajasmiha. For 
After Parantaka and before 
. 770 to A.D. 811 is more from the time of the .^ AJ)_ 
t0scriptioil Aand A.D. 824 
81b ns P 
811 as the date of accession of Varaguna I, we may assign A.u 
Of the places mentioned in these inscriptions, manycanfouende^e Majjakkgpis the homonyruous villagein the Trichmopolj-district andd^^aSta;attuiai ^ 6aid to have 
tavattupii' must be Lalgudiitself because, the ms^P } tot fer hom Laigudi, , have been the principal pbce ^^^^J,^^^^. Tel}^,where ^--- 
.,Vc,L XXU, pp. 57 . 
ThoM is also . village, calledTiruUav.Uur^ka^ A village of Oil name is la U4iy^palaiyntohd, but inacripticjoa* 
tho one refcued to m
52 EHGRAPHIA INDICA. [ Vol. XX   
TEXT OP A. 
1 Svasti &n []|*] 
ttavatturai-Mahadevark ku1 Teljej^eyiriduvera Nandipp6tta|rjai 
2 yar kuclutta paJan-kaSu 60-du [f|*] ivv-ayupadu kafium i-Sfia^u NaUtmaAgalattu sabhaiy5m ivv-apipadu kauft(m) Tkuttavattup,i-Mahadvar* 
3 idtai ko^(Ju naraya-naliyal n&adi naji ney oru nonda-vijakku kndir-Mitta val irav[um] pagalum eriya*kko^u^e|jju ajapp5m%5] 
4 m[||*] Nallimangalattu sabhaiyom Tkuttavattupi-Mah5(ha)d,5varkku aJavOmSyil muttil mutt^irattiyum miilappatta pap.-mahevara[r] 
5 sabhaiy-agavum tanitt-agavum nilaikkajam-ujlitta tl$ v$(4u kSvinuklra pukka ^(ff|2iru-nujju-ppadi^E-api ka^am da^am-i^a [v]o 
6 ttinom Nallima&galattu sabhaiyom [||*] idupati-mSii5$va( rar 
I(i)raksliai ||. 
TRANSLATION. 
Hail ! Prosperity! In the year opposite to 4, Nandippdttaraiyar, who the battle of TeHru and gained victory (in it), gave 60 old Wit to (fa temple of} MaMdeva at Tiruttavattuyai in I^aiylrpi-naijlu, Having received from the temple of the Mahadeva of Tiruttavattuyai these sixty Mu* we, , (the Member of} the assembly of 
Nallimangalam in this nflju, bound ourselves to take (to tfa tempk} and mwim out daily (one) noli of ghee by the measure called nftfy*njj, for burnkg one perpetual lamp as long as the sun and moon last. If we, (the members of) the assembly of NaUiinaigalam fail (in our uvdertaUry) and do not measure out (ft* 0A*) to the temple of the MahadSw of Tiruttavattuiai, all the MaheSvaras attached to the central shrine4shall levy on fw fa mrn^sof) the assembly, as a body otindividually, a fine of two hundred and sixteen JcSnm and this shall be pad to the royal officers* inclusive of the nttaikJcalm* whichever they desiro Thus we, (4a mmbers of) the assembly of Nallimaiigalam, had this (edict) metal Thk (chmty) shall be under the protection of all the Forty-Eight Thousand Mttttvarai,' 
TEXT OP B,
c.   
18
  

No. 3. j THREE TAMIL INSCEIPTIONS OF LALGUDI.   
kaiu 120 [ *]urjrirupadu kasun(m) muda[l] ke[<Ja]in[ai]y poli[y-u]t;tinal ni&di na 
5 a}app5m-ayin5m ippadi ot[t]i i-kkasu kond5[m] Idaiyajru-nattu liamperunkayr. iruk[k]ai [sabhaiyo]- 
6 m [*] i-nneyniSadi iru-naliyummuttil mutt-irattiyum mulap[pa]t;ta pan maheSvarare sabhaiy-agavum tanitt-agavumni . . . * 
? IJitta ta ve^du kovigukku pukkaa$ff13aaafiru ka^am daijdam-ida otti kku4uttom Tiruttavattujai-Mahadevarkku [||*] 
TRANSLATION. 
Hail ! Prosperity! Iii the 9th year oppositeto the 4th year of (the reign of) king Marafija4aiyas correspondingto the day of Sadaiyam, i.e., gatabhishaj (falling) on a Tday in the month of Dhanus, king Marafija^aiyaii alias Pan^yakulapati Vara gu^a-MaharSya gaveinto the hands of Anaa-nattu-VeJIfl120 old ka& for burning day and night till the sun and the moon last, two perpetual lampsin the templeof the MahSde-ra it Tiruttavatturai in Idaiy&jrpi-nSdu. As interest on these one hundred and twenty tA*-the capital remaining un-affected-we bound ourselves to measure out daily [two & of b.ec by <* *tyMttf measure]. Thus agreeing, we, (the meters of) the assemblyof 
runkay-imkkaiin Idaiyajru-n^u,received Aese Mfe If (any) default occur, m ihese two noli of ghee daily, we agreed on behalf of the Mahadeva of^ttavatturai in a body or individually, double the (qmntity at) default and a fine of five 
o/ 9oU) to^royal (offters) inclusive of [n^toW as *e Mahesvaras attached to the central shrine desire.TEXT OF C. 
1 Svwti id DPI K 
* 30" "'"s p-^^,- dU
54 EPMBAPH1A IXMCA. I Vni, XX   
13 nnir vetti utp^da mayjum epperppatta vojjiyum iraiyuw i'i'h.l*iriiiii vdt naiymu epperppattadum-ipulada-ga virjrii \> 
14laiy-avajjafi-chji[y*]du ku<Juttora TiruttuvAfctu jtti-MfthrlPvurkkta Miu,w K.tl mihha i* yom i-nilattukku pugunda 
15 kuttukkal tlrttu-ku^uppomanSm tirttu-fkkucjdinagil ku|tfuki:aj fun'utui.M|>n/;uncU)- podu muypatta panm[a]- 
1 he^varare nilaikkalam-uljitta hm fv^uju] kujviyulkku . . . . . 'kfcfu.um sabhaiyaiy-agavum tanitt-figavunt <,3aiti 17 4am4da otti i-fiilam pattu^chdievum virtu vilttiy.Svtti.uun ,'iry.lu ku'atiltmii Tiruttavattuxai-[Ma]l)5d5varicku Mai^- 
18 rkkal sabhaiyom [||*] idu pan-Mali?4v&iar nS]fj>^it-<H)?fiyimvArui nibhai H' 1|I H1; 
TRANSLATION". 
Hail ! Prosperity! In the 13th year of (the m^ o/j king NaftgaiU Varagu^a-penunSftte, the illurtriwis uterfaio sinter of the ChA}a ktog (^J/ Wi*7MMiIn. 
<W), gave 30 (/^tofu of) gold for burning a perpetual lamp dwly with (^.r // .,f' gliHi a$ tong as die sun and the moon last, In the temple of ttvavm-bhatttoakm at Tiruttavatturai. l^o^memSm^^) assembly of Ma^alkai>a Imhma^/a on thu w^lwi portion.{ KaUra w^cl1 was a sub-division of Va<Lakarai*Ma)a*xiI4u rw^MviHl tluw, thirty 
:. The following are tho lands which they mild for th* 30 faik/i/w of g^Jd t< the enimaea^iga) at Tiruttavattu^ai for (6ww$) a naotHi lump: 
Four ma and 
(one) k&ni of our land, situated to th east 0{ the mound caill Wm$mmn^ and (one) M^i (o/ /av^rf) to the aorth o tho mf^fp^ in dirugnvar ?t u-o rf uf 
-Aem 
^ ^1 * 
Tslaivjyajj* in all Imlf a f/i rii*prLsHi in 
.. , of $old, wjy (^A** mtMtwtt c>/) Miii^iykiilj HO Id 
other (faxea) inclusive of 
o ourn8' We lm to r-ifv th, to 
officers i 
, 
No. 4.-A SUNGA INSCRIPTION FROM AYODHYA. 
oi Baba igat BaBu^SS I d to Lll" K fth^tttonoft ' thtt*'^l< 
TK^ *.BY RAI BAH4DTO DAYA RAM SAUNt, M.A. 
-iXr^^^^t^--^ daub.^toe wth the 22S ^2,*^<Jl6 tim00f N*wlh 8hu^'1 - -aUed enclose kaown as Rano^J^.f^fd f^fh?e We8tem Prtton of a large 
toad leading, to Fyzabad.^distailt from the^of AyddhyS on 1 MOT also men 'for the
4* ] A SUNGA INSCRIPTION FBOM AYODHYA. 65   
The inscription consists of two lines. The first line appears to be complete, though it is difficult to say that the portion of the slab hidden under the sill of the doorframe does not contain on? or more lines. Of the second line, the left hand portion is completely effaced, though some slight traces that have survived make it certain that the whole of this portion was originally inscribed. The characters are Brahmi which show considerable resemblance with the inscriptions of the Northern Kshatrapas and some archaic votive inscriptions from Mathura. The charac teristics of this type are discussed in Biihler's Indian Palaeography1 and these are the equalization of all the upper verticals exceptin la, the constant use of the serif and of the angular forms of gha, ja, pa, pAa, ma, la, sha and ha. Another peculiarity of the Brahml script of this period is the slightly bent base line of the letter na* The inscription under discussion exhibits all these peculiarities in a marked degree and should be classed with those mentioned above. The docu ment m written in correct Sanskrit and is thus one of the few early inscriptions recorded in that language. The only grammatical mistake noticed in it is the use of Dharmarajna in placeof Dharmardjvna. 
The document has already been dealt with by several scholars, the first of whom was the discoverer3 Babu Jagannath Das Katnatara2 himself. This article is writterf in Hindi and is accompanied by an inked impression of the inscription together with an improved hand-copy prepared by Mr. Ratnakara himself, Mahamahopadhyaya Pandit G-aurishankar Hirachand Ojha, of the Bajputana Museum, Ajmer, dealt with the document in the same volume of the Nagwii PracMmyi Patrika^ as well as in his reportof that Museum for the year ending31st March 1924, pp. 1-2. Mr, K. P. Jayaswal has devoted three articles to the subject.4 Other scholars, who have dealt with this inscription, are Mr. N. K, Bhattasali,5 Dr. A. Bannerji^astrl* and Mr* N. GL Majumdar.7 The inscription has, however, not yet been dealt with in any of the official publicationsof the Archaeological Department and my objectin editingit in this journalis to bring togetherthe various views expressed by scholars on this important inscription and to record my own impressionsof the same. 
The inscription records the erection of a shrine or other memorial in honour of PhalgudSva, 
the father of the Dharmaraja ..... Dhana(deva, bhuti, efo.), Lord of Kosala, son of KauSikf, the sixth of the Snapati Pushyamitra, who had performedthe Atoamidte twice. The inscriptionis importantfor more reasons than one. It is die first inscription on stone or metal yetdiscovered which mention* the name of Pushyamitra,the celebrated founder of the Sufiga dynasty,Hitherto he was only knomi from literary sources, AJT., the DwySoa&w (XXIX) Patafijali'0 MahSbhashya (111-2423), where reference is made to a sacrifice performed by Mm, some of the Furf*", Kalidasa's drama, the MalavikZgnmitra,etc. The passages referring to 
the Suftn dynasty in'the Vishnu and the Bhagavata PwrOfasm quotedin parallel columns m PargitJsThe Pura^a Text of the Dynasties of tU Kali Age, pp.30-33. From the riaet from the former we learn that the dynasty was founded by the General Pushyamitraafter he jddam the last Maurya king Bphadratha.His son was Agnimitra, who was n^^^^^"The letter's son was Vasumitra and bis son Andhraka. He was succeeded by Pulindaka and 
Ind. Ant., Vol. XXXIU, 1904, Appendix, p. 40. 
,Vol. V pt. 1, pp.99-104. 
, . B. * o. E. s, u* T PP 
XIII, pp.247-49. [HeroMr. Jayaawalhas ^iven goodfaoainules of thia maonptaon.- 
* Mkdem Review, February 1925, p. 202. 
Ibid., January 1925, pp.59.60.' 
4wwb ofthe Bhandarkar IiutSMt, Vol. VII, pts. I and II, pp. 160463.
66 EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. f VOL. XX.   
latter by Yome^ha. He was followed by Vajramitra. Ho was followed by JNUimbhiiga. The latter's son was Devabhumi. 
Kalidasa's drama mentions three of these kings, i.e., the founder, bin .son Ajniiiii<,ru and the latter's son Vasumitra and further informs us that Pushyamii.ru instituted nItrrjitsfiyn .sacrifice and appointed Vasumitra as the guardian of the sacrificial hor.sc, which in accordance with religious custom was to wander at will for a year and that the home was seized by flic cavalry of the Yavanas, whom Vasumitra successfully defeated and brought the horse hick to hiw unnidfathor'a sacrifice. The Eajasuya sacrifice was performed by universal monarehs and the .sacrifice of t.h is name mentioned in the drama of Kalidasa may have been the one performed by I'unliynmitra on the occasion, of his coronation. The Ayodhya inscription, however, records the performance of two Atvamedha sacrifices by Pushyamitra. It is at present not known wlmt, nmvwiUtod the institution of the second sacrifice by him. It is to the credit of Pushyam if rn that, he revived this sacrifice which had long been in abeyance owing to AAfika's commandmeutH prohibiting the immolation of animals even for sacrifices. Mr. JayaawaU think* that the AtvamMha sacrifice mentioned in an inscription discovered at Nagari alao referred to ltw!iyttmitra It is true that such an inscription was found by Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar when ho win'i-nptgwl in his excavations at Nagari.* It has, however, been fountf by Eai Bahadur rtrihnknr H Ojha to be only a fragment of the GhSsundl inscription and to supply the mwmnp portion of the first toe of that record. Thus restored, the epigraph shows that the son of (Sajaviuui an.i PuraiarJ 
the to, 
rf 
Stworkt ftB^Ti, T^r,^7-itra,not Puahpamitr* .. found in ,)m of the ^nslmtworks^DrBuhlerhad 
he found malready been led to this condumou' by the form 1'feuuiita whkh certam Jama Prakrit gatMs, but epigraphical evidence wa8 wantir1K The ^interpretationof this short record is rendered difficult by the uncerluiniv^mt 
tonourof PhalX, a teache7o7d Ojna favoured the meaning skth in to interpret He 
of Pushyamitra. 
of it, his name woud ave ha. shown, is no real obst.de as the ftoa, and found on their 
"Gllurwhankllr Hiracband 
Mr. Jayanwd preferred 
> ^king Phalgudev* the father 
jcte,l the descent 
it 
e lf 
, I &% *?**' aa "
4. A SUNGA INSCRIPTION FROM AYODHYA. 57 is the case in the expression under discussion. Mr. N. Q. Majt^dTr has hunted up a parallel expres* sion ia verse 88 of the 16th Sarga of the Bagtomhta. The expression in question is paftcfamam Tahhahuya, which is interpreted "by three commentators as meaning grandson oi giandsou of Takshaka." Mr. Majumdar therefore sees no difficulty in interpreting Pushyam&rasya slash* thak as'sixth in descent from Pushyamitra." In his third article* on thisinscription, however, Mr, Jayaswal points out that the example from the Raghuvamfa referred to above is actually interpreted by Mallinatha as meaning the fifth son of Takshaka.'The sixth of Pushyamitra% in the Ayodhya inscription should therefore mean tJtie sixth son of Pushyamitra. As, however, this interpretation would make Phalgudeva identical with Pushyamitra, he proposes to read Dharmarajnd in the 2nd line as Dharmarajfti, and to compound it with the following word pitu%. He thus construes the record as meaning that Dhanadeva, the sixth son of Pushyamitra, erected a house in honour of Phalgudeva, the father of his lawful queen.   
It will be seen from the above that the only parallel expression found by lie ingenuityof Mr. Majumdar is capable of two divergent interpretations. As has been pointed out by Dr. Banerji Sastrl, the inscriptions so far known fail to throw light on the question and he is right in stating that the established custom in epigraphical records is either to name the generations in succession or not at all and that it is not usual to mention a distant stage by omitting the intervening ones* One such example I have indeed secured in verse 44 of l&e Vam&dvdi of the Chamba rajas,2 where we find the words"Meruvarman was the 10th from Jayastambha"after the nine inter vening ancestors of M&cuvarman have been duly referred to in direct succession. Even here, however, the mbhaUi employed is the fifth, not the sixth or possessive case. An example of this kind with the sixth case ending occurs in the RaghuvamAa, Sarga 6, verse 29 : 
"Thou alone, fortunate lady, art fit to be their third." 
Sunandtl, the attendant of IndumatI, while narrating the achievements of the prince of the Angas observes that the goddesses Sri and SarasvatI, though naturally hostile to each other, together reside in him in peace, thus indicating the proprietyof her union witih him. It will be observed that though the grammaticalconstruction in this case is the same as in the doubtful expression being discussed, the sense of descent is out of the question. Whether more exact parallels both in form and sense will or will not be found in the vast field of Sanskrit literature, I am unable to say. It seems, however, exceedinglydifficult to disregardclear palaeographicevidence and to group this record with the other known documents of the early Sunga period.I would, therefore, with Pandit Katnakara, supply a word like purushe^aafter shashthena and translate"by the sixth descendant of Pushyamitra ". It will be* seen*from tie facsimile that onlythe 
first portion of the name of the chief who had this inscription engraved is preserved. Pre vious writers have restored it as Dhanadeva and Mr. N. G* Majumdar identifies him with a chief of that name whose coins have been found round about Ayodhya. Be the name, however, what it may, the inscription has established beyonddoubt the fact that Ayodhya formed partof the Sunga Empire as late as the date of the inscription, which, on palaeographic grounds must be assigned to about the 1st century A.D.TEXT. 
Icetanam karriam_
Line L K&sal-adhip&na diw-afoamGdha-yajinafy senapatefy Pushyamitrasya Kau&ikl~ynttr$'tya Dhana .... 
Line 
Dharmar&jM 
2. 
Phalgudivasya 
pitufy 
^fli. JR." A, Vol. XIIL 
B. /. 
pp 247 49, 
*Vogel* Ant>quit%e of Cbain&a State, p. 85 ;-*58 EPIGRAPHIA'INDIOA. [Vor,. XX.   
[The chief pointof interest in the inscriptionis the use of the genitive case in the expression PtUkt/cu>Utr<uyasJiaiHthSna. According to Panini (WW tft^ $ TW(4*I *& T <| W<^ and ' 
V. ii. 48, 49 and 51), the suffix dto (with the 
augments moj and t&w&)is used in the sense of puraya, i.e., 
V ?TWK ^CT; (Katika on the Asfyadhyayi, V. ii. 48),'that with which & number is com pleted'. So W, means tl%!T if^: and ^w:,t|n|Tft'^I^I*,and so on. In other worde, this siiffis: does not signify any order of descent or kinship and tfgsf of the inscription, taken by itself, would simplymean:'by the sixth.* The genitive case., howewr, Would show the Mtobandtia ot relationship which this person had with Pushyamitra, for that m ono <f the chief functions of this vS&dHi. To express'order of descent'tho ablative caB ahoulil be employed, as a reference to the comments on ^SWtTf^tf'C?? f^^^T^WCtf^TSfTf^^W (Astyadhy&yi, II. iuX 29) would show. We generally say <RrepBrR[ T$'., ^raH^WT^T:.Thin will be made clearer by the following quotation given in the &abdakalj>adruma under the w<mi napi\ti}a ; 
<dawijj,f WSTI: fatiK swrct i 
fafa: u" ifIWH^TRTT^W^ 11 
That pa&shama and not ihastyhi is .generally used in such oases ia further ahown by Oio Puraqa (Am&a III, Adhyaya X) and the Qarufa-Pur&va (AdhySya LXV) UH qwttid in th Sabdakdlfpadruma under the word vivaha. 
"and 
said statement for it .says': 
Seriee) would !(> wpport th 
^rwf o y, ^ it 
have saxd f^f^^^a not ^few. Consequently, it becomes evident that if any word i. 
Therefore, if it was the order of descent which the author of the inscription hud in viw, he would tohe TOpplied,itsh(mldheiWHran'dnot^^r. In consideration of the* points, MallinSth* (^hU" XVI'^in tl" - "f' * fifth 
ributed to this paseage by CMritmvardha,m or by Din*- ^ ""r the form ^^^ ^' W y mbut not :. Here, we should remember that th. Vayu^r^ Kiv B 
in,rpnlto tin fr* M 
^
No. 5. ] PAIIAEPUR COPPEB-PLATE GRANT OF THE [GUPTA] YEAR 159. 59   
No. 5. PAHARPUR COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF THE [GUPTA] YEAR 159. BY K, N. DIKSHIT, M.A., CALCUTTA. 
Tli is copper-plate was found by me during the excavation of the great temple at Pahar pur in tho Budulgachi Thana of the Rajshahi District in Bengal on the 29th November, 1927, It was recovered from the debris that had accumulated on the north-east side of the circumam bul&tory passagecut tho, second terrace. From the circumstances of the discoveryit was apparent that it could not hiwi boon originally buried or deposited under the floor of the passage, but was probably brought down from a higher level along with the bricks and mud. It is to be regretted thai owing to th o inadvertence of the labourer a hole has been made in the upper right hand comer of it and some lotlc-ra in the three lines at the end of the first side and the first few lines of the second nichs have become obscure. The left hand margin has also been damaged at places, owing to which <'irnuntanee some of the letters written there have disappeared. The plate when dug out waw covered with a thick coatingof rust and verdigris but has subsequently been cleaned by chemical troHt'.ment and proves to have been fairly well preserved.It is rectangular1 in shape, measure 7$"x 4,J/' and, weighs 29 tdlas* 
Tho characters in. which the inscription under notice is written belongto the northern class o( alphabetof tho 8th century A..D, and closely resemble those of the grants 3 and 4 of the PSmrMUrpur* copper-platesof the time of Budhagupta. The formation of the medial a by the addition of a atroko at the right lower end of the letters ga, #a, dha, ha, ra and &a may be noted. The terminal m in written slightly below the topline as will be seen in -adlikaranam (1. 1), chatu 
thtaymn (I H), Sam (I 20), and phalam (I 24). The rare letter $ha occurs in afihav&pa (1. 15)* Tho"forms of tho conjunctletters Jtofca (as in DaksUtya? 1. 1), hma (asin Brahma? 11. 3, 12 and 17) and 'HV/tMua (as in ap<m3c,hcMya1. 20) are noteworthy. The numerical signsfor 100, 50, 9, 7, 
4 uutl / are! to bo. found in 11. 19 to 21. The unusual form of 9 in 1. 20, seems to be the prototype of tho nmdmi Bengali signfor that digit. 
As rc^nlfl orthography, the doublingof k before yain ^InariHya? (11. 4 and 11), and before r in "viklfayO* (11. 5 and 12), and Mrame^d (11. 5 and 17) requiresnotice. The con sonants k, n> d, r ^iwl ;/ arc doubled after r, as in arTcka (I 20), *mwaTwy-& (1. 3), nirddista<? (L 1H), fanimn (II 4 and 12), ^armmata (1 17), Sryya (L 1), &Mryy5 (U. 4, 12 and 17), *8Mryya (II fl un<i 13) and in r/tomma and *awnmB*a in lines 16 and 19. The v symbolis used for 6 in *mmu<luiwnhy~tiF (11. 4 and 11) and vvaMhir (1. 23). 
The language of the inscriptionis Sanskrit, With the exceptionof the fire imprecatoty venu* ut tho imd, tho whole record is in prose.The rules of joncZftiharebeen very often violated in respect, of it vtoarg* at the end of a word, as in' ayuteaW aryya M), (1. tt) t %mlr//;4 ^t^ 0-l )- in U. 4 and 12 in also \vrou^ grammatically. 
Tl." ,h,umnt uulr oxamination registors the purchaseof a fallow statela^idby a __ Jn tfae centraj p0rtion,It fc wobable tnat, as 
private individual for charitable purposes.The Dhaniidalia,* the Damodaqmr,' the 
of the Dfuufolarpur platenthere waa a eomi-oiroular projectionat this 
'Above, Vol. XV, pp. 1W ff. 
[8i (,n. n on p. 01 bolow. Ed] 
*Abovo, Vol XVn pp. 345 f. 
Above* Vol. XV, pp, 1130*
INDICA. [ Vol. XX,   
pur1 and the Ghugrahati2copper-platesalso record similar transactions, the difference being that in. the presentcase the jate at which one Jculyavapaof land waa sold waB 2 dlnaras wliereaa it was 3 in the case of the Damddarpur grants and 4 in the case of the Faridpurones. As NOB. 3 and 4 of the Damodarpur plates are almost co-eval with the present plate, the difference in the ralea men tioned in the two cases must be due to local causes. Probablythe qualityof the laud available was inferior or there was an abundance of fallow land in the locality around Pahiirpur. It was, apparently, owingto such considerations that the 5 drdyavapas (=*'ofa Iculyawipa approximately) were, as stated in No. 2 of the Damddarpur plates, grantedin lieu of a depositof 2 dlnSrus, when the rate was 3 dinaras to a kulyavapa*. 
The grant under notice records that a Br&hmajja and his wife deposited 3 dinSras or gold coins with the city council (adhisfyMn-adhikarawa)to secure 1 kutyavftpa and 4 drO^avfipasof land situated at 4 different villagesall lying in the Dakshi^arhSaka^^i and Nagira|;ta-waw^!ala for the maintenance of worship with sandal, incense, flowers, lamps,etcf of the divine arfiats 
at the vihara of Yata-Gdhall which was presided over by iixe disciples and the disciploa of disciples of the Nigraniha preceptor ($rama%,-acharya) Guhanandin, belongingto the Pandm-Btupa section (nikaya)of Benares The donation of a Brahma^a couple for the worahip of Jinas,, as recorded here, is noteworthyfor it bespeaksof the religious toleration of the peopleof the period. 
The Jaina vihara at Vata-Gohall mentioned in this inscription,it would appear, must have stood.at the originalsite of the present temple at PShaipur, The boundaries of the wte are partly situated within the limits of the village of Goalbhita to the north-west and the mound whore tke temple has been unearthed was pointed out to Dr. Buchanan Hamilton in 1807 as*OOaMtySr Pahar' (the eminence of G5albhit&). The identification erf Gollbhita with the ancient Vafa Gohali easily suggests itself as the step GSfcgJi is substantially identical with GSS1, Kow ndics of the Jaina faith4 have come to light during the excavations at PSJbiijpur, but munorouB Brnhntani* cal and Buddhist. bas-reliefs a^d terra-cotta plaques, dating from the late Gupta tirnofl, have been discovered. In the ninth and the succeeding* centuries of the Christian era, the PfthSppur toinple was. known as the great Buddhist viJwa of king Dharmapala, at SSmapura, the latter place.being recognisedin the modern villageof Ompur, a mile to the south of the raottnd. 
Begarding the prevalence of Jainism in Bengal, the Chinese traveller Emm Teian, who visited the countryof Pu^<Jravardhana in the second quarter of the.seventh century, records that6 "there are some 100 Deva temples, where sectaries of different schools congregate. The naked Nirgranthas are the most numerous." This statement can now be corroborated by the evidence of the present document v^hich speaks of a vihara presided over by a succession* of Nigraiitha monks, at least 150 years previous to the Chinese pilgrim's visit to the locality. In connection with the name Guhanandin it is worthy of note that the name* of the Kgambara iehfima of the third and fourth centuries of the Christian era, such as YaS6nandin> Jayanandin, Kumflranandin, eto., as is shown hy the Iists3 generally end in nandin. Pu^ravar^n*, is, mentioned as one of the SIT ?T ,anPr ;timing with Gupti^Gupta or Vttakh-Scharyya, the disciple of Blmlm* bahu II and Guhauafidin must have been one of them, 
* JmL in*, VoL XXXIX, p, 103 and 
2 J.A.S.B,, NJ9., Vol. VIL p, 475. 
Above, Yol XVIH, p. 74.. 
of a *>*,* mmt he 
Of , Weatefn World> Vo]>^
5. ] PAJL1RPUR COPPER-PLATE GftANT OF THE [GUPTA] YEAR 159. 61   
The procedurefollowed in ancient Bengal* in respect of applications for the purchase and donation of land, as elaborated in the present case, is interesting. The intending donors approached the District Officer (AyuMaka*) and the City Council(Adki$hthan-adkikara<$a) headed hy the ven erable Mayor (N(igara^reshthm) ami requested them for sale of land for charitable purposesat the prescribedrate. The Officer and the Council referred th A G^se, in the first instance, to the com mittee of record-keepers consisting of one chief record-keeper and at least five other record keepers.21 The latter after making necessary enquiries submitted their report with recommenda tion in favour o the transaction. The authorities thereupon realised the necessary amount from the applicants and intimated the elders and other householders belongingto th$ villages concerned to measure out the land and make it over to the applicants for the purposein view, 
The hind measure adopted in this gr$nt wag based on the measures o| graip, as is the case in the Damodarpur and other grants. The /kulyavap^ denoted as much land as could be sown with a kulya measure of grain. A kulya, accordingto various ancient authorities, was equivalent? to 8 d>r$wt8*s9% adh<ikasx=l28 prasthas, Other land measures found in the presentrecord are drd$avapa and S^hampa, 
The dat of the grant as given in the inscription is Sam 199-Magha di 7 a^aPP%ren^y refers to the Gupta -era, which was in use in Bengal when the charter was issued. As, such, it would fall in January 479, A.D. The mention of Paraw&Jiaffiralca in L 16 can only be taken to refer to the reigning sovereign whose name is not mentioned. The DamSdarpur plates show that the kingdom of Budhagupta included the bhufai of Puijujravardl^ana at this period and it is not improbablethat the unspecified reigning sovereignat the time of the issue of the copper-plate was Budhagupta. 
Regardingthe identification of the,places mentioned in the plate, Pu^dravardhana hag been identified- by General Cuwuwgliam3 with tie extensive ruins known as 'Mahasthan-garh/8 miles north of the.town of Bogta. Vata-GdkSH, as stated, above, may b&the modem Goalbhita. I am unable to identify the other localities, 
TEXT,4 
Obverse. 
1 Svasfci [I!*] Pu^4ta[varddha]nadIyuktakah5Iryya-nagara4re8hthi-pur5ga&-ch=adhiah- " 
tapufijaktt-Mila 
8 
anubodhavanti [J *] Vij 
of anoi^ Seagal'till it is proved by docnmeatazy evidence tbat 
*^*--^ 
the Committee which
EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ Vot. XX,   
4 gamma tad-ttbyytBarn! cha yuHhrnakam-tli^ -nM^siumiilaa^vah^,^ 
5 piaa.k^^^ 
BakMSA-dfii^^ 
6 yanaya Vata-GoMlyam*av*=^^^ 
actoyya-Guto^^^^ 
-7 Btagavatam-Arliatam gwdha^Mpa-sum^^ 
a[ta*] eyaVata-GSkalito Yastu-dr5^vapani-ad 
8 mbudeva-prav^ya-Prislitliinia-pottaket5 kslietram 
Mflla-Nagiratta 
9 prav%a-Nitva-Gohalitah 
kulyavapam6=akshaya"mvya dfitum*i[ty*atra] yatat pwUwina 
10 Pus&pala-DMJmrana^^ 
ahu pratliamaiiiL7* fnS]m*a7adhfiwmaH 
11 y-avadliptain asty^asmad-adhishthan-adhikaraijSdvi-dlnarikkya-kulyuvripfina fefimt 9-apratiIcara 
kal-5pabh6gy-aksl3,aya'-mYi-samii[daya-va]hy 
12 [Miila*>kslietra-yaBtu-viklarayo*nuvrittes=tad>^^ 
Stad-bliaryya Earn! cha Palatetta-parivilafc*Vttto-(?ohSlMha1 ^('O-ya 
Reverse. 
13 . , t , b^pauoha-stupa-ku^ 
praSishy-adliislLthita-sad-viliarc Arahatam12 g^ndha-[dhfip>ady*-upay8gay 14 [tak-v*]ataka-nimittan*cha tatr*aiva Vafa-GShaiyaih vSBtii-drtlijiivIpain*jwUiya-* rddhain kshetraja^Jambudeva'-praveSya-PpBhtliima-pSttaki <lr{(quiV&i>a*chaiu(fht)ayaTh 15 Gosliatapunjad^dro^avapa-cliatuslitayam 
1 Bead 6c%-a. 
2 Beadc fec. 
3 [a XwysAvaJMktyflto of the Faridpur grants2 and 8. Jnd* 4nfc, Vol. XXXIX, pp.2(K) tiuti 2( *Tiais expression is further characterlsod as jw^^-^flya-fctcte-m'fclyi^a ia L 13 of tho tout. The word dtafti&tyite is familiar to the students of Buddhism in the sewift of*oao who known tlw five NikAyimf* In the present case, however, the word M&pa or si^a-^wfo occurring botwoen paftvha and nibti/ika and itii oonww tion with a Jaina. preceptor would seem to show that Nik&ya ratiwc bo taken hows in th ciwo of i* branch (AiWt) of the Jaina Ackaryas. Paucha-stapa may, in that case, be a place name from which a purtH'uIar bn*nh of the Jftina loharyas may have been known* 
61 is redundant here, 
8 The engraver first wrote drQnav&pam* but findinghis mistako later, appears to havd xn&do an attotnptat 
correction. The erased letters MW are clearly visible twlow Jh%a. 
7 Some letters after this are lost. 
8 [The text of the DamSdarpur plates would suggest that eWKft^aw$ wa0 proomlwl by tbo record-keepers wbich were put in the genitive 
Bead 
[Compare the reading in I 6 bove, -Ed.J
gH CO 
F H   
5 
c 
w 
UJ 
N 
se 
$ 55<
CO OJ   
p2X
No. 5. ] PAHARPUR COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF THE [GUPTA] 1KEAR 159. 63   
16 dliyanWlunh kslietra-kulyavapam-prartthayate^trana ka&chid^yirodiali gagas* tu yatparaiBa4>hattaraka'-pa(laiiaiiL=artth-6pachayo dharmma-ahadubhag-apyaya 17 uari * cha blmvati tad yaii-ln:iyatam=ity--ane^^ 
liiiiana-Natlia-Aarmiiaata etad-bharyya-Rajniya&^chadmara-tra 
18 yam aAikrityaitabbyam vijMpitala4cram-6payogay=6pari-nirddistta-grama-G6liaU- \'Crthu Uila-vfvfcaka-vastuna saha kshetraiii 
19 kulyavapa adhyarddhos'-ks'haya-mvi-dharminei^ dattah ku 1 dro 4 [*] Ta(byuhinabhili sva-lmrmma^-avirodhi-sthaae shatka-na<Jair2~apa 
90 vifirhchhyu8 dat^vyo^ksliaya-nlvi-dharmmgnacha 6a^vad=acbandr-arkka-taraka kalain anu-palayitavyaiti [I* ] Sam 100 50 9 
21 Miitfhft<li 7 [ I* ] Ukten-cka bhagavata Vyasena [ I* ] Sva-dattam para- (latlfuiL va y5 hareta vasundharam [*] 
J>a wi vishiluiyaih toimir4 =bhfitv pitribhis-saha pachyatef ||*] Sliashti-varslia aiiha.ruijii Bvarggevasati bhujnidah [ I* 3 
28 uknlulplu ch-gnumanta cha tany-evanarake vaset [||*] Rajabliir=walui bhir6 *datta diyat5 cha punah punah [ 1*] yasya yasya 
m yaclablLunii6tasya tasya tada phalam [||*] Purwa-dattam dvijatibhyo yatnrwlvtakshaYndhishttira [I*] maMm=niahimatam7 keshtha 
35 danlk*.ohhrSy3 nupalanaih [||*] Vindhy-atayislivariambunshu*sushka-kotara vilBiiia[h *] krishn-ahmS9 hi jlyante d8va-dayaihharanti yc [|| ] 
Abstract of Contents. 
and Rarry,his wife, approachthe District Officer" and the 
bythe Mayor (tfo^ at Puravardhana wz h the 
that i accordance with the procedure ptevaleatin the locality, they may , be allowed to that m aoiaauccwwu v j r ^^^amon 4 land^^^^among 
may therefore mean note of BO many cubits^r J;^^mefming to ^t Or choo^-Ed.] 
and M referredtoth8 
[Dr. N. P. Chakravarticonnects it witht^e Beng^wora ^,^ead ftAflwtis,. 
, 
' Bead *r*ir. fBut fc**-j"JS ^J^Smlo the piatois ^so oorrect.-Ed.] 
Ewi oa*. [The reading *<**** g" ^e P, Eead ^atfi tod S*-lta. IThe platocorrectly gives -*~-4M.] 
-note 8 on p. 61 dbom-Ed.J a^rf ^6^^ between tte
64 EPIGRAPHIA INDJCA. [ Vat. XX.   
The Council, in the first instance, consulted tho Board of Kooonl-Kwi^m fnv.sid.od by Divakaranandin, who pointedout that thero was no objodion to the f ranfw especially as, besides bringing some revenue to tho treasury,it would <>nf !(!> 1 1 IH Majesty to a sixth share of the religious merit accruing from tht) oudowmont. The (Smm-il, ilirnvforo, decided to accept the offer of the Brahmana couple and rooordd tho transfer of land. 
The village elders of the respective villages at which tho lands in quest tort woro situated, were then asked by the Council to mark out the boundaries* of tho liiuds) thu.i f,r nui*od and maintain them in perpetuity. Tie date was the 7th day of Muglui,in the |<iiipu] year 159. The usual imprecatoryverses follow. 
No. 6. KOTAVUMACHGI INSCRIPTION 0? VIKUAMADITYA V. 
BY R. S. PANCHAMOKHT, M.A., OOTACAMUNO. 
is a village about 14 miles to the north-cast of Gada, tho hi'iiili|imrt .TH of the Gadag Taluk of the Dharwar District. Tho inscription, which w oditwl below, IK .-n^nm*! on a stone-tablet set up in front of the temple of KalamSsvara which is standing tkr. Th < inwribed portion of the .tone covers an area of 6' 2* by 1' 11* and is in a state of vwy good pnwrvation. The inscription is neatly written in tho Kanarese script of nbouUhe 1 1th century A.D. As regards paladography, the chief points requiring notice are: (i) the lii Wuil</aud / nr- not clearly distinguished from thedental t; compare for example c,hhan<hv-a{(tmkara (i U5), /Mimmyw/u (11. 17, 29), M^e (1. 33), pa$iyale (1. 34), etc. ; (ii) the -sign is indicatol in thnw difl.-rcnt, wayg, WK., (1) by a short hook at the bottom of the letter as in PvMgeft (1. 7), ? wAm(/ (II. 17, 29), vondu (1 36), etc., (2) by a mark with a downward bend by the m<i of tho" itt<r, IIH in ^se h& (1. 13), mcmr^du (11. 18, 20), kuruva-gey (1. 28), ^., an<l (3) by a l<mK riKht HH!,. strnka shooting from the bottom of the letter as irx Puslya tuddha (1, 10), nnMana^lu (I. 40) ; (iii) k rePreseilted ^a horlHmtal'rtiwk. t <h Inborn of 
the final m is uscd in 
eC6Png 6 trC ra Precato^ -~^Han-krit, which ,orno at a w of^5) and cM^a (i- 24)' 
^Ifm Kanarese Prose of tho nAval ,Hio.|. Th words 
v . that Tri*h vaua 
village Um^achige situated m ^^^7^ ***"*'^'^ kin'H I><ii,,, tho amga -Twelve to Maunara 6rWhara 
u-323 mention the income of certain eBtat uudoc
No. 6.] KOTAVUMACHG! INSCRIPTION OF VIKBAMADITYA V. 
different headings, namely, the maintenance of the 
of *J* and JJM*. to ***of 
M^to ,.*.... djta,I d,n, aS on 
65 
Carnage, ^ic -waAeej,BMube^KarapuWime and DlpSlige, with a remark that they be enjoyed by the t*ro<Jeya (li 33-36). IUurtl,er stetes (11. 3643) that fines on certo   
. s on cer 
it has specified, Hicomes derived from spoil., ^am^a (cWAwfla) of escheat property of 01TTS ir ,*C ^?DSyilfa^e at Ummachige. Lines 4346 obtain the stipula- turn that the Mahajanas should protect the estates and maintain the gift even in adverse cir cumstanccs. The record was written hy G5vinda-Bfcatta and engraved by CMv5ja (1 54). 
person, dying intoteto and taxes on musical instruments such as Meand maddak are to be utLd 
The inaeriptioa is dated the Saka year 934, the 8th day of the blight haH of the month Pushya, Paridhlvin sarhvatsara, Sunday and the Utta^ya^^sarbki&iti These details do not appear to be quite regular. Except for the week day, the date corresponds, according to Swamikannu Piliai's JEphemens, to Tuesday, 23rd December A,D. 
The iuttcriptionis important as it reveals the name of a new subordinate of Vikramaditya, *ft.., the MahasSmantadhipati KeSavayya who was administering the two Six-Hundreds at the time of the grant, A Record5 secured from Hosfir in the Gadag Taluk dated in A.D. 1029 refers to the MaJiSsSmaitiadhipati KS&avatasa in the passage"MaJi^mantadUpM mahaprachavfadmfa* nayahm Mmt-KStevaraBara tadagra-tmujam [f] Svasti mmadhigata-pamlM-mahaMda m<M sandU-vigrah-adhipati mahSpr^^^da^nSyaJcam iri-Vaw%ara#ar*w<^mnururwm ...... naluttam^irc ......"as the father of VSva^araaa who was then governing the two Six-Hundreds under Jayasithba, the younger brother and successor of Vifaamaditya V. It is this Vava$arasa who figures as a subordinate of Jayastoha II-in the Hottur inscriptionof Saka 959 (A.D 1037} and the Hulgflr Inicriptionof Saka 960 (A.D. 1038)6 Kefevarasa appearsto have succeeded Sdbhanarasa7itx the administration of the two districts, sometime after AJX 1004 when, according to a record8 of YeMrur, the latter was stil the governor. We know from the NQgund inscription of Taila II dated in &*ka 904 that Kannapa-was appointedas the governor of BejwtarSQO and Purigefe-300 by Taila II and that he was succeeded by his toother. 
riya is made up of AWcwf (Ski Akshara) and iga, a taddMta termination indicating knowledge, accord ing to Iho *SWra H?H|Tft!l rt || 167 || of the %arv&takaBhMbhfahawi of Kagavanna, p. 62 (Mysore Govern* t edition)* Tho word, therefore, aaeans*on "wfoo is well versed ia (the science of) words** 
8 Klkfyi oflootios am probably tho devotees of Siva in the form of MaB&ri who with an army of*seven crores* the iloaiona MaMa and his brother. Bee for the story Imp. Gfaz., Voi XVII, pp. 30 3L 
* Bftduho IB a Kanarese name for the new-moon day of VaiSakha, Karapumnime for the full-moon day of and DIp&lige for the new-moon day of A^vina. For Kanarese names of all the full-moon days and new moon day* of a year, see I)r Fleet's note in $p* Ind,, Vol. V, pp.11 ff. 
* An inscriptionof Vikram&difcya V bearing the Saka date 0&p5] is noticed in Appendix B (No, 722) of the Madron Kpigraphicdl ffiaport for 1923. But the readingof the last figureia do'ubtful (ciee ibid p. 101). A tecoid from Karatjihajli to the Mysore State ($$, Qarn<9 Vol VII^ Bk. 287) belonging to the same king is dated clearly Saka 933, Paridhftvin, Pushya,Su, 13, Monday (*Mond^y,.the 29th December A.B. 1012) which may be re gatdecl as hli latest date known o far. The present inseriplsioHis thus six days earlier than the latest epigraph ,of VikramMItya V. 
6 No, 110 of the Bombay Karnatak collection fot 1926-27. 
*Sots above Vol XVI, pp. 75 & and pp. 832 $1 In the publishedtext of the former record,"ths name appmra to have been wrongly read m Ohavanarasa, 
7 Tho rolationship between Sflbhanarasa and KSIavarasa is not disclosed, 
8 No. 62 of the Bombay Katoatak collection for 1926-27, 
*JSp. /wd, Toi IV\ pp, 206 ftEPIGEAPHIA imiCA.[ VOL. XX.   
Sebhanajrasa in the government of thoae provinces m about A.D. 982. Ti, in likdy thfct Taila IT after overthrowing the Ganga chief PanchaladSva shortly after A.D. 975, mv<mt<vl Kannapa'with the governorship of the two districts aa stated in* the above record. Thus vr grt, after the' downfall of the Gangas, a succession of rulers of the Bejvote and Purism provinces in the 10th and llth centuries of the Christian era, namely Ktmnapa, S3bhanarasa, rasa and Vavaiiarasa. 
Fromthisinscriptionitcanbegathe^l that Ummachige wa8 a groat education*! centre a wh wTllth centr ity A' D> and maintainerl a pollc^with ft f '-^^ *^h! to where anstruchon was nnparted in several sciences. It allots tt nharo of fifty *<*,, with "twenty-five^and MW hoHHato only .. !|v o hi (mn I6tte?Mmfld M*-*^o >W teach an* comp<>Ho works on m ,hen?a! tics, astronomy, prosody, poetics, etc., and was well versed in irmmniL i* V f?la^ 
house.s.te to the^, who could expound^Sa and PralMkara anl t ^nW-flv, n-v, L^ , studyang those subjects., while 
we e 
easem.tisworth eth tin''"'-'or. m*-*--w
  
KQTAVUMACHGI INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMADITYA V
u   
54
No. 6. I KOTAVUMACHGI INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMADITYA V, 67   
of fines in respect of certain crimesaccordingto the caste of the offender. This is iu keeping with tUo kwa laid down in the Dhamat&stra.1 
Of the places mentioned in the inscription, Roria is the modern Ron, the headquartersof the Ron Taluk in the Dliarwar District. Nareyaiiigal which was the chief town of Nareyamgal 12, a sub-division ia the Be)vola-300 province, is the modern Naregal situated at a distance of 10 mile from llcm. Ummachige is evidently identical with Kotavumachgi where the record was found* 
TEXT2 
1 Svasti [ *] Rainasia-bhuvan-asraya-Sri-PrithvI-vallabha-inahara 9>jfm 2 jadhirajiL-panuuGvSvara-parainabhattarakaiii SatyaSraya-ku 
3 la-lijakam llwlukyabliaragaih rimat-Tribhuvananialla-Vikra 
4 mfw 1 i tya< ! ova ra rajya tnutturottar-abhivriddhige salutta 
5 m-ire j||*J*Hiumulhiguta-pamcha-mahaSabda mahasaraantadhipati 6 inaha-pruchaoda-dai.ujlanayakarh pati-mechche-ga^idara ^nmad-Danda-na 
7 yakaiii KCfewayyanigul-liclvola-munujaiSi Puligere-munuyuvaA su 
8 kha-Huiikutha-viii3dtt(lin-aJuttam-i]ldu [||*] Srfmat-Tribhuvaaamalla 
9 ddvaram prrijrjtl-hisi Edijada Maunara Srldharabhattargge $aka-varsha 931- 
10 Paridlnlvi-wuiivatBarada Puteliya Buddha ashtanal idityavira vuttara 1 1 ya tjia nanikrantiyandu Nareyaingal*Panneradarolagap Ummachi 
| #(>,]yaih ^rvvabliyaiiitara-siddhiyagi sarvvanamafyav-aggiaharam ma 
1 2 
13 (]i AfiBiiuaih bejgoqlo ghajige verasu pa<Jedu kudise ku(Je paded-ayu 14 ran-- a SrHlbambhafcj-ar tmpnalvar-mmahajanake bharaoam-geydu tayagam 15 mahujunakkarfi prajogarii ma^ida vyavastheynifr8 dharmma-brayad=upabiyada 16 manyada bhuruiyunive&anada prama^amu[ine]nt=ene SomeSvaradevargge ma 17 ttar aju Bhagiyabbe^varakke mattar-ppanneratju elkoti-tap5dhanara 18 siitrakke matiar-ppaiinewKJiu Iychagavu^.4alla degulakke inattar=aydu maneyo 19 ndu l<litya<lcvargge ma"ttaraydu maneyoadu Bettada-Bhagavatige 20 mattaray*lu matiey^ndu Narayai^adevargge mattar=aydu maney=onda= 21 nt-ayvftttu iMttar-kkeyyuman=ava]fa nivefenariigaliLvaiii Bendeyabhatarara 
22 tatiya brahmacfaaryyavullanaishthika-tapodianar-agiy-anubhavisuvar [ | *] 23 Marolabbo-Bha^rigo mattarppannera<]iu maaey-oadu Nyasam Pr^bhakara^ 
vuvarfi 
M vakkli&Qisi gU9a&8anadin-ubabhatta-vptti anattar-ayrotta^ man^ondu 
a JfafMmrt% OtapfcVIII, Vv, 267-268 and f^towUifwmr* Chupfe II, Vv. 220-224. From iEk*imprfli?lon. 
1 The t^iign is iudteMnot and ressmbloB the consoEant ymark.
68 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ V,>T, XX. 
25 mattai:=irppattaydu gaijitam joyisa-chchhanda-vajanikaraviivan-ribhava. . veyuvarti ba 
26 reyalurfi bajisalumballa, Sabda-sarhskaravulJata Nagadt~sigrgg< mt,yatlutiy*o 27 ndu poj[tal=aliaramuii)L varishakkondu kappadavuvan-ikkiy odini g 28 nadin=alv=akkariga-vptti mattar-irppattaydu maney*ondu kumvu-gey ppanne 
29 radu maney=ondu ga}atige-gey-mattar'Sru aaney-omlu eih 
30 tu maney=ondu pajekaprgge mattar=ppannera4u mancy ondu 31 n=a}vara satrakke mattar=nnuru mane yerad-antu ilhanmna-vrayakkaih vupabiyakkarii 
32 mattar=miiimiu tTro4eyargge mtoyada keyniattarjnim]ru nmiKjg 33 yyagala virppattaygay-nlla[da] nivtenaiii muni* [sfilvajta2 sutJikuiu ku^de mu M ttige padiyaje yajnadal=ondu gadya^rfc .... 
veyal-era 
maijiyaUondu pagarfi BS[du]be -am n K mQru 
parwadojaih* 36orbar-orbanuh   
87 *1 ***** eurigo"giwe maru ***** ** 39 r- mS9iy.ftyuclha 
40 
kava^tey^aputrika-dravyada 
41 
IT] 
42 ke,e7an.o4eda pat.ka^kkurix parikhayari. ocUtt.oIU mttr^ " n"& 
45 7ad=uPabiyad=aut=ailituv.edeya 
46 ya myekna^al^n-euitu. duBhkalav^gdadarfx 
4T .idakke 
-MflfltapCdhanatuvan^aluAa^ 1 Tbe word mflra ia written below the line, 
f 
*Readi 
No. 6, ]KOTAVUMAOHGI INSCRIPTION OF VIKEAMADITYA V. 69   
49 kftviloyuvana][i<lapaiiicha-malia"'patakan=akktim || Samanyo* 
50 yaiii <lharmma-H5tuxhr(s5tur)nyip5ijJkihkale kale palanlyo bhavadbhih I 51 sarvvanc?tH!i*-l)!nlginah parttliivendran>=bliuy6 bhuyo yachate Rarnabhadrah || 52 ftyardattrim para-clattam va y5 hareta vasumdharam [ | *] shashti var shrt-\httHrrn.u viahtayam1j^ya 
53 ie kritnih ||Baliubhir-vvasudha bhukta rajabMsgagar-adibWh [ I *] yasya yanya yadablulini 
54 |B ta]yrt tasya tada phalam || Govindabhatta[ni] bareda diavojam mangaja 
Translation. 
/TI in Hail' While Ilic reignof the glorious Tribhuvanamalla Vikramadityadva,the e of iu! whole world, the lord of Fortune and Earth, the *<^^ i farataW,fv/amte, the decoration of the race of Satytoaya, an ornament of the Chalukyas, was iiuTOWsiii^in proaperity,five the chief of greatfeudatories, the augustGeneral who hadattain^efive 
Huudwl 
, fiv. 
,v 
^ 
-
70 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. |V<L. XX.   
(LL 23-32) Twelve mattar and one house(-tfite) to the deity Mftroknbbe Bliaturl, fifty mMar and one house(-tfite) towards Ihatta-vritti to be enjoyedin return for performing flie duties of expounding NySsa and Prabhakara, twenty-five mattar to the pupila, twenty- 15 vo Mttffttr and oue housef-5^e) as akkariga-vnttito Nagadesiga who was able to compose anil expound (//<r /rv/U OH) mathematics, astronomy, prosody, poetics and ..... and who hud a knotting* of sounds (i.e., Vyakarana), to be utilised for his daily requirementsin virtue of his wm'iivs of twch ing his pupils, feeding them once a day and supplying (Mem) with a cloth every year ; twelve motfar and one house(-*i/e) for (^0 swppZy o/) tender cocoanuts1;ix f/w//w smd one hnu,;<4( ,v//r) for (fAe supply of) vessels2 for dbJiishfika; eight water of land and one, hoiis(-,svV* ) for barbers; twelve mattar and one house(-jwte) for drummers; (one) hundred mattar and t wo h< MUIP( Wi ,s) (o the feedmg-house of those that manage by gunatiasana.* Thus in all three hundred M,Mnf (ictPC, set apart) for charity and auxiliary expenses. 
(LI 33-36) Two hundred mattar as manya land and three housef-*//^) opjhf lands broju! and twenty-five hands long each to the Vrofieya. Moreover, the Tff.^ya^Ml //</ thw f tl<wh<tj) taxes permanently :~a ku^e for the open space of an oil-proas ; tho reapt^r of a door-lmino for every set of wooden materials (for building purpom)&; one gadi/aya for a vedic Hj^rilicc ; live payas for..........,two pa$a$ for a marriage ; one pa^a on the occasion of one gady&y* severally ou the three p-wwi of 5M^e, K<WWHW>W and, ttipViyr (LI. 3643) The incomes accruing from the following fine*, w;2i1 two ^OK/.Vfor a. 
oito 
I wive <jtubja{m 
another, twelve pa^5 for beating ; three ^yam? for drawing out the, dagger, 
for 
rtabbingH%) may change (^e <miw^ o/) fine considering the dLstinetion of c,mi* 'three ?^a^, in case a bachelor commits adultery; three ?a%atw on the oeciwiou of purificattion ceremony-exoept when a mawi gets up a processional ma^lapa with weapon^* ; thai ohtaininl as spoils (after a raid), one-tenth (datavmtta) of the escheat propertyof pensona ilyini- in< OH( ute an<! 
the taxes on (musical instruments) Me and madto (fa dnm) ; all Uuw ahull w to (/Ar ^w* Deyirngere. He who neglects this shall incur the sin of breaking th tank. A houm-Kite 
'..... fc including parikMya, etc., (w,f^apart). ThoHe that ketn H ,the ?5mu^^ and the chief men of the low caste (mu*t get) ono houfle(^) moh . (LI 4346) The fire hundred mato (o/Z^)and the reapeeiivo fliteH (nttar/mit 
to 
adverse fche times may be. 
ft.thc 
(LI. 48-33) Threeimprecatory verses. 
* d 
of th!8 word fa not clear 
,* p. 1263. 
prowdea oepta0a to the fine stated above for drawing out
THE HA.THIGUMPHA INSCRIPTION OP KH1RAVELA 71   
No. 7.--THK HA.TUIUCJMPHA INSCRIPTION OP KHARAVELA. 
BY K. P. JAYASWAL, ESQ., M.A., BABKISTEB AT-LAW, PATHA, AND PEOFESSOB R. D. M.A., BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY. 
This inscriptionin incised partlyin front and partly on the roof of the HStlugumpM, an artificial cave, on Urn Houthwn fucc of the Udayagiri, alow rangeof hills situated about three miles 'from Bl'uivan<>Avar in the Tun district of Orissa. It was noticed for thefirsi^time by Stirling in lH2f> and was published by Prinsep from an eye-copy prepared byKittoe in 1837.' In 1877 OunninKham published a tracingin the first volume of the Corpus Inscri&ionum IwKcoruw.4 In 1 880 the late Raja RajondraLala Mitra published another version of this in scription About, thin time a east of this inscription was prepared and taken to the Indian Museum, Calcutta Thn tintt reliable vcmon of the record was issued from the able penof the late Dr. Bhagvanlal Imlrajiin I8B. I" 1895 and 1898 the late Dr. Buhler proposedcertain come tiont' The fin* inlnxl impWHsionwas taken by the late Dr. T. Bloch m 1906 and sent to Prof. Shorn from whom it, pasH,d ou to the late Dr. J. E. Fleet, who published two short notes pro lin" Wrt*iu .mtinH in the readingof the 10th line.' In the same yearProf. Luders o 
ill k a- 'tho publicationof the text, KPJ. went to the cave and prepareda revised 
to gowith KPJ. and in 11, wo both exammed fj"^^^^^Govern cast i, now pr^rvodin tho Patna Museum. It is as J^^^kthe Pataa tion of tho original allowed it to be. Two ^^^J^d by KPJ. at Patna. la 
Muaouu, With tho helpof these matenals the study ^c^d ^Jed the results Of his ^^ 
. 
SchoUrH of Mr. H. D. Broil', typo1* to difficult to replace.-Ed.]. 
AfMif Atww*, Vol. XV, pp.313 f. 
J. A. ,S'. .,Vol. VI, pp. 1078.91, pi. LVDl. 
Pp. U7 f., SI8-101, l.'W ft'., pi. XVII. 
Vol. H, PP- 10 a'. in ^ion 2. pp. 1M-W. 
J. R. A. ft., 1010, pp. 242 ft. ami 824. 
,-. Vol. X, App., pp.160-61, No. 1348. 
"VoL m/pM. 
18 YoL IV pp. 304 ff.
72 EPIGRAPEIA INDICA.C VOL. XX.   
from the paper impressions preservedin fche Patna Museum.1 In 1928 some further notes we published by him in the same journal.* We have again conjointly examined the cast and the impressions and effbcted a few important improvements in the reading and explanation as offered 
below. Amongst notable contributions 02 the problems connecoed -with the inscription, we refe to the articles by Dr. Sten Konow" and Dr. F. W. Thomas.4 We have to thank our friend Prof. Anant Sadashiv Altekar for the help he has rendered to us in preparing the notes for thi edition. 
The Hathiguinpl)a appears to have been a natural cavern which was later on converted into a templeor residence. The roof consists of a huge boulder, and the inscription begins on the southern face but is continued up to a place where the stone has become actually the'roof of th9 cave. The last eight or nine lines occur on a sloping surface where it is difficult eitl-er to read or coP7 them. Both of us had to recline partly on our backs to read the portion from 'the rock Below the inscription the wnlls of the natural cavern have been chiselled straight and at places are as beautifully polished as those of the Barabar caves. Near the floor then are mu.drv rock cut pardons which do not appear to have been regular walls as they do not go up to the roof* In the dressed and polished portion of the side or the wall of the cave there are a numix* of kt r mscnptions (of about the 10th or the llth century A.D.) many of which contain proper nam winch are not of any interest." They prove, however, that the cave waa *ed 
^historical 
by pi grnns up to the 10th 
century and therefore it must have been considered Borne sort of a shrine I seems reasonable to expect that the great Jaina kin Khuravoll Tntrtd sacred 
~^^^^ 
nx indicted by 
ii^atdy* *position in in the 
and W,fo> (1 17 the , , 
d- 4), 
are to bo S,cn in - 
and Lnil2(\^, (] 4) TeT,& 
"placed by 
nty of ,JS?the dental has been use! but^er bl i <]' tw- (1. 2) and ?a?a. (1. 17) only With t the ligature in 
a(] ' 15) 
are 
~dental. These two cases are the cerebral in - 
r"Mld ifl to bo "' et 
tl)C 
*""" *"
o. 7,] THE HATHIGUMPHA INSCRIPTION OF KHARiVELA   
(L 17). The writing seems to have been done by three different hands, and it is possibly on this account that the forms of the characters sometimes differ. The first partof the inscription was written on a carefully dreased surface but after the 4th and 5th lines the surface was undressed ; and towards the end of all the lines after the 5th there are numerous chisel-marks which make 
the decipherment extremelydifficult. 
The la.iguage of the inscriptionis Prakrit. The use of ra, the affix o at the end of the nominativoH of masculine stems endingin a, and the absence of palatal a show that it is not M.iira,rilil or an? extern dialect of it, Throughoutthe inscription the dental has practically replaced all other sibilants. The doublingof consonants, even when necessary, bas been omitted. The centralisation of dentals is also to be seen, as in -p^rfchavadam (L 8). There is Uo an 
to approachclassical Sanskrit in certain cases, e.g., MahamegJiavahanena (I I) and mm ti (I !)> <^' Throughout the record the liquifactionof consonants is absent. This would that the record was composed by a man from Western India who wrote in a literacy t. "It IH quite possible that the record was composed bya Jaina monk from Gujarator the MahMHhtra who might have been broughtinto Kalinga by King Kharavela for the purpose ^Httioucdmi 10. The languageof the record is a verynear approachto the canonical Pah, But UH in Jaina flauraHonl, da in this dialect becomes dha, of. padJiame (1. 3), 'raSha* (L *), vitadha tfaradhwiri- (1. 7), Madhumm (L 8), BharadJuxuasa- (1. 10), VtaripaOu*- (I. 11), but not 
' 
n 5) 
taailcwes, c/:muift*a-(i.")-The eytraordinary form chavuthe (1. 5)is a graphic form o but Prakrit dtaA becomes oho in GfeytfK (L 16) which is a later Praknt form o . Ho abo Sanskrit MM. becomes tuny^k (L 18) instead of tunarn. Perhaps fw the intemiediate form but the changeof ta into yainstead of a u e.ceptionaU 
backed Kuliaua form, as t Kahmg-a (1. 1). itiree;d the curve ^s turned the curve 
wit, a circuit botton,, into a right angle, o/. -o the lengthoftho_ lc|,hand two right angles ms ead of 
or, 
****'' ^case of & also mfi.d two forms : ast ^(1. 9). Tbree different forms ca, be 
in Wto-, -rtH^o- (L 6) and the ater,- 
*^ ^ ^ ^.^ and paemnM. 
tho Maurya, an in p*4m^0-8) and distingihodin the case o and 
^J ^^(L ?)> Q{ c^s in tepa. ro^
(1. 4) ; (5) the transitionalas 
v, r 
be noted^the Kushana 
1. 8, 
the later form with angles o (L 8), 
altogethe 
o**M^ 
Soals in the case of Xa we End the Maurya general duct of the writing M^^-*boa tUt fch* 
fl in JfM^ and 
form in 
the angular form/ 
f. i*
g 
th length of the vertices bad not begtm n74 EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
belongs to the same periodas the earliest inscription from Mathurfi edited by Bilhlor1,and it cannot be earlier than the beginningof the 2nd century B.C. or later than (.hat of the 1st century B.C. For na, %a and other letters a reference is invited to the detailed pahwgraphical analysis by EDB, elsewhese.8 
There are two symbols, one over the other at the beginning, and one at tho end of the record. At the beginning the first symbol looks like a crown. KIM. identificH it with the Vaddha-mangala.3 The second is the Svastika. The last symbol w the Sacred Tree within a, square enclosure or railing. There is an elaborate system of spacing in thin record, the larger, correspondingto full stops. There is space before almost every proper name,. The smaller spaces indicate clauses of a sentence. 
It has been proved by repeated examinations of the rock that there is no date in u Maurya era in the 16th line of this inscription, as supposed by the late Bhovanlal Indrnji antl ourselves formerly. The date will therefore depend upon synchronisms. The first of them- HviirhroniHir.s is with Satakamni. It is now absolutely certain that tho family name of (he dvniistr founded bySimukaisSatavahanaandnotSatakarni.4 Tho NSniJghaj, inwript.ioriH supply the Juhcl /%J Simulca-Satavahano for the statue of Simuka. There were ntoru kin (Jian "on,, of M.u name of Satakarni, and the first king of that name is called Hiri Katukuiiini Imth <. his coin* and iu the label on his statue at Nanaghat. Subsequent t5atakan.iia with wh<w nmues we meet ia epigraphjcal records added their metronymics todisfcinguiHh Mumwolvwfrom their }>re<l(. (i( -H.sor 
Gautamiputra Satakarni, Vasishthiputra Siva-gri gutalcarui ami (Jautunuputra ,Srl Yajfm jff., 
batakarm It is therefore evident that this record refers to a &IUkan,i who wan a contemporary kmgm the Western regions. The name is not to be taken as a reference to au umdenlifk*! dynastic Me. And the only king of this dynasty who can afoiy be aeribed ti> tlu,peri,,<} when 
L N*3T-^GrfamIpUtra Satakar9i Jt is to l)e^^l that the long 
?-VU- ng **&**, the husband of Nayanika, and not (Jautm.uputra or 7,f \P^lule? gI Up d 6S not iaentio f'^ing or tho country of 
~~~ 
' 
by l dtaoo^
No. 7.] THE HATHIGUMPHA INSCRIPTION OF KHAKAYELA 73   
before the formation of the Sfitavahana empire covering the whole of Marafchi-speaking (e.g., Ba.rhii.tt, KhrurliMl, Northern Marifchl and KonkanI) area. 
The reference in the 6th line to the canal from Tanasuliya-vata, which was excavated in the year 1(W of K.in Nanda, will fix the upperlimit of Kharavela's time, like the reference to Muriya kaia (the, time of Muriyain 1. 1C). Chalukya Vikramaditya VI in the Yedarfive inscriptionis said to have wiablishcd hi f'hiilukya era after abolishing the eras of Vikramaditya, Nanda and Saku.vi Having wild'Why should the gloryof the Kings Vikramf.ditya and Nanda he a hind rance anv longer? ', he, with a loudlyuttered command, abolished that (era) which has the name of tfaka, and made that (era) which has the Chalukya counting".lAj.ain, we have the definite datum Mint Alberuni found in use in his time an era .with the initial year 458 B.C., which iiot-s back to the time of the first, Nanda king (Nanda Vardhana),2 The year103 of the Nanda c-a would correspondto !W> B.C. when the Tanasuliya canal, which Khara , ela extended to the capiud in the nth yearof IUH reitfn, was originally excavated. If we take this Nanda to be the last Nanda, Kharavela would be referring to (325 B.C,-103=)c.222 B.C. and not to anylater year. But we 'have Homi't.hinf,' more definite in the next datum, namely,the contemporaneitywith Baha satimita In Hue I a KJiiiravela reaches the Sugamglya palace, i.e., the famous Maurya palace at Tfituliinitra mentioned in the MudraraMasa* Bahasatimita is expresslycalled the Kin of Ma-'udha Now we know from coins that Bahasatimitra and Agnimitraissued coins of the same tn>c Thin much we may take as certain that the time of Bahasatimitra, whosoever Mw .uay be, is the Ural, half of the 2nd centuryB.C.* AshSdhasena, who belongedto the royal 
Lily <>f Adhih,,hhatra, dcHcribca himself as the maternal uncle of Kmg BahasaUmitra m the SxbhL inHrription,' aud Anhadhasena dates his record in the 10th yearo Odraka>= whom 
ShI lentiliedithaking of the Sunga dynasty. Bahasatim tra's corns have been ound at Ko am (KauttmW)' whh was a .tato on the borders of Magadha The characters of the 
at KOHIWU (^ /trntiHoimmhainscri-ption.8 As Bahasatimitra does not occur m the I abhow H < o, we )Kharavela's contemporary Bahasatmuta would belong to a pW H between 188 (,^^}&^n given^ the Pura^ themselves. 
fifth ku Ko ho line. In other worn ^^ ^ ^^^name rf^^^rule equally,<A,wih equa pa ^^^t^-^M^ inlB^to - 
putimitra m tlio KungaIirt. But weT6 ^ . the^VM saya that be made his 8 sons It Ls reportedthorn thatI^pa^* t gnitraat Vidisa with a separate court of hin own. Probablythe 6th son was ruling 
.,,,,.,,,..-i, U..B. l"St''"'tl.l^od.tumth.t vl .. nUed .t 
BhSrhut to"in the mgn*" 9 *"to. Tha Ti^J>. jlwe.in the imp.n.1 A.
EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
Brihaspatimitrais not in the royallist of Magadhabetween Agnimitra's on and Odraka, we shall be justified in taking him to a periodhefore Agnimitra'ssons succeeded to the Magutlha throne, i.e., to the time of Pushyamitra himself,1 
The most importantcontribution of the Hathlgurapha inscriptionis the synchronism ol Khara\ela with the Indo-Greek king Demstrios. This important dine-overy was iun.de in November 1919,2 and it was settled that after the phrase Yavana-mja comos the name Dimita. . . . . , Be7ond this name not a single succeeding word of the sentence can be road. Demet.ntm, HOU of Euthydemos I, is generally well-known as the conqueror of India. It i mentioned i:; a verse of Chaucer quoted nearlyhalf a century ago by Cunningham.Strabo refers to the faet that, the kingdom of Bactria had expandedin a remarkable way beyond its original limits and that the kings responsiblefor its enlargement were Demetrios and Menamler,3 Beyond HUH nothing could he said about the Indian conquestsof Demetrios before the dincoveryof the kinpfs name in the Hathigumpha record, Justin calls him the kingof the Indiana, He VWH probahlv driven out of Bactria by a rival king named Eukratides and had to Kettle down in Afghan iwt iin and India. The surest indication of his dominion over some partof India is the tune of the KhanVhth? script on some of his coppercoins with the use of the title Aparaji&a^ Unfortunately we do not know the exact date of Demetrios except through synchronisms, He conducted ne^oi-ia tions between his father Euthydemos I and Antioclms III of Syria aiui married the tattor'fl 
daughter. Therefore he must have been a young man towards the. cloo o{ the thin! century B.C. His Indian campaigns appearto have been undertaken when he had come, to the throne in mature age, and his coins show that he was between 30 and 35 when lib reign began.* Numismatists distinguish two Demetrioses, taking Demetrios II to be the aon of PemetrioH I.* It would be absurd to say that the Indian conquestsof the first dynasty of the Bactn>*Griu*k kings were made by Demetrios II. The Indian campaigns of Demetrios and hiw advance at Pataliputra are distinctly described in Yuga-Purci'tya of the Gargl-safkhita. Thtihifttoriral text of the work has been recentlycollected from different MSS. by KPJ.7 Section 5 contaiiiB the account of the Greek invasion of Pataliputra and a battle at that place.It is stated that after conquering Saketa, Mathura and Panchala the Greeks reached Kusumadhvaja, and at I'unh* papura, i.e., Pataliputra, there was a great battle fought on the mud-embedded western ramparts with engines (ballistae 01 catapultae), and the outlying districts became full of disorder. Further on (section 7) there is a mention of Demetrios as DharmainVta where it is distinctly stated that Ms officers would oppressthe people. Finallyit is stated that intoxicated with fighting the Greeks would not stayin the Middle Country and that there would be a furious civil war among themselves in their own country. This statement is corroborated by the Greek aecountB of the great civil war in Bactria and Afghanistan between Demetrios and his successors and Kueratides 
1 The objection of Prof. Rapson (Cambridge History of Mia, Vol. I, p. 537 note) that thftw in n Interval of 25 years between Pushyamitra and Odraka, and therefore Ash^haflcna, the maternal uncle of BfthawUiraitm, cannot be ^nnected with Batasatijnitra of Pabhoaa has not much force in a ootmtey where poopto marry than one *ite at the same time and where maternal uncles are often found to b much yotmtwr than their mephews. 
* It was announced by Sir 'Edward Gait m his presidential address to the Bih&r and Oriwa ReMtroIx Hoototy in 3920 (J. K 0. B..,Vol. VI, p. 5). The late Kao Bahadur H. Kriahnfc SastH did ndt notice tfci* dlnoovwry ven m 1922-^3. Cf. Annual Report of ike Archaeological Survey of India, 1922-23, p. 130. *Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, pp. 444-45. *Catalogue of the Coins in the Punjab Museum, Lahore, Vol. I, p. U, Ha* 26. 
8Cambridge History tf/ lndia> Vol. I, Pkte III. & 
Ibid.t p. 461. 
1 J, B. O, & 8.t Vol. XIV, pp. 397-421 and Vbl, Xt. p|i.
jja. 7.] THE HATHIGUMPHA '0SCEXPTION OF KHARAVELA 7?   
and the kingaof the dynasty founded by him. Therefore his mention in the Hathigumphi inscription proves definitely that KMravela must have flourished in the first half of the 2nd century B.C. 
The compilation (uySdayati) of the Atfoga* is described in line 16 as the crowning act of glory of Khiravela, This was undertaken and completed in the 13th year. Learned Jamas from all over India, were assembled in a conference (&amghayanam), evidently on the Kumari Hill of sacred associations, and they put together once more the scattered or lost sacred texts of Jainism. The Jama tradition asserts that in the reignof Chandragupta Maurya a Jaina con* ference was held at PH|ialiputraafter the 12 years' famine was over but that no agreement could be reached as to the restoration of the texta. Kharavela's wide conquests from the Paudya country upto the North-Western Frontiers and from the Mar.ltha country up to Magadhaand his consequent political influence made it possiblefor him to have the texts recompiled. That the term*Anga* denotes the Jaina canonical Angas is proved by the adjective'consistingof 64* {choyathi) t which, is a very difficult and mysterious expression. The Jaina tradition says that 64 letters make up the Jaina sacred literature. The Jainas at present give a mystic interpre tation, vide Mr. J, L. Jaini in hi* Introduction to the Jiv*-R]uw4a of the Gdmvwtasara at p.12. He says:"The knowledge of Sruti, Sruta^JMna^ may be of things which are contained in the AAgas (Limbsor sacred books of the Jainas)or "of things putside the Angas. There are 64 simple letters of th* alphabet. Of these 33 are consonants, $7 vowels and 4 auxiliary (which help in the formation of compound letters). The total number of possible combinations of these 64 simpleletters into compounds of 2, 3, 4, or more upto 64 letters is : 264-~1184,46>74, 
' 
40,73,70,95,51,615, 
41 These are the letters (simple and compound)of gruta in its entirety. This number bpmg divided by 16,348,307,888, which is the number of letters in a central foot (madhyamajMa) of the Par'amtgama (Sacred Jaina Literature), gives us the number of padasof the Angas,as 11 ,283, 68,005, The remainder 80,109,175 gives us the letters of that partof Sruta whiph is npt contained in the AAgas.This partis divided into 14 Praklrnakas '*. 
. In our opinionthe Jaiaas had an alphabetof 64 letters several of which were not actual we read"Ailya^ti^uri^minstead of Amga jtiW*)'**"*' w Wget the HI 
letters but symbols,, T. One school of the Jainas maintains that only11 Angaswere recovered altert^eloss, ing that the recompiled A%as were in two groups, Satika-saptiJca groupof seven texte Turiya . torfy* a groupof iou. texts, In anycase the Jaina tradition about the loss and recovery of the texts stands confirmed, and here we find another instance of of the Jaina tradition. The monfes honoured at the Kumar! B1I m the 13th 7* baras as they were given piecesol China-cloth (silk) (cUna-vatam ^^T^ tobes (v^Mni). KhiraveK by his religious enterprise, was emulatmg Chandragupta and Afidka, But posterity has completely forgotten him, 'i^s^^^^^^^'s^szt* * A. *. i iToK^rro a t,v which has now disappeared, layclose LO ^r:rpt:oTs:r^^^ 
^ujlbJrimft ii Krish^a-ver^*of the Baehfrakfita periodand-the BIOC 
nagaram was probablya city on the river Musi in its upperreaches near* W* On tho ooounoo of* 
Polity,' I, 212 ; </. Ortewon, UnfiiMfp Surrey of I***, VoL X, pt. 4,. -- 
The oonfluanflo of th JHM nd & on UM M4laUr POM* to ugge.ted
ante, 
78 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ yOL> XX.   
As to the peoples mentioned in the inscriptiontiie Ra^hikas are probably t.h Mah&rathis or tlte peopleof northern Maharashtra, i.e,, the inhabitants of the modwu districts of East JJhiindesh; Nasik, Alunadnagar, Poona and the northern taluku of Hholfiptir ; the Bhojakaa are likely the same as Mahabhojas, i.e., the inhabitants of theMjira^hi-speaking districts of the Central Provinces and Berar. 
The Tanasuliya or Tanasuliya-vata cannot he iclontificd bj- us. Vajiraghara remained under the same name till the 12th century A.D. when it is mentioned by KulMtun^a ChSja I or the Chalukya-ChoJa Rajendra Choja II, as Vayirfigara in the Tiruvoyj-iyflr Adhipurftvara temple inscriptionof the second year. It states that RajaWaarivarma?) alias Rajfridra Ch6]a II captured elephants at this place and defeated the king of Dhlira at Chakrakflf.fa. In the Pandaya-Perumal temple at Conjeeveram another Tamil inscriptionof tin- 5th y<-ur of the same king, who is called Rujakc-sarivannao alias Kulfittunga Ch<*]a I, infcmiw m that the king's vic tories at Vaijiragara and Chakrakotta were gained while ho was the hoir-appamit, '.., before 8th October 1070 A.D. Chakrakotta has been correctly identified by Kai Bahaar'niralal with Chakra-Kotya in the Bastar State of the Central Provinces. It i thtircfure certain that this Vayiragara is the same as modern Wairagadh in the Chanda district of tho flame province Kiel htorn restored the name Vayiragara as VajrSkara.^ Tho form Vajinyhara in thin record flhovs that the original form was Vajm-yriha or Vajm-ga&a in Prakrit which came to h written as 
KaSr^i M-,B Vhakl' a- K fra Md Waira^h aroo^Hrom Central Kalmga to Sonthern Malwa Goradhagiri is no doubt the anciont rmrno of the Bunlbar Hills in the Gaya distnct as proved by Mr. V. H. Jackson, I.E.S, the kte principal of the Patna C who, along wzth Mr Russell, discovered the inscription on bouMem r the M tern, giving the 7' 
U.- u h place was an 
^portantoutpost on the western flank of the anei.nt capital of M Jdh 
potion, of the diMrioft of 
Th, 
VdLm,p. 
Jol.I, pp. 160 and 161. 
see
No 7.] THE HATHIQCJMPHA INSCRIPTION OF KHAKAVELA. 79   
TEXT,* 
1 [T\vo symbols]BTaroo Ar[i]b,arfitatiaifc2[.*] Namo sava-SidkSnaxfaJ.*] Aireia3 Ma liarfijena MShimeghavahanena4 Clxeti-raja-Yasa5-vadlianena pasatha-subha lakh aneua chaturaiiita4ut;liita-gu^opahiteEa Kalimg-adMpatina6 siri-KhSra veleua 
2 DaAdarftRa-vasSni siri-ka<Jara^sanraVata kl^ita bimara-kldika[*] Tato lekhaa-rGpa^ga^anSlo-Yavahara u-vidliila-visaradena saYa-vijavadatena nava-vasam Yovarajatrfil" pas&sitaih[.*] Sarhpniiia-cbatu-visati-vaso tadani vadbamana1 *- aesayo Ven-Ibbivijayo15tatiye 
S Kali'hga-raja-va[iii]se purisa-yuge MaMraj-abMsechanami' papunati[*] AbM Bita-mato cha padhame" vase[,*] Tita-yibita-gopura-pafcara-Bivesaiiampati Bailikharsyati[;*] K^ihga-nag^KluMra.iBi^^^ta4aga.pS4iyocHa bam dli&payatif;*] sav-uyana-pa[ti]samt]iapajiamcha 
4 karayati plnatUUiata-iahasehi Pakatiyooka zaAj^itiC *] Dj^|> ^vaw achitayita SlWkattolrfx" pacibima-disam ^ya-gap^ara-radha-Mhulam ridar ptWP^CK^a-be^t-^-gatayacba senaya vatas^am M[uJikii-nftgwaaii[*]Tatiye ptina vase 
cha nikhita-chhata-.,._, 
bo 
Nagararfi pavesa[ya]ti[. ] 
saTa-kata-vanam 
[k 
Atabato [va?]pasadarkkSrayail
10 
11 
80 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ Vot. XX.   
12 M[a]gadhanarh cha vipulam bhayam janeto hathl Sugarhglyafrh] pSya* yati [;*] M[aga]dlia[m]3a cha rajanam Bafcafsajtixraitarh117 
payati[.*j Nariida-raja-mtaiii cha Ka[li]iiiga-Jinarh Msarfmiwfaa] 
[gaha]-rata[na]na[ra] pa^Iharehi89 Arihga-Magad&a^vasuiii cha 
M . ......... katu[ih] jathara-l[i]kMIa barni sihsrSnl nivesayati sata visikanam41[pa]rihareM[,*] Abhutam=achliariyaiii ehahathi-nivafa>pari saram42.... haya-]iat]u-ratana-[niamkam} Paxii4a4 ^rlja [cla^ecJioi anekSni] m[u]ta"ma^i-ratanaiii alxarapayati idha sa t[], 
J*.......... sino vasikaroti[,*] Terwame oh* vme supavata vijaya-ckaka-Kumri-pavate arahayate pa-klii^a-sai&[ai jnahi kIya-BidlyIya yapa-navakehi45xaja-bMtmi china-vatani vs[4]-s[i]t*mw[;*J pfijSnurata mvas[aga-Kha]ravela47-sirina jlv a-delia-[sm]ki parikhita 
15........ sukat[a]-sama^a-suviliitanaiii cba Bata-din&Mib ftanrilnaxb tapas[i]-is[i]naiii saibghayanaih^*] Arahata-ttisldiyft aaiwlpe pflbhfatt var-S kara-samuthapitahi aneka-yojan-&Wt5hi pa si, o 
16 ..... 
' Pa^alako chaturo ot*ve^flriya-gabhe thaifabhe patithS payati[*] panatarlya sata-saha86pu][;*] Mtiriym-klla^oc^liinarft cha 
; 
ctoyathM Amga-Satika[m] turiyaifa updayati[.^] Khenia-rj aa raja sa BMkhu-raja Dhama-raja pasa*M[o] 0unat[o] anubhavstfoj 
17 ' ' ''' 
,. , saara-karako 
NOTES OK THE 
I. I fufaib pto^ /. B. 0. B. ft, Vol.. m, IV A XIII. 
- TsrMiro( ^oi *f>th"- tfy^^^Z.^^
. atnarasaMa.^pBttbabjy ^^ ^.. 
-----^cr^^^^ 
far mKad period. B^^""*Baghelkha^ and 
. later 
in 
ol Bada^i. 
'Bhy, D
No. ?.]THE HATH1GXJMPHA INSCKlPTIOir OF KIURAVELA. 81   
are a branch of the YSdavas.* !fhe originof thfe CiiSAig is thus stated by Pargiter: VHtaWia of the Yadava dan had three sona named Bhlma Kratha, Kaifika and Lomapada."KaMika's son Ohidi founded the dynaaty of Ohaidya kings in Chedi.* "Prom Chidi the name of the clan as well EB that of the country became Chedi In the Bttddhist boots'Cheti is placed Wtw^en Malla and Varfwm indicating that the kingdom lay cloee to Kau&ambl in the Allahabad district, and it is very likely that modem B*ghelkha$<J was originally called Chedi fVasu, from whose line KhStavela1* family doHocndod (1, 17) w&s, however, not a Chaidya, but the conqtieror of the Chedi country. He wan fifth in descent from Kura who was the 72nd Aila( /. R. A. $., 1910, pp, 22, 26*29). The Jaina flmvamh^Pum^ also includes Vasu in the Alleya list and' as the son of the founder of (Jhali-rafihfra in thw Virtdhyas (/,J3. 0. R. &, Vol. XV, p, 277). K. P. J.] 
(S, Kdiwg*MipalinQ.~'<-rCkt term KaMga is usually applied to the northeim part of the Telugu-spcakmgdistricts of the Madras Presidency* In the PwatMs, Kalinga is associated with Anga (outh-eaHtorn Bihar), VaAga (eastern Bengal), Pu$<Jra (northern Bengal) and: Snhma (south-wcatern Bengal), The nauaos of these j&ve countries were given according to the names of the five sons of BiUiai.e., the fcr&dition treats the kingdoms to be eariy Aryap conquests and states. In the V&yu and tke Bmhrn^a-P^rS^aSt Kalinga is associated with the Mahisha country* (later BtEhishiuatl, modern Btahesor in the Indore State on the rivei IjTarmada). This text would indicate that Utkftla was included in KalMga in the time oi Kharavda and tha later narae 04^ had not come into existence. The Parade te,xts further indicate, that the torn Utkala waft appliedIn early times to the billy country .b^ween Gayl ( and Orissa^i.g., modem OhhofS Na^pur and the Qarhjat States, "The Saudyumnas had been almost overwhelmed by the Inaviw and Pauiwas, and were reatricted to the Utkalas and other clans which occupied the hilly tracts from Gayft to Orissa/*11 The transfer of the term Utkala to the plain country along the sea-board is therefore later..,. 
7, Sm-ka4Sra^arim^^.'^Kc4Sra mean^ reddish fair, accordingto Amara, and a sbve according to tha MidM* 11 it is a Prakrit derivation from katara, then it means"wo^ar<4 of A'Swin,1 *according to the Sab&mBte ( V(icha8<patyam). The explanation given in the Ataman AMa is more suitable as meaning"of beautiful reddish body." 
8, LeMm or Royal Correspondence,a manual of which was written in the time of the Ch]ukyw of AQAhilapfttyWft tmd has been published from Baroda,8 This lekha cannot refer to the art of writing- The subjectis dealt with in the ArfhaiMra of Kautalya.7 
9, Rfipa must be the equivalentof r&yya raea^g cuyre^y. In the present inscription the position of the word rftpa shows that the meaningcannot be anythingelse.8 The exact mean ing of the terra in made clear by the explanationof Buddhaghoshaon a passageof the Mahavaqga. The term is explainedthus ;**he who learns the rupa-sutm must turn over and over many Ktehapa$as/*ftFinally, the term rupa-dariaJcain the Artkatastra translated as ''Examiner of Coins*' shows that the term rflya was used in . oasqi ,afr >-the piesent faoaqpttcn with 
1Pargltor, Amimi Indian JKitorfeaZ Tradition, p. 102. 
aIbid., p. 109.' '' 
*Pargitot, DynattiM ofthe K&K Ag^ p 54, 
a PargHwf Alston* JnMm Nlttoriaal Tradition, p. 292. 
*Mysore edn, (4810), pp. 70-75,- ' ''' ',, ^ a CityMagliitmte who could reeognise ototo at a glance. Anmal *** <f *#fr*m*^af 
* ft la ImpoMiUi to llgiae M ht pMa learned acting. We dan eompto -the in th* Jdglm&rl oaw inmri}ition where ala9it may mean a currencyofficer, Tfce tarims aJo Mm * 
India* 100^-04, pp. 12840, It**. Ant.* Vbi XLVDl, p.MJ31 ., ^, 
* A JBL R, V<rf, XHI, p, 201''
82 EPIGEAPHIA INDICA.[   
reference to currency. The term did not refer to silver currency alone but to other metals also as we find the terra tamm-mpa in the Arth&&asir&*1' 10. Ga^na. This term occurs in the Ar&atSstra and ha* been translated asAccountancy. An entire chapter has been devoted to it there and tho subject Is explained in detail It is cer tain that this term could ncfc have been used for elementary mathematics in this inscription as supposed by Biihler. Knowledge of lekha, rupa, and gawn& is here coupled with that of law and learning and refers to a post-boyhood period. 
11. Vavahara.VyavaMra meaning Civil Law or Municipal Law as opposed to 12. FAZW or Eeligicus Law which is mentioned in Sanskrit legal literature as nositi 
injunctions.* "wve ^ 
13. rowr^a*7autwi/yam.-T8varaiarh shows the nhortonin* of the Internal medial grapwc lighteningof double 
*he incisi n f these two wor(la they 
rr ese in thi8 
posed m the translate u adopted for want of a better one. There may I* a pun i the UBS of the Word wfiMiM which is the eaUy natre of the last sitrr*shws*? tins lane thethe sentence is in the act- **> * oo -t Af forms are generally causative7 
^ 
te settled in Centra] ga' whose waves are brackhh '=the 
Ai} atoek held^Ganges and the 
country k-WB* the Rljpub5aa desert and 
Berth and East BibEr and Bengal propel-in he u generally recognised to be the xaodern BerSrThe ^ 
^ it is an 
84, Engl. trano., *
but tb. dynast, ^^oof the Kh5ravdtt G^M*'one to he- an^or ^
othap kin of the 
Ma*lcUui' the 
in t}w 
C Untl7 of Vidarbl 
So. 7.] THE HATHiaUMPHA INSCRIPTION OF KEARAVELA. 83   
19, Kotiitya>nagari.~~The capital of the Kalinga country, very likely now represented by Kaliftgapatanamin the flanjam district. The ancient capitalof Kalmga, accordingto the tradi tion prevalentin the Chioacolc taluk of the Qanjam district, was swallowed up by the sea. Frag ments of bas-reliefs of the Maurya period with the well-known protuberance on the head-dress have been, however, discovered by RDB, in the temples of Mukhalingesvara and Kurme&vara in the locality. The coast fiom Chhatrapurara to Masulipatam is subjectto great cyclonesdur ing the north-eantern monsoon and the majorityof ancient sites on this coast are buried in drift sand. 
20, KkiWra-iri*t8la."~W* have examined these two words very carefully on the rock, cs tampages and caata. The leadingis perfectlyclear but no explanation seems to be possible unless Khiblra is taken to bo a proper ntme of a IJishi who excavated the tank or lake or after whom it was named* In that case, the phrase will have to be taken as referring to a particular tank while tafilya and piltfiyo will refer to artifical excavations. 
21, P&t}iyo'"-**$kh P5Zf#,"~-Perhaps the same as the Podhiyaoi Western India, of. Pd%4u U'QM cave No, 10, inscription No, 10, 1, 3.1 
22 jSatafca/ftniwi. Evidently Sri Satakartji, the third kingof the Satavahana dynasty, Ihd husband of queen Nayanika of the JSCilnSgMj; inscriptions in the Junnar tduk of the Poona district, 11|"A to tho $atakar$i whose architect VflsSjjhiputra Inanda gavea t5raya tostufa ' 
Ko. I at SUchi see J. S. 0. JZ. &, XVI, p, 284. IL P. X]''' ' 
23sira^a*2w?A#&-'*~th6 Sanskrit KpshyavSn! or the modern Krishna which rises near Dhor in the S&tM district. The river flows throughthe Satara, Belgaum and Bijapurdis tricts and the KolhSpup and HyderabadStates into the Bay of Bengal throughthe Krishna district of tha Madras Presidency,It forma the boundary of, the Nizam's State from Alampur near Kamfil to Natidiglnia in the Kistna district. The rise of the Kpsh^J and its particular sanctity are doncribad in tha POMlfrkhawfa of the Padmapuraria.* The earliest epigraphical reference is to be found in this inscription and the second in the Nasik inscriptionin cave No. 10 of tho F&wlultyjA group wher it is called Kardbena* In mediaeval inscriptionsit ia called Kfbhw*VitQqA>* There is ao doubt about the fact that Kharavela reached the Krishna omewhre in the long and erratic course of that river. It is possible that he went west wards because the term pmhMm<Kwrh W expressly mentioned. But it is uncertain as to where ha reached the Kfishi^i, , ,, 
24. Murikfrnagarv. The Mflshikas ftre a peopleol Southern India as in the MaMbharato they are mentioned along with the VMOTISM.' IB the mtfa^Mm of Bharata they are pio bably coupled with the 2Wob* and the KMatos under the name UMfaJ In the FM^*- Purk<a the Mfisika country comes with the Strl-rajya. Accordingto the commentary Jaya mfygM on the XAnovttm of Vatayfiyana,the latter was a kingdomin the western partof the Vindhya country.1 * There is a river Musi which joins the Krishna about the Nalgonda and the districts. It is mentioned under the same name in the inscriptionof the Bashtrakuta 
' 
Mnfc, VoL VIII, p. 78. , ;, . J. Ji. 0, R. 8,, Vol. HI, plate8. As to tke letter-fort of mi ijfacriptton reference may be mad* w tto 1* * r > M^^vo A K "R Vol X DD 1SI U< !- PoteoffmpJiy c/ Me HatMgumpha and Nawghat Iiucrtptvme, Mtmmr* A. *. -o-, voi. "*_ 
lH proved eUcwher* that b*tt Mid earlier forms oil the ohnraoter nsed in an inscnptaon depend m tt on locality. 
An&ndUram* edition (1884), pt. 4, VI, US, p. 1467.' A*. Vol. VHI, p.78. 
* j* v^i t/T 0118 J5AwAifl^parwof Uh. IA, 
fvrrT u /vi.MM it ^M^, *, iiflN A6.J8flmflW*w3Dlf*s^
nfilWwt VQ1 V* / nwAJl* , __ _ tl/rEPIGKAPHIA INDICA.j-yOL(   
Govinda JI of the gaka year 692=769 A.D.* It is quite probable that the on this river.2 
25. ^V^^-m/a.-The readingis absolutely certain and the phrase should bo 
_ 
with reference to tatiye Kalimga-raja-mme. 
26. BatM^Bbjate stand for the MahSrathis and Mhi 26. BatM^Bbjate stand for the MahSrathis a.nd Mahiibhojas of SiKaviihana an* inscription, ha rnmor jnscnpfaonsof the same period at KaoMri, K^Ul and Bed5. The RftthikL Z
a Mah b, 1S also caljed a Mah_r_.a^^ ^M 18 are mentioned in five votiveinscriptions in' the K i cave l 
s ^rzedtrrrp]ate inscription f the paiiava ki * ^habhoj 
' 
" "Irn<"1 tow "1" 
" ""' "'"" 
^'^tfSk-^^^
No. 7.] THE HATHIGUMPHA INSCRIPTION OF KHAEAVELA. 85   
mentions a people called Avarni or Aruarrti near the Krishna. It is quite passible that the city of Pithurhda mentioned by Ptolemy as Pitundra (Ind. Ant., Vol. LV, p. 145), was founded by 
these people (J. S. 0. R. 8., Vol. XIV, pp. 15 ).v 34. PtthuMa, According to Ptolemy, a city in the upper part of the Coromaadal coast. This i-ity has perhaps to b taken as the capital of the Ava or Avarni. 
35. Tramira or Tamira is the equivalent of Tamila just as Aira representsAila. It has boon pointedout that Tamil ia the origin of Dravifct and of Drarmla.1 Tremila would thus bo a perfectlycorrect substitute for Dramila. 
36. Mayadhcah. We have examined the rock very carefully. The cast of the inscription in the Patna Museum shows that the word cannot be Muriya aa proposed by Dr. F. "VT. Thomas.2 The chisel -cuts of the letters are still clear though the decay of the rook surface has made im pressiona of this partof the inscription smudged. 
87, Bahusatimitam. The act in the word is of the later 2nd centuryB.C. typein which a clear right-angle has been formed in the right limb of the letter and therefore it looks more Eke >pn than *. Tho reading is absolutely certain. 
38. KnKthga-Jinn perhaps raeaaa SitalanStha who was born at Bhadalapura, whieh is the same as Bhadrapura* or BhadrSohalam in the GSdavari district of the Madras Presidency. 3i). pa^ikSrohistands for pratMraih. The da denotes its difference from fcenharain 1. 9. 40. Arbya-Magodha. The meatioa of these two provincesindicates tha* the campaign of tho 12th yoar was peoiIlydirected against South BihSr whibh now includes the ancient pro vinces of Aftga (BhSgalpur and Monghyr districts) and Magadha (Pfctoa, Gayaand partof Hazaribagh dintrict). 
41. *^o-OT*tfanoA--Th readingia aot doubtful though rt was read slightly dnlerentJjr bfor. Th rcfewnoe seems to be to architects (wvtmJcas). 
42. halhi-nwa9<>paritarttrh.~-ma reading of the second wowd of Hie phraseis more reliable than the previous one (kathi-nSvaw-pariyumrk)* m&8<*=*mn8sa.* Th* rferrce seems to be to elephant pwserresor same original form of kheda arrangement, *prente4 by Kh5rvela. The elephant*of Kallngawere Tcy teamtf in ancient India. Th* strengthof KMrvd& pro bably lay in elephant*. He toot the fort of PSfaiiputra with tier telpof elephants. 
the groat Dravidian ela* is Pi^ya and is derived from X^by;,j*l^of eariy gram 
4. P^.^.-ror the tottx /, roHf m 1. 15, !* Sawfateed version of the nwne of 
naariaas. la the iwcriptionsof Asoka also the vowel in the first syllable long. 44. P-H-*o*Wlt.-The reading seems to be tolerablycertain oa the rock, though it loola 
45 
aA 
.* Vol. XLIIX ?. 04- 
* JM. M.. VoK H, 
Put Kmi 
*rdll^owHit *) -45. P 
JTF. ^. rf-, 1922, p. 84. 
v/. Kamandakfya-mtisa'ra, XV, 7 
y. Vol I, P- H*. whew he cite* J*iim tests' "
86 EPIGKAPHXA INDICA. [ VOL, XX,   
49. Simdhuldya. The recognition of the corebial la is duo to a suggestion of Prof, H. Liideis. In other cases the cerebral la is changed into ra in the dialect naod in this inscription. 50. sata-sakasehi. This reading was fully established by us when we examined the rook jointly in November 1919. This reading along with the reading of the paaaage Amffa&,etc* brings to a close the long controversy about the existence of a date in the Maurya era in this inscription. 
51. [The read'ng Rajasi-Vasii-Ma has been corrected by me (from -Mna-kula) after Mr. Banerji's death. King Vasu of Chedi is known to the Pura^as (see Jt K. A, 8., 1910, p. 22; JOA,, I. ch. fl3). Cheti-rataP in 1. 1 refers to King V,:su, The inscription hero confirms the Pnranic genealogy. The Jaina Harivamia Purd^a also gives Vasu in the Clifldi list (Oh VII) and as an Aiie^a. /,' B. 0. R. 8., Vol. XV, p. 277, K. P. J.] 
52. mnisrito. This is the only instance of the use of thepalatal fa in this record. The form is certain both on the rock and impressions. 
TRANSLATION, 
(Line 1) Salutation to the Arhats (Ankats^lli.<Conquerors of Enemies ,* if Jina ) Salutation to all the Siddhas. By illustrious KMravela, the Aira (Aija), the Great King* the descendant of Mahazna^havahana, the increasor (of the glory) of the Chati (OhMi)' dynasty, (endowed) with excellent and auspicious marks and featuras, poiaemctd of virtues which have reached (the ends of) the four quarters, overlord1 of Kall%a (t^frftee\^Bj 7ith BbodJrra*d7 Md handsome were playedVouthwiwi sports; alter that (by *,,^o)had mastered (royal) correspondence, currency, financ^ civil and r*li. 
lf 
gious laws (and) who had become well-versed in all (Jnmrfet) of learning, for mm years (the *ffi<* h^77f^as ad^i8t^d. Having completed the twmtrfoitrth 
time, ( kej who had been prosperous (wOom**) since Ma Mmey (!) md whci 
< 
to have wide conquests as those of Vena, 
coronfttion in the 
instmnMn^ "befow 
"3Kbi*W1 Dfts^ 
^
No 7 j THE HATHIGIJ V1PHA INSCRIPTION" OF KHASAVELA. 87   
"tmv stron" in cavalry, elephants, infantry (nara) and chariots (ratha) and by that army li vinsr reached th<> Kaftha-bo iiija, he throws the cityof the Musikas into consternation. 
Agau. 
(L 5) (Ac) vera<td in the science of the Gandharvas (i.e., musics-entertains the capital with the exhibition of <tapa,1 dancing, singing and instrumental music and by causingto be held festivities and assemblies (um&jt) ; similarlyin the fourth vtar, '-the Abode of Vidya dhara*' built by the fonaor Kalingan. king(s), which had not been damaged before ........ 
......with their coronets* rendered meaningless, with their helmets (?) (Mma)1 cut in wain (I), and with their umbrellas and 
(I, 6) Mm/am* ea*fc away," daprivedof thoir jewels (i.e., rcetana, Skt. ratna, preciousob all the fUpiika* ami Bhojakas (he) causes to bow down at his feet. Now in the fifth . b -inaw into tho capital from the road of Tanasuliya'the canal excavated in the year one 
unrodJtto of King Nauda' ...... :;'....... Ha * bee"^)aU0' inted (A wWte) ^^tating the EajasQya,remits alltithes and cesses, 
(L 7J bJtowi many privileges* (amown^ to) hundreds of thousands or tixe City-Corpora the Kalm-CorporatioD . In the seventh yearof his reign,his famous wife of Vap 
obtained the dignityof auspicious motherhood............Then m the aghth f Ac^ wit,h a largo army havingsacked Goradhagiri 
'(L 8) eauTes pr^ure"on R&Jagaha (Eajagriha). On account of the oud report of 
wore 
No, 348) ^a KOB^T (.loto 0n**taK*. Vol. I, p. ) m fav^of interpret- 
jfMM**1 >t^J^lI^hew(A0. S. &, VoL XIH, pp. 237-238). Soch 
' Th oplnloaof LUdew (IM Mo."^"^JJ,. aooepfibte'to F^^ * * * "^*^ns of 
103f^ . namtor. re not untoowu ia VWo ^^^^ticjl (asjukys VikramSdity. VI (Bo**** 
ol King Nwid'. On Nl era, ""JJ" ^ Q curreat^the time of Alberum, the dkoua t Vol. I, Ft. U, P. 43) d TBSr5 Soeie^ (Vol. XHI, pp. 237-241). 
to ubjob in the JoW 
. JP(^o.~^th*dii Mioa<th^Mt "^^^^materials. The queationof identi 
.- - > 
y M orpmte body iai now put beyond w^ ^^ Thj8^^ ^Gnpta ^*^KthStw^ole^SomeWseaUofNaianda'-WO Probably 
'"^: 
[I ^"J^J^K^S local Jafl ajxA.In the HatMgumpha 
tto oeatna /AHpto *" *^up d ^^^7*^ to one 
,L. ,)V TTOfctto meaning*- 
down, inflict. *, sacks V W - * b coutmted
EPIGRAPH!! 1NDKA. VOL. XX,   
(L. 9) Kalpa1(wiBh-faifilling) trees, elephants, chariots with their drivers, houses, resi es and rest-houses. And to make all these acceptable (he) givesat a fire sacrifice (?) exemp tion (from taxes) to the caste of Brahmanas. Of Arhat. ................................. (L-10) .................. (He) causes to be built ---- a royal residence (called) the' Palace of Great Victory (Mahavijaya) at the cost of thirty-eight hundred thousands. And in the tenth year (he), following (the time-fold policy) of chastisement, alliance and conciliation sends out an expedition against Bharatavasa (and) brings about the conquest of the land (or, country) ........ and obtains jewels and precious things of the (kings) attacked. 
(L- n) ................ And the market-town (?) Plthurhda founded by the Ava King he ploughs down with a ploughof asses ; and (he) thoroughly breaks up the confederacy of the T[r]amira (Dramira) countries of one hundred and thritecn years,* which has been a source of danger' to (Ms) Country (Janapada). And in the twelfth year he terrifies the lanes of the Utarapatha' with.................. thousands of 
(3f J2)'............... And causing panic amongst the people of Magadha (he) drives (M elephants mto the Sugafcglya' (Palace), and (te) makes the King of Magadha, Bahaati nuta, bow at his feet. And (he) sets up' (the image)'the Jina of Kalixhga which had been 
. N 
by King Nanda.................. and Cause8 to be b hfc ho|M^ 
token 
away 
Amga 
Magadha along with the keepers of the family jewels of.................... 
and 
* T nS) givtDg ttem exemption fr m land*'A d a wonderful marveUous enclosure^ stockade" for drivingin the elephants^) ...... and 
...... (He] builds excellent towers ^h ca^ed interiors and creates a 
" 
(L" 3) ' 
" 
4" 
I' 
a 
" 
', 
rfi 
i 
numerous pearl8 i 
^sxs?"jKiSor^ *Mw>rd% ^"==^2=== 
wnte. of to th*^JL^JS2*SSi Mkrit rr8* is MI> foiiow'd * j^attoohiBg to tte tem Mji?te mongBt^iPf bably OWin * ** "IfBlflowwe *Iwdy * me*n"3 y<MUH- not P oW to conformity with the tater- 
' A* the ^oord Jf1 *"Tf* SBm' W ^~K. P.> J.J ^..^ ,vw iwuuionea in t&v Mudrar&fahasa / A** rm'*?i.*^\"' ** * 
fortified palace. v^" A^TlA'fl entry by meaaa ^j 6JbpJto*it* mpm wm> I* WM a This must have been near or on the 0^es K3k" i>^ft8P<a3liao6 of 
- . _ r^~ ~~-~ MwHt'is/v euu\f\jLv vijK Bftftnino1 rvr +! x _x j-T ^p, nmnw.HH WWMII VVVWUWJA ora is enoksure pr stockade.* ^^^ *^ 
' ^^^*** ^*A*%f aa wirodia of ^iibaato (XV, 7). wrI 
u^w?wfot%< ott iwrt^^ Oj |Jejjyyj^ ^y^ y^-^ 
>r stockade. 
^jwia.w/aya-oftaAa; Skt suwa^^i^
No 8.} KAP COPPER-PLATE OF KELADI SADASIVA-NAYAKA;SAKA 1479. 89 Coffers respectfully*royal maintenance*, China clothes* (silks) and white clothes3 
' 
) l^e extinguished the round of lives/ the preached t the Belie Memorial, By Kharavela, *. 
'vil')" quarter's,''the monies (*aW)of gooddeeds and who have fully'Mowed.<* 
*a a layman devoted to worship,is realised (the mtore of) jw and deka' IT un briMing about a Council* of the wise ascetics and sages,from " 
*?1i.'. . ^r the Belie Depositoryof the Arhat, on the topof h 
hundred ("I 
*...* 
stonea brought from many miles (yojana*) 
hill,'with 
mines (he builds) shelters" for the Sixhhapatha Queen SiadHufci 
"' 
PafakM?) (Ae) sets up four columns inlaid with teryl.. 
at the'cosVif ^eniy-flvehundred thousands ; (b)causes to be compUed e^ouslyAe is'ii^^^^^^^^^A^-Kling of Prosperity, /T 17^ .....*.. COO*nP*loAJL^W'J"* CA.W*WW*****- /- *t ,, ^jSrri^--^
seeing 
the Great co^eror, the King,the illustrious Kharayela. 
No. 8.-KAP CX)PPER-PLATE OF KELADI SADASIVAWAKA ; UKLW*. BY N. LAKSHMINARATANEAO, M.A. 
that yeara No. 8 of Appendix A 
-.^ btter -ivea a more reauonable meaning. ^^theeftrlie8t referee to the .* 
formerly red aa WM-*- "worn   
- Ski,"" -t^ J** P* 
- 8k*. KMtoTtti- . .. j,.'<! interpretedin ^tew of fl wto l*tw on oonnoted with the SvSUmba * 
* VII); 
:tS:i^*r-j?s-^ir oWM ua^*ye4ifiii*Il^/i^l^1 
by J. L. J*fBl, Introduotion, p.
90 EPIGRAPKIA INDICA.   
"The plate which is rectangularin shapeis 16*4" long and 11*5* broad. At the top of the plate, just in the centre, there is a flat projection 1*4* broad and 1" high shaped into the form of an arch. There is a small hole in the arch through which passes an ordinary copper ring 175* in diameter. The plate has sufered a slight damage at its proper right corner at the top. But the writing on either side is in good state of preservation. The plate with the ring weighs 230 tolas, 
The language of the inscriptionis partly Sanskrit and partly Kannacja. The first six verses are in Sanskrit and the next six in Kannada, the rest beingin Kannada prose. The Kannada verses are defective both in diction and in prosody. The record is written in Kannada alphabet and is rather indifferently inscribed. The letter wt is often written like ra and it is not_easyto distinguish ya from ru (as in Timmarasa inline 17). The aspirates are generally d^tinguished by means of the" vertical stroke at the bottom except in the caso of dha The secondary form of va is sometimes used (wlla in 1. 36 and vurolagein 1. 37). With respect to orthography : (,) the consonants are invariably doubled when they art, preceded by rgp/ia (tt) the nasal is generally changed into an anusvdra before consonants of the same class (Hi] the consonants are freely used in place of vowels (e.g., ye for * in 1. 21 and m for o in 1. 14) J 1h letter sa is sometimes wro-no-lv used for sJia (11. 8 and 42)" * v * * * - * 
The 
the inscription is to register a grant of land made by Madda-Hegffade the 
^object^of 
"* 
details correspond regularly to A.D. 
Verses 3 to 6 describe 
to 
* br 4 Sunday 
V ?MB|*( Ma^v1). tho 24th Jina. Htou who belonged 
extol the donor 
tell us nothVW8B8' wUcil foUw' ^^except that ha bdonged to the 
The inscription then states that varaya, was ruling the (F was the ruler of the districts f 
?t Wn f KSf)'<Vv" 7' 12 ') flUt9MBt f kin 
* 
~ 
__ 
ina^meaaiBg.aem%f 
- wwnw or A*a*T^ta * <**y*y, v**aawday,
,. 8J KAP OOPFEE-PLATB OF KELADI SADASIVA-NAYAKA ; SAKA U79. 91 situated ia the villageof MaHSru and yielded an income of 80 tw^.x TMs income, it states   
was to be utilized for the daily riceoffering, for the Mlu-dhare(milk-bath*) and foHwffi?Xassembly (of^) on the 1 7th and 25th day. of every month. Provisio^ "al So mlde^expensesto be incurred when either of these days happened 60 he a M,dgala(a)^rayodadl Mmi Chawaviwajl from Poona has kindly pointed out thai;, according to the colophon of tie Digambara Jama ^ork Yamharaekariya, Mangal^trayod^l is the 13th day of tie dark fortnightof Aftvina. 
Sad&iva-N&yaka of the record was the first prominent chief of the Ikkiri-KeJadi family which held away over the whole of South Kanara and parts of the Mysore State from the 16th to the 18th century A, D.1 Since very little is known about liim, a short account of his career may be givenhere. He was the elder of the two sons of Chauujappa, the governor of Malla desa, the younger being Bhadrappa. Soon after SadaSiva succeeded Ms father, his first act was to reduce to submission by the order of RSmarSjayya, who was the de facto ruler of Vijayanagara, the kings of Bijapur and K&IyS^a. Immensely pleased with this achievement of Sada&va, the emperor appointed him governor of Chandragutti, Barakuru and Mangaluru, besides bestowing 
on Mm the title of JT^e-A^oAaiIa8(disturber of forts) and the privilegeofaffixing the term of honour rSya-n&yakato his name. SadaMva's next expedition was against the rebellious chiefs of ChaudraguttI and Bldar and in recognitionof his achievements he got the biruda of $o*m- #ajp3%a/*ampk He next put down the chiefs of Tuju and Kira}a and set up a pillar of victory. Shortly afterwards, he punishedthe defection of two chiefs named Ye^ava and Muriri in the country of JUihl)u and received as a reward the title of Yetjava-Murari from tie emperor. Sometime later, ha marched against Midarasa of Baaklpura and took Mm prisoner. By this time SadSiiva* youngerbrother Biadrappa who had gone on a pilgrimage came back. "After governingthe provinces conjointly with his brother for sometime, Sada&va nominated him as his successor with the surname Immadi Sada6iva-Nayaka and retired to the forest/'' i 
The tf *t of SadliiirarNftyaka may now be ascertained; Our grant is dated in Saka 1479 (A,D* 1658). Ths latest date available for him, w.f Saka 1486, Dundubhi5(A.D. 1562) is furnished by a record at Ms^igtokSrinear BSrakftr. AndSaka 1473, Sadhara?afi (AJX 1550) is the earliest date that we have for him from Ms inscriptions. In fiaka 1488, Kshaya7 (A.D, 1508) Immacp SadiAi^Niyaka is known to have been ruling, Sada&va-Nayaka must, therefore, 
have ceased to rule sometime between A*D. 1562 and A.D. 1566. So the periodin which he flourished may be taken to ba A- D. 1560-156!?* he djats ^smgiiedto him by Eica, m&.9 A, D* 151S-1545 is, therefore, not correct,8 Here it is necessaryto say a word about Immafli plaot ia tlie genealpgy of the Kejadi fa-imly. Though a 
* A iwAJb Is 4wl to ^wpees* 
an account ol thta fAm% oa A. A B. to IQli-tt, PP-^*'** Bwe^ Mysore d 
ol wMdh, m act otaur*' ^','^. v' ;;' ', m otham Mfollow are fo^d in most of 
^d on JToiHto * Jfcw^iV of 
edited bj Meww, B. Enmn %*<*, MX, IL.B. and Vidvan F. 
* No, 168 ol 1001, 
If* Cant., VoL VIII* 
. 
Qmypom Zmetiirtton** table on p.
92 EPIGBAPHIA INDIOA.[Voi. XX.   
of his inscriptions1 has been discovered he has not been included in the table* of the house published by Eice, perhaps, because his relationship to other members of the dynasty was not known to that scholar. Now the work Sivatatvaratnahtm enables us to say that Inunadi Sadasiva-Nayaka was the younger brother and successor of Sadasiva, 
The sage Bhanu, who has been highly eulogised in the record, must have been one of the 
^ 
Jaina teachers of that name who were replaced by Lalitakirtis in about Saka Iii86.8Nothing is known about Devachandradeva at whose instance the grant was made, his guru, Munichandra deva and his guru Abhinavaderaklrttideva. With regardto the geographical names occurringin the inscription, the village Mallaru may be identified with Malluru in the Udipi Taluk; Bejuguja is the well-known Havana 
Bejgoja k the Mysore State; Kopana is KopaJ, a famous place of pilgrimage of the Jainaa in the Nizain's Dominions; Parvata is probably identical with Srfsailam in the Kurnool Dis trict, which is one of the twelve great centres of Saivaworship.* G6kar*a in the village of that name in North Kanara; Tirumale is the celebrated Tirupati in the Chittoor District tTjjantagiri, which appears astJrjayat-giri in the JunSgadh inscription of Eudradaman ia the Mount Gimar on which there is an ancient temple of NSminStha.' TEXT. 
First Side. 
^^^^ 
t^^ 
6 
I akhamda.sri.tap6-lakshmi.nayak5 Bhtou-^yaml || [5*] Srlmad 
bana-^-vrajah 
aaukhy-arnn^av, magnayan" |, [6*] T+** 
*Mp. <7or,, Vol Vffl, ftpr 2, 3 aad 4, 
1Jf^sore antf Coorp, p. 157^ 
Aboy, VoLVni.p.m^f.n^. 
Eead
No, 8.] KAP COPPERPLATE OF KBLADI SADASIVA-NAYAKA ; SAKA 1479. 93   
11 pamguja-bali adhipatiyatm poin-galasade(a) nelake ilw. nyipa-ku]a-tijakaiiiI saifagata sabheyoju 
12 po[ga}gu]rhAtiigaja-jayaJina-pad^bja-madhukaran-errLbaiii || [8*] BhU-deviya mukha kaihnacjibadftrfi [hlva> 
ii t..<tA RilniiV'-eiiiHicla naujaraih ! ildaradiiiinwadaTo[lga] mSdini-mata*Dliarmmanatliaa= XO IJipijW <****['**F r ^ 
ena(Hfi)suih Jinapam || [9*] A-nagara 
14 kk=adhipatiyum &rl-;pati Tiru[ma]raaa-n?ipa [a]vanl-tilakain |vSmanadali1 atanuih v5ta karaih Mukti-La 
15 kshiuig-'ittaih manamarh || [10*] YSn-einbe Madda-Hegeade d5na-chatu[r]-widhakketane chiiiita-ratnath BaniBu(nnu)tf a-guiia-gaiia 
16 nnilcyarh" urhnnata'^tlavanu talda [n^pa-ripu-sarnaaramII [11*] Dhaimmadojam [dpdta]- hittanu nirnutiala t . . 17 guru-bhaktiyalli Tirumarasa-miparii Dharmma-JiDa-Jama^asanamam vom-mandua tanu 18 dmtn^LiM ILW*| Svasti Sri [II*] Jayadbtudaya* Saiivahana-Saka-varska 1479 19 A* Kftrtt'ika^i^ddLii Adityavaradalugrlffia^maliaraiadhirajaraiaparameSvarasaiya- 
^ 
8 Mikrit, Kd wrwa oth*r JMn* t^h-*EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [Vou XX,   
32 varugalu tamma guru Munichamdradevarugalige svargg-Spavarggakke karaijav-agi 
Kapina 
33 lu dharmmavanu mSdabek-erhba cMttadimda Tirumalarasarada Madda-Heggafcyaia 
kum(ku)- 
34 $eyu avara najinavaru ga$a-[p]a$a-samamtara kutjeyu KapinaIxalara sahayadira 35 da dharmrnakke vomdu kshetravanu ko4abeku yerhdu ohittaisal-figi avarugaju dharnima*> 36 paii^ama-svarupavanevullavar=ada karaiia guru-bhaktiyiiiida tamma aluieya* 37 lu Ma^ajr^emfca [vujr-olage padu[ya*]$adikkinalu Kajarutopatina bajkeyalu agaji 38 mda volagebettina gadde1 kkam bija ba}{a mu[ra]ttara lekkada batba mQ4o ii rnattaify a 
39 galimdam borage Papinadiy-emba ga[dde]1 kkazh bija bajja mflvattara lekkada bija 40 mu^e 4 mattam bagila gadde1 kkam bija balja muvattara lekkada mu^e 4 gadde iiiii 
Second Side. 
41 rakkam bija miide 10 I bhuroigaligevulla kare mure mane bavi talasu ralvu BU 42 ihbe nikkilurkkamrdde kadiiu jala pa&a(ska)$asalia mula-dhaxeyanu yera(oredu) ko 43 ttu yisikomda do$$a vara(a)ha ga 80 aksha(a)radalu yeriibhattu vara(a)ha yl ho* 44 nnige yeradu be]eyalusalia varsha 1 kke baha akki arfigac^ya korigeya 
48 baj[}]a aiv^ttara lekkada akki mu4e 24 I akkige nacjUva dhamxmada vivara Kftpiua bast)* 46 ya kejagai^a neleyalu Dharnuxia-Tirtha[iQ*]kara-saniiidIiiyalu madhyShna-kS!ada!u nityadar 47 lu dina vomdakke voihdu bajja akkiya naivedyakku [Mu]niohamdrad5varugala hm^ 48 rinalu nadia[va] hala-dharegu saba akki mii4e 10 tirhgaju tirixgaju tappade tixfi 49 gajalli 17 tohaga na4ava yara 1 mattaA ippatta-aidu 25 hShiga na$ava 50 vara 1 amtu timgajalli yeracju vara samadaya1 na<Javudakke akki mft^wu1 51 12 I Tara%aIaffi,Mamgala(a)-trayodai bahagaa Marfigala()-tray5da6i na4ava 52 [de]m[du*] viSeshav-agi ytrisida akki mu^e 2 aihtu akki inQ^e yippatta-Bllku* 53 yi djiarmioada sthajadalli BaJJa|arige anaya sanlya saUadu flla I sthaQapgadalu* idda 54 vokkalige bitti bi^ara salladu kaijike dese appa^e padadalli yettu(a) salladu yeMu 55 wrwaiaanyaT-agi Tirumalarasaraada Madda-Hegga(Jeyaru avara nllmavaru ga 56 ^Tpaj^smaiiiW saha tami^ dharmma-paiiijama-iximittaY-Sgi tauoma BvaxQ(rti)chi 57 ynhda guru-bliaktiyiijaida vo^aiabattu barasi kotfca tl^bra^SsaBa imta 
58 ppudikke sSkshjgaiu ati(dH)kari XJaUfruffi Cha|;a Bikra-se^i SSma^i 59 set$i Eija-setti Bagge-[se*]ttiya ajiya Kosaw Mfiliira Bejile BmtmSJa 60 Dugga Baia^ari Birusama^ii yimt=inivara vub!hay-anma[ta*]diifx Ma 
61 ihgalura SajJblcai^Smabovana baraha [I*] yirbiM dharioma-6sa[na*]kke 62 'jB*kX*UL<Ul ^Il*]^a-^tta[d*]^vigu]jaiiipu^yai& 
63 para-datt-apahare^a sva-dattaiu ni^(sh)phalaitL bhavSt|| DaEa-pSlaiiay6r.*mmad% 64 daaaclx*<5klirey6--nupalaiiaifc danat*svarggamav5p]a5ti pfilanM-achyutaitt 65 padaih || yi(!) diarmma-Sasanakke avanan^obba Jamanad4va tappidare Bt}ugu- 66^da Gmmatanatlia Kopa^ada Chafcdjanatha tTjJaiiita-giriya 6T modaladaJJina-bi&baga]an=o(Ja(e)da papakke koharu Saivan-adare Fa 
1 Bead aamudaya. 
*Tfee letter [fa]is written below the line. 
* Rf&d sthafrdalv.
No. 8.] KAJP OOPPBR-PLATE OF KELADI SADAS1VA-NAYAKA ; SAKA 1479. W   
68 rvvata-GSkarnna-modalildavaralli1koti-limgavan=o<Ja(e)da papakkehohara 69 Vaishnavan=&daro Tirumale-modaliidavaralli k5ti-Vislinu-niurtiyaii-orla(o) 70 da p&pakkehSharu ||Bhadrarh bhuyij-Jina-sasanasya [ H J Sri [ ||* ] 
TRANSLATION. 
L. 1. Obeisance to Dharmmanitha ! 
V. 1. For the translation of this vorso see above, Vol. XIII, p.22. 
V. 2. Hail ! The illustrious Vardham5ria, the lord of Jinas, who adorns the seat (symbolic} of universal sovereigntyof all knowledge and who brightens the Sy&tMduschool. Vv. 3 and 4. Bhlnu, the lord o! sages, the rayof enlightenmentof the moon to the Tim tri^-gachohli* ocean, the swan in the lake of purefaith (i.e., Jainism), a lion to the elephant of religious disputants, the dispeller of the darkness of ignorance, the elephant among ascetics, shines in the skyof Ki^ttr-gava, 
V. 5. The sage Bhinu who broke asunder the multitude of arrows of Cupid by his arrows, the five practices (5oMra*)is the lord1of the ever prosperousGoddess of Penance. V. 6. The illustrious Bhlnu, the lord of sages, the reducer of the masses of darkness to dust by hundred fresh raysof knowledge,stands victorious in the heavens of ByStoada religionfos tering eternal prosperity among the assemblageof lotuses in the (kh of) the pureMGla-saifcgUa and immersing sages, the herds of lovely fc&M, in the ocean of happiness. 
V 7 Mftdd*4Ifft<4, the ruler of the cityof Kap-be he ever radiant on the earth like the shining pendant worn by the king, in the form of the Tu}u country 
V 8the lord of the ternt 
pinnaoli 
- of the godde. Barth; the^n shines 
**b* to) the cyolio yer Na|a, on the 1st W f^b^odde88 of Fortune on the right 
lion written (totfcrt tffeot), 6iivahaaa aka year 1479 expired (corns D. 18L &II! ho*** I fcth\PTSofn^thaJfofKirttlka,onSundW> LI. 19ff. when Bm*Iyy. who was as itwere,adamantine cage
96 EPIGKAPHIA INDIOA, [VoL, XX.   
LI. 23ff. and while Madda-Heggade who had the name Titumalamsa, an ornament to the lotus face of the damsel the Tuluva country, the young sun (emerging from) the eastern mountain viz., the throne of Kap which is from time immemorial famous in all directions, (the incantation a* it were of) all the ancients like Bharata1 radiant with, the rays of multitudes of ornaments 
of fresh gems, the collection of many virtues, which were possessed by no other man of royal descent, viz., friendliness, generosity, prowess, sweetness, profundity, policy, politeness, truth and purity, etc., was ruling the chiefdom of Kap assisted by his assembly, communal and pro fessional guilds and his subordinate officers; 
LI. 28il hail ! 'Munichandradeva, the discipleof Abhinavadfivakfrtidflva, the ScMrya of *he circle of royal preceptors, the lord of great disputants, emperor of all learned men, resplondant with several such Urudas, the foremost (follower) of the KfyHr-gaw ; 
LI. Slff. his disciple Devachandradeva requested Tirumalarasa, alias MadcU-Howa^o, his assembly, communal and professional guilds and his officers to grant a piece of land with'the help of several (people) of Kap, with the intention of instituting a charity at Kap for the final beatitude of his guru Munichandradeva; 
LI 36ff. and as they were of a charitable temperament, they, out of devotion to their pre ceptor, granted, with pouring of water, on the western side of the village of Malllrti (situated) within their province, in the place called Kalantopatina-bajke, on the inner bide of the trench ^"9**^(f^ sowing) of 2 muc}eot paddy calculated at 80 *//(/* each seed of 1Q^with the ptopeHieg atkched ^ Jth~ w* lands
outside the trench one wet land called Papmadi requiring 4 mfl* calculated at 30 and a bagila landrequiring seed of 4 mfitfe calculated at SO bafla ; (in dl) thn* wot lands 
No. 9.1 SAMOLI INSCEIPTION OF THE TIME OF SILADITYA. 97   
LI. 58f!. The witnesses for this(transaction) are : Atikari (Adhikari) Kamta-setti, Chata Bikra-BOlti, ttotnaiji Sartikara-setti Raja-se^i, Bagge-setti's nephew Kesana, Mulura Belile, 'BirumSja l)uga and Barhdiiri Biruaarani. With the consent of all these, Samkayi-Senahovaof Mariiguliir wrote thia. Prosperity and good fortune to this charity deed ! 
LI. <52lT. Imprecatory versos. 
LI. 6511 Any one who violates this charity,if he is a Jaina, shall incur the sin of breaking the imagesof Gummatanatha of Bejaguja, Chandranatha of Kopana and Nemisvara of tfjjan tagiri and other Jaina idole ; if a Saiva, he shall incur the sin of breaking a crore of lingas at Farvata, G6kari?.a etc, ;if a Vaishgava, he shall incur the sin of breaking a crore of images of Vishi.ni in (holy) placeslike Tirumale. May there be prosperity to the Jiw~6asam (doctrine). Fortune ! 
No. 9. SAMOLI INSCEIPTION OF THE TIME OF SILADITYA ; 
[VIKBAMA-SAMVATJ 703. 
BY R. R. HALDEB, RAJPUTANA MUSEUM, AJMEB. 
This short inscription was found at Samoll in the district of Bhomat in Mewar and is now preservedin fcho Rljputana Museum at AjmSr.Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar has already noticed it. 1 It consists of twelve woH-engravodlines of writing, covering a spaceof about 9J"x 10J". The stone being slightly broken at the lower right corner, a portionof the inscriptionis missing. A few letters here and thwe are also indistinct. The averagesize of the letters is about |*. On account of its importanceae the earliest inscriptionof the Guhila familyof Mewar, a detailed notice of it is givenbolow. 
The charactr belongto the northern class of alphabetsof the acute-angled type. They arc almost similar to thosa of the Udaipur inscriptionof Aparljitaof V. S. 718 (A.C. 661) though the f5tr&r of tho vowels 0, , I, M and A have different forms. The language is incorrect Sanskrit and the inscriptionis written very carelessly. As a result, the metres employeddo not always 
the following points may be noted ;-* is used for in ryfaftft (L 4),*J*>r m W*^
fltand scanning, and the meaning is alao not quiteclear in a few places. As regard* orthography, (I B) and *&afi (I 8) ! the ***** is used for * in^rtUte(1 8) and as redundant it*. (I- B) aad #llta*m>**Wir fl-7);*marga^ ^m.B{12) (1. 8 J, while it is redundant in 4bqf4 d- 2), ****> Q,- W) 
* - 
pla whik, it i. wrongly U8ed in ***** ****** 0- 3)- Other rmstakes and content, rdout^he^ o the uum a eaa thee^^^ MS foe8 ,.
poin 
------- HM&, W.C./1908'^fl; ^"48aod M^, VA XXXIX, p.189. 
Above, VoL IV, pp,2fi.
98 EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
is not very clear, the inscription being broken at the corner. It appears, howeve.r, that the Mahatara Jentaka, having seen the approachof the messengersof Yama entered fire (?) or com mitted suicide at the holy placeof Debuvaka. The record ends with the date 703 Katika (Saittika)di (?)-. Evidentlythe year belongsto the Malava-Vikrama era and corresponds to 646 AXX 
As regards the personages mentioned in the inscriptionit would appearthat SUaditya was a scion of the Guhila familyof Mewar. This inference is supported by the documents which have already been published e.g., the Itapura1inscriptionof Saktikumara, the inscriptionof ChitSr,* dated V. S. 1331, the Mt. ibu3inscriptionof Samarasiiiiha. As has been pointed out by Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar,4 the name Sa in the Itapura inscription stands for Slladitya who was succeeded by Aparajita5 whose inscription, dated V. S. 718 (A. C, 661), has been alluded to above. Nothing of importanceis recorded about the Mahatara Jentaka. 
Vatanagaraof the inscriptionis evidently the same as Vata8(Va^apura) which has been iden tified with Vasantaga<Jh7 in Sirohl State and is about 16 miles from SamSlI, where the inscrip tion was found, 
This inscriptionis of special interest, as it enables us to rectify a mistake made in connection with the pedigreeoi Goha. Col. Tod supposed that Goha (Guhila, Guhadatta, GuhSditya, etc., the founder of the Guhila family of Mewar, to which Slladityaof this inscription belongs) de ssended from the last gfladitya (Siladitya VI) of Valabhipura.8 The AltaS copper-plata inscrip tion9 of the last SUaditya of Valabhipura dated in Gupta Sarfivat 447 (A, C, 706-07), would show that he was the ruler of the Valabhl kingdom at least up to the date of his inscription, t.e., the latter half of the eighth century A. C.10 As the date of gflidityaof the present inserip* tion is Samvat 703 (A. C. 646), that of Goha or Guhila, the fifth11predecessor from him, should fall in the latter half of the sixth century A. C., if an average reign of twenty years be ae&igned to eack of the rulers preceding Sfladitya (of Mewar). Thus there is a difference of about two centuries between the reignsof Goha (Guhila) of MewSr and the last 'toditya of Valabhipura. In other words, we might say that G6ha (Guhila) had established his rule in Mewlr about two centuries prior to the break up of the Valabhl kingdom, Therefore G5ha could not have been the descendant of the last Sladitya (giladitya VI) of Valabhipura.18 
ind. Ant., Vol. xxxix, p. 101, * &Mmagar Inscription*, p, 75, v. 18. 
*2nd. Art., VoL XVI, p. 348, v. 14. 
jpj. 180.. 
*<3f. note 1 above where the Mugs are mentioned m succession 
Above,VoLIX,p. 12. 
VoLltt nn 171 ff T\ m" *' " 4),V L * PP 253-50. 
. . l^u^ 
p. 308). Hence Slliiditya VII ought to be Rlladitra VI TTM.,- '. \' P" *n nr' C'A"M %y. 1M No. 4S7, footnote k-Ed.]% [TtU8 * * matter of Pialon & * KWlwrn'a Northern P. o^n(W.Orooka'.Bditto,), VoL *****. VoL XXXIX, p. 188, Inscription No. IV 
Sec IwL A*.. Vo,. LVJ, pp. J69 74.(
  

SAMOU INSCRIPTION OP THE TIME OK   
vr] 703. 
10 
12
No- 9.]SAMOLI INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF SIlADITYA. 99 TEXT.1 
. 
the origtod.tone. 
by "ymboL 
abo the KM, 
o ^ gn^ycd jost below IT . 
bent   
q ol< k 
then ttw metre would be 
ft.
100 EPIGRAPKA INDICA. [VOL. XX*   
Bo, lO^PATNA MUSEUM PLATES OF EANABHANJA-THB YEAR 22, BY E. D. BANERJI, HA., BENARES, 
These plates were sent to the late Dr. D, B. Spobner byMr. L. B. V. Oobdcn-Bamiitty, LtXS? Political Agent,Orissa Feudatory States, in 1916-18.* A summary of the contents of the inscrip 
tion they bear, as drawn by the late Eao Bahadur H. Krishna Sastri, was published m the Annual Progress Report of the Eastern Circle for that year,2 
The plates are three in number and are joined together by a copper rtafi? to which, is attached a seal (l$"x If) which is ellipsoid in shape and bears the legend Sn-Ra^abMfijadSwisya, They are identical in size and measure 7J* by 4J* eaoL The first plateis inscribed on the inner side onlywhile tibe remaining two bear inscription on both the faces, There are altogether fifty-sevenlines of writing on these three plates, which are distributed as follows : the first plate has eleven lines, the second, eleven lines on each side; and the third, twelve lines on each side. The writing on the whole is neat and clear bu* each line abounds ia mistakes du* both to the composer and the engraver. 
The record is written in incorrect Sanskrit, The first eleven lines of it are in verse. They contain four stanms of which the first three are already known from the two Biradh platesof the same prince.8 These verses contain an invocation to Siva and the genealogyof the donor, This grant mentions two ancestors of Eaijabhanja, namely, SilSbhafija and Satrubhafija, while the Bandh grant {B) names only one, i.e., Sateubhanja,his fairer, The object of the imcriptkm is to record the grantof the village of Vabirava<3,l, which stood on the banks of the Mahfinadl and was included in Dakshi^apali and the Khinjali-wa^ato,to the god VijaSsara (VijaySiSvara), by MahadeviVijya'(Vidya) who was the daughterof the illustrious Kanaka Niy&tnama* The god Vijaesarais evidentlya !$iw~Unga and the donor, the wife of Eaoabhafija himself. The document describes Baqatktaiijaas a devout worshipperof Vfeh$u, the titoka of the spotless Bktfijarace and master of both the Khifijalis, who had obtained the five great 'Mctea* whoae feet were worshipped by tho Mabasamantas and who had obtained the blessing of the goddess Stem bheSvam. 
Mahanadi is evidentlythe well-known river of that name in Orissa. Ehifijaliin mentioned in several Bhanja grants which have already been published.I am unable to identify the village Vahiravada. 
The date of the inscription is, apparently, regular and is givenin a half chronogram as Indu wk-wianti varise (^Indu-vafowmiati-'varshS).* Ordinarily this expression would denote the year 2011 of -some era but the Baudh plates (B) which are written in the same script as this inscrip tion would show that it stands for 22, vaJc being taken in the sense of L4 
I edit the inscription from the original plates which were kindly placedat my clkposal by Sir Edward Gait, I.C.S., 1LCJ.E., the then Lieutenant-Governor of BihSr and Orissa. 
*JmMii Mepart ofthe Archwlogiwl Survey of India, -Maitern Gwek, imW, p.-7 t 
*?, 4, para.6, 
51 Abo, Volume Xll, pp. 323-28. 
*[But mk (ac&) does not mean4one'though it might itand for*four'as it is auppotad to hire four tagea, namely Para, Pa^antf, Modhyama and FeribfaK. The reading, however, is not certain Ed.]
No. 10.] PATNA MUSEUM PLATES 01 BANABHANJA THE YEAH 22. 101 TEXT. 
[ Metres : Vv. 1-3, VasantatilakS ; v. 4, 8M&amJuWta ; TV. 5-19, Amslttnibh ; and v, 20, 
First Plate. 
i [ I* ] Sarfihara-kala-hutabhug-vikaiila-gliora-saiiibliranta-kinka 
svasti 
2 ra-kn{kri)tanta-[mtanta*>bhiunarfx [I*] bkinn-lndhak-isuia-maha-galian-atpatra*| toil* hhl?.(l)htti)ravatii Ha 
8 ra-vapuLr* ] bhaA(blia)Yata& prapStuh* || [ 1* ] 
pftkaba-la*]kahmWxatiha-gra   
4 ha^-supraarita-pratapSC t I* ] Bhanja^N^ (ba)bhu(bha)vur-udbhQta 
5 yW-t,ra bhuva(vi) bhuWri-sahasra-sat*]kkya[ h ]I [ I2*] 8akala-bhu(bhd)ta[la*>pa 
I 
6 la-maulKl^mal-archohhit-a^li-jngalS* valavaA'-njipo-bhu^uJt 7 SiiabhaaiadSvaLfc*] pravakrata'-paurusha-rataii-cbakra-niidarit-an 
[ 4* ] AnyS-nya-mada- 
_ 
jfya*]-lakshml-
va ku!5102 EPIGEAPHIA INDICA, [Vol. XX,   
15 samanandita-paura-jana-ma(a)nasali firimad-Bliafija-bhii(bhu)patili purMDhptipura* na 
16 mna[ h* ] || Saf^ajrad-amala-dh.avala-kara-'ya^alj.-pal^la-dhavalita-dig-'va 
17 dano(nah) I1I(A)nayarata-pravpt[ t*]a-samnama2-dan-a[ na*]nclita-salcala-jan5(nati) I1 18 A(A)$daja-van (m)Aa-prabliavah Parama-vaist^ava(v5) mata-pitri-p5da(d-a)nu 19 dhyata[ h* ] Bkfij4mala-kula-tilaka Ubhaya-Khiajal-a(ly-a)dhipati[ Ij*] sama dhigata 
20 pancha-maha-Savda(bd6) ma(ma)haaamanta-vandita-[charatiah*] StarabhMvarI*lav dha(bdlia)-vara-pra6a 
21 da[ h* ] |lEai]iaka4ri-Ra!?abhafijadeva[ t* ] kufeB [I*] Ihaiva Khifijali-majgi<Jale 22 bhavishyad-raja-raja(a)Mk4ntetangaa-lmmaxa(ra)m 
Second Plate : Second Side. 
23 9a-pradhana[ n*] anya[ m ]i-cha da^^apa^ika-cha^a-bhS^a4-vallabha-jStliiil^11 ya* 24 tharbi7manayati vaidhayati8samadisayati(Safi) ch-Snyat !|9sarvvataf ^*) 
25 smakaA I Viditamastu bhavatat10Dakhi(kshi)ija^a(p8)U.prativa(ba)ddlia Ma(Ma)hanadi(di)-vima 
i*] i6 
27 Bidhya upanidh!.saliitaih(tali) mata-pitrS^yatma-jaiaia-pu?y-ibhivriddhay8 28 salla-dlarali^pura^aigp vidhini| 
29 [P 
30 datva vidki-yidhanena sa^dhgya-tamm^MSsanarM pratipMitJ-yaA || 
Bead 
Bead 'ja 
6 Punctuation superfluous, 
whioh 
11 Bead ma(d-|^^r^wanaldia 
u Bead *Vidyimahad$vyd. 
3 Bead Fya^ttt%a, 
17 wIs written below the Mae. 
19 The ma uj superfluous.
  
PATNA MUSEUM PLATES OF RANABHANJA - THE YEAR 22.
IWl 
34 
36 
r 34 36 
38 
42 44 
56 
  
^WNTi rmrqvn 
38 40 
42 44 
56
No. 10.] PATNA M0SBTJM PLATES OF RANABHANJA THE YEAB 22. 108   
81 parya-kulavatarSga ya(y.a)vad-V1 sarwa-vachan&na yatha dharma(ma)[|*] prarShaiMi ||* sa(yS) 
32 san6(tfl)na pratmi(taa5)Bi sahasrBga virShasi [I*] 6va[rfi*] vtt(bit)ddhpiv5) pai arddhafi-cha parat5 
83 vaJ&^ftvat&r5i3&(-A)py^6md-antai5r^nakenaohi smalp-lpi3 
Third Plate : First Side. 
84 va(b&)dha kara^yS |tathi eh*att(ch-5)lrtatii dlamma-fitatrfelni [f] Pb51a-kiBlii. [A] mahlDit*] dadya[t*]-8a 
88 viia(ja)iH Ba8ya-m5dinI[A*](4alinWi)I r&va[t*] 8u(8u)tyakrit-al5ka taTO|>] svargga8 mahlyatfiI [I 5*] 
86 Vsaa-vta-asmayOji'vadanti rishi" -d6Vatat[l*] blm(bllu)mi.l1artr&, cha a 
87 h5 m& hara mi hara , [16*] Tath-appu pattanhfiakra 
; 
viaa[r*]pptii 
88 Svarh bhu(bhfi)mi- krita* dfiaa* swyafayS) saayS ptarShala | [I 7*] Vara 
89 & Vi8hou[r*].Vr(Bm)h S5m(maa-tu bhaa" 
40 bllandranti" bhu(bhtl)mida[m*]I [I 8*] 
41 nti pitamaha(haV)I Bhu(Bhfl)mi.data 
ti | [I 9*3 Ewahu-" 
aphalft-8a*k& ya pwadatSshu
Kfc BfIGBAPHIA INDIOA. [Vot. XX   
44 m-va yd hared*va(rete va)&undliaram |a 
pitpbM[s*]salia pachyatS | [I 12*J Hiraijya 
45 mekaza gamekam(kam) bhn(bhu)mim1 
kam=ayati yavad=abhuti(bhuta)- 
Third Plate : Second Side. 
46 samplavahCvaiii} | [I 13*] BJm(Bhu)mi[in*] ya^ pratigjih^M yach(A)olia bin- (bht)mi[ia*] prayachchliatiI ulxhaii tau 
47 niyatau* s[v*>rgga-gammau | [| 14*] HaratS hirayat* bhLU(bha)-mi[rtx> l<] | sa va(ba)- 
48 ddh6 v&raj?ait pi4biEfl*]*tirya[g*>y6nI(ni)8liu jyatS |[| 15*] MS par thivat(va) kadachi[d* dhi*] vra(bra)kmaavaiii mana* 
4 8adapi(sa api) | axhgS padham8*abhaisva(sha)3yaiii tat 
l[| 16*] l(Na) vislia[ih*] visham-ity-a 
50 htt[V*] vra(bra)lnasvaih vis3xa[ifi*] uohyatS ] yislmm@kilmi5(niiijbi) ianti 9Ta(bra)hmasvarii putra-pautri(tia)ka[ih*] | [| 17*] 
8K iw-56v^cMoht)w 
sliu I5kshu kalji pumili(n} 
52 jaiamSjvaramisliyati1I [I 18*] V]apya-sahasr&gi* 
58 chA I gavaxorkoti-pradattena7bbu(bb,t)mi-hiartta na iy^dhyatl1i fl 19*1 ltd kamala-dal-a L J 
54 mvu<bu)-vi[ih*]4a-iaU[ih*] Artyam^nucliintya 
ndahfitan-cha 
55, vndait" na H piuusliailL paraki(ki)tta(rttii)yd villjpyftft*]I [| 30*1 Viiaya^ ^to**"<^^ 
57 
1 Bewl ttomirm 
8 Itend 
*{See note 4, p. 100 abore~B&3 
BeaditfWrw*** 
(Powubfy meant for
No. 11] THE KADAMBAPABEAKA GRANT OF NAEAVARMAN-VA 1167. 105   
No. 11. THE KADAMBAPADRAKA GRANT QF NARAVABMAN-^YA 1167. BY R, D, BJUSTEKJI, ILL1 
The inscription edited below is incised on, two thick plates of copper which weigh 15 Ibs, 7 ot. and now belongto Mr. X J, Gardar of Nepean Sea Road, Bombay, who purchased them at some placein Central India, and lent to me in November, 1920, JOE publication. There are two holes in each of these plates through which they appearto hare been oace tied together by means of two ringblike many of the Valabhi plates which have now been published. There is o al attached to them but a kneeling figure of Garufa, holdinga snake in each hand, if incised at the proper right corner of the secondplate,as is seen in the Dh^ram purl platesof VakpatirSjaol V.S. 1031, the Ujjain plates8 of Bhojadevaof V.S. 1^78 and the Mandhati plates4 of JayasirhhaI of V,S. 1112. The plates measure IbfJ by 8* each and are incised on one side only. In all, there are twenty-ninelines of writing on them, seventeen being incised oa the first plate and twelve on the second. The average heightof letters is f. 
The I*nguag of the inscriptionis Sanskrit. With the exceptionof two verses at the begin ning, two in the middle and jive imprecatorystanzas at the end, the record is written in prose. It referu itself to the reignof the PawmMat^ the illustrious Narawrxnadlfra, who meditated on the feet of the P. M. P., the illustrious UdaySdityaddva, who meditated on the feet of the P. M. P., the illustrious Bhojadgva, who meditated on the feet of the P. M. P., SindhurajadSva. 
The object of the charter is to register the grantof certain piecesof land given on different occasions to a Brlhma^a named DvivSda Is^a)dhara,son of Narayaijaof the Katyayana 
00to and MftdhywaiiM^aM.The gift-land consisted of, twenty MM*** given bythe king NaravarmadSva himself on the 12th day of the bright haH of Magha in the year 1167 (-Thursday,the 3rd February,1110 AJX) when this grant was issued. The charter also refers to a previous grantof twenty haks of tond, out of which ten Uhs were given by the MMmanluka Eljadlva oa the 16th day of the brighthalf of KIrttika the year 
day of^^^^^^J^the bnght half of *tad* mto 
the 
flS4, iTjtato byhis daughter4n4aw 
illustrious 
16th 
and six tabt by the king himself, on the 
t Surf. A**., Vol. VI, pp. 
*[Th0 coiwot wading seems to be U^h ^^A.J). U02,i.e,twa **y* 
[PtObubly mMb to be *ta to ^se^^^^^gto 8wflmm KM's Mto 
^ Above, ?oL XU, pp. *8 . ,. _N P1 
our** te w^m* *kto* took place ontue iKai^o 
thte date glwttia the present grntr-H.P. OJ 
Above, Vol. I, pp. 354 &
106 EPI6RAPHIA ISDICA. [ VOL. XX.   
have given ite name to the ma%4ala, I am unable to identify either Kadambapadraka or Mandarabt. The granfr was issued under the sign maxnlal of the MaJwfaraja Naravarmad^va and the Dutaka of the charter was fhakkura Ke^ava. 
TEXT.1 
[Metres :~*Yv. 1, 2, I and 5, Anushjjubh ; Vv; 3 and 7, VasantatUaki ; V, 6, Indravajra ; V. 8, Salini ; V. 9, Puahpitagra.] 
JWrrt Plate. 
1 Oihs svastiJl Sri[r*]=jayo=bhyudaya4==cha || Jayati [Vy6]3ak565sau ya& sargglya vi (bi)bharttri(rtti) tarn aindavirii foaaa l$khaiii , jagad-vlji%a sa kjitiiha|| [1 1|*] 2 Tanvantu va^t Smar-arate^ kalyg^m^aniteih j^alji I kalp-anta-$amay-lidSta^ta4id valaya-pimgalah || [2||*] Paramabhadvfi(ttil)raka-MaharS]I 
3dhkaja-ParaineSvara4ri-SindhiirfiJadSva-va(pa)danud^^ 
rajadliira]a-Parame6vara-6ri-Bh6jadeva-padanudhya 
4taTafPaJrajnabhattaraka-MaharajadMraja-Paramefivara^ri-^ 
ata-Paramabhattaraka-Maharajadhiraja-Pa 
5 ra^efi 
pratij agaranake 
6 mana-Kadamva(nflba)padraka-griini 
hxna^antaranHpra]tiipdTafli-pattakaa-jaM^ 
7 fiiayaty=a8tu vah eaiiividitaik || yathi Srimd-Dhlr-lTaathitdr^imibhi^ charachera^gilruifi bhagavantarii Bhavanipatiiii BamabhyEt^J 
8 ,r%^ar^A] dp^tvS I Tatha MI Vit-ftbhra^ibhraB)tain4dftib 
9 ^-agra-j^la-vindu-sama narai^aih dhaxmali sakha param=ah6 paf^lCkm-ytaS II [3 It111! Bhramat-8azhfia*a*oha^fay&ih [ |* ] 10 prapya ye na dadusteshaih pafichattapalt paraih phakrii || [4f] It* 
11 rwava.kBhiti-samakalaih yavatparaya bha[kty&] 
12 ^ilVmiti^ti^^^ --^; 
13 a. 
vati-Parvva.da^ 
nsan(mri6an)-madhyakenabhu-iuvartta?ia^ith6ati,pratya | f Bhfi 
14 
From tihe original platea and impresflions." ....... ---^^^m^^^*^^.. , , , WWWMBMW 1Expressed by a symbol. 
* Readjagad-mj-alilcur-akritim. 
4 Bead -samay-dddama-. 
1 Bead 
c Bead -dttard?^. 
1 Dcwfa unnecesBaiy. 
8 Dtwfa unneceflgary. 
r. P. OJ
8 
I I   
eg 
i
CO   
g 
00
No. 11] THE KADAMBAPADRAKA GBANT OF NABAVABMAN-V.S. 1167. 107   
15 6yS[xb]sva-bhukto" kasyitanx vaddliapita(?)-bhu-lila-da4akati^bhi)rTva1Matamaij.- <JalIka-rI-Rajadeva-vadhu-&rI-Mah,advy& pu[r]wa-kalpe ta(da)-J 
16 tvan(tta) bhu-hala-chatuali$ayaiB I Tatha asmabhiHSkSniwbasbty-adMka-fekt i(ai)k&da6aka-Bamvatflar Paiuha-iudi 
17 paifaoliada6yft[ji] Bftitijatft-bhataraprana-parwaiji kasyitatvaiii1(?) blm-halB-slia$ [&*] IEvam yatblyathaih bM-hala-vi[ia*]fe- |* 
Second Plate. 
18 tik 8a-flIml-tp)Qia-[yii]ti-g6oliaia-paryalQtS 
adaya-samSta 
19 8ava(mat4)-pitr5rafcmana-obA pu? 
kataya pradatta [ I* ] T6(Ta)n-ma1;vatan-ni 
20 vaM-pa^ldla-jaMpadair^thadS^ 
vana-vidhSyair-bku(bha)tTa 8arwam=amushmS(8hmai) aamupa 
21 nSfeavyaih I $am&nyarii oh=aitat=pu9ya-phalam vu(bu)ddliva uaifrtoifrati*Bj[i 
* 
api bUvi-b]i5lrtpbHr^iaat-p[r*]adatta-dlia[r*]inm-aday6^^I 22 alanlyai-soha I Uktufc oha I Va(. 
yaaya yaaya yada bhu(bM)mis=<tasya tasya tada phala[ih]I [l ||*J 
n-a,, ,. . . 23 dattani putSnatSudrair^danani dharmm-artha-yafcskariM I Birmalya-vaiLti-pratunaiii tini kfl nama sadhu^t punar=adadltaI [ I 6f]Asma 
24 t-kula-k[r*]ataamidarain.udaliaradbMr=aiiya==cha danam4dam=abhyairamodai^am danaA phal&m para 
Laksh{m*]yatadid-valaya-vudvuda(budbuda)-ch8iiiclialaya 
p [ |7||*] Sama^StattanhW^vna, pavi^p Bfiy5 
26 
yaohatS Saptajmabhads*I te^many-SyaAdharma-sgtur^pa^Mkale kalS 
26 
oha 
Orh Hail ! (May 
bnalli.dal.amvu(bu)-yiiid[u*K5lM TBANSLATIOlST 
for the sake of the creation, hold* on the shoot from the seed of the of the godof love (i.e., Siva) 
* Daly one 
* Bead108 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA, of the end of the world, grant you prosperity incessantly (2).' The 
[' VOL. XX. 
dhraja-Parammarafhe illustrious Naravarmadeva, who meditated on the feet of theT" the Jlustnous Udayfidityadiva, who meditated on the feet of the P. SondhurtjadSva, being in good health, informa the various officers, Brahmanas and others   
wS^rsscsrs^KJtrp-to'ta wuoi * of Maudaraka of tlie Upgndrapura-ma^^a. Let it 
aiding at Dhara, having bathed and worshipped Bhagavan (iSwa) the rule f th brd of Bta^f^d having perceived the worthiness of the world-^s it ia niAVMm ^r^^^^^X^^^^on the 16th day of the bright hTo, Pausha 
n^sures of land, in ite regular' age, with rights of .inin/gold, 
Hicome H given for the increase of the *erit and toe of mother, by means of a (c^-plate after 
aU d^, t^ne^, ti^riiS.* 
townsmen inhabiting the place! are to ^five imprecatory verses.) The 
***"* OUr
No. 12] TWO SINDA INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENACHAMATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109. 109   
No. 12. TWO SINDA INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENACHAMATTI, SAKA 1088 AND SAKA 1109. 
BY R. S, PANOEAMTJKHI, M.A., OOTAOAMUND. 
These two records are engraved on a stone tablet lyingin front of the templeof Isvara at Benachamatti in the Gajndraga<JState which is included in the Ron taluk of the Dhajrwar dis trict. They are edited here for the first time from the estampages secured by me under the orders of the Government Epigraphistfor India in the year1927-28.a The first inscription covers an area of 2' 9" by2' 3$*, the size of each letter being about \* in height. The area occupied by the second inscriptionis 2' 3$* by 6$* and the size of each letter is roughly i". The latter is the continuation of the former. I am calling them A and B respectivelyfor the salce of con venience. They are in a fairly good state of preservation exceptingthat some letters of B are loot at the right corner of the lower edge where the stone is broken. 
Both the inscriptions are Karma<Ja records of the twelfth century of the Chrisj/ian era, In A the longt is distinguished from the short bne by au inside coil at the topas in pathifya (L 1), Gliamdalad&oi (1. 19),efc. ;the u-signat times has a short downward: bend bythe side of the letter 
with which it is connected as, for example,in CMvuyfc (L 10),^0- n),*'> thewdgniB represented,in some cases, by a horizontal line at the bottom of the letter concerned with a curve on the left side and, in others, by a cursive upwardstroke shooting from the bottom to the right end, as in Mandara-dhavryyarh (1. 18), sainyam (1. 26) ; the letters m, y and v have very often been represented by their special cursive forms as in baliyim (1. 6), "y-aliyam (L 7), and dio AnftMtamuma* (1. 37) respectively ; the mwnSra is written by the side of the letter connected therewith in four places, i.e., in yeniM (L 19), ****#* 0- 29), JMP*"""* 0- 37) and jMUfry. (L 42). The Orthography is generallyfree from errors It may"** in A the engraverhas fiUed upthe spaceleft at the end of hnesS 6, 10, 12, 13 2024^35, 3 41 46 49 51 and 52 bythe addition of a superfluous mark resemblingthe Englishletter 8 la BthecoLnant la is, in several places, wronglyused for Ja, as in p> (U. 3, 5 and 6)t Q 5) etc and the letter te in NShilana teradi (1.4)is written likeje. 
" 
Exciting thefirst verse which i* in Sanskrit, A is written in Kannada with^et 11. 8, 10, 31, 32, 36-38 and 44-54. B is also composedin Kannada 
brother^-namely Aohara^a, ^.^ "Z 
oftheSinda family whose ped^ree givenin hnes 8-29.1* 
H&vu*4 was a powerful warnor and that to^charasawas 
thoccclof thoSinaal (U) by o_ueeu 
cammcuuaa. Of Ch&vu*4a it is recorded that huge army,the Sinda prince destroyedits general his elephantsin large numbers. Again when tt war against Chavunda with a view toconferhim 
eway for life in the forest. Whend. Erarrtbarage (whichis ooi 
MathurS and Ujjayinl), the 
cr g ^ ^^^ 
OIUflhing defeat and had to flee 
celestial Amaravati, AyMhyi, conrtmctedthe 
**+
EPIGRAPHIA INBICA, [ VOL. XX.   
temple of Telligiivara in the south-east quarterof that town and made certain gifts to it after laving the feet of Goamdramaiili-vratin of the Lakuja sect, the Scharya of Simh&vara-matha,1 on the day specified in 11. 4647 during the reign of the Kajachurya king Trlbhuvanamalla Bijjanadeva (11. 44-45). Lines 38-44 give the genealogy of the Icharya Chamdramauli-vratin as follows : Vigrahedvara-vratta, hisdisciple Yogedvara yati and hisdisciple Chamdramauli-yati. 
Inscription B introduces, after prayerto the god TeHigifoara, mentioned above, Vlra Bijja^andVIra-VikramaassonsofCaittvu^abySrldBTlanddworibeBthe elder of the two, namely Vira-BijjaJa, as a great devotee of Siva like Nambi* and Ohila' and a scholar like Bana (U. 1-4). His wife was Tripuradivl (1. 5). ffis brother Vikrama was a munificent donor and an invincible warrior looking majestic as if he was a Chakraoartin (11. 6-9), In lines 10-12, the two brothers are mentioned with the usual titles, Mahama^aHvara S&hastotuihqa etc., as ruling over Kisukadu-70, BIgadage-70, KeJairadi-300, Nareyatfcgal-12 and Karividi-3[0]. At the requestof-the KffyTelligas and a certain MwfaJaya-Siluini they are stated to have granted some land to the temple of TelUgitirara (U 13 l^ An fK date specified in lines 12 and 13. 
The details of the date given in A are: Saka 1088, Vyaya, Fushya amavftsva Monday, Uttarfiyana-saihkramti and vyatlpata. They are not quite regular Thl Pushya amavasya ended on Sunday at -95 and the Makara (UttarSyanaJ-samkrtoti had 
occurred on Margatosha ba. 30, Saturday (24^ December). The date intended probably * *"^ A' D'"67 whioh^^ " 
The details of the date given in inscription B are :~Saka 1109, the ttyclio y ............. . chaturdaa, Monday, Saifakrarfxtl. According to Swamikannu Pillai' **. dttori* combined with a samkramti did not faU on Monday in any Tthe sr^Mt^r^87^^^*&- 
Plavan^a. But, for Chaitra ^u. 14 which was a day of Mesha-san^ 
<> 
, p. 109 ad XIX, p. 227'' 2M"75 <W-fldlted * '** ^- Vol. IX, p. 96)
No, 12] TWO SB03A IN80EIPTIGNB MOM BENACHASIATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109. Ill   
who has written an excellent note on the Siuda chiefs in this journal^ evidently followed Meet in this respect; but, while editing the Sfi^i inscriptionof the Kajachtuya kingSainka madSva, he felt the moongruity of this interpretation and remarked"it seem* to confuse ichugi*8 brother SiAglI with the former's eon Siftghi II*'2 Since the Eon record edited by the sne scholar state* elearly that Icharasa II was the son of Singa, a brother of JLohugiI he hai recognised this difference as being onlya variant version of the pedigree recorded in the Sfl^i inscription mentioned above. But it may be remarked that all the epigraphs*if understood properly with the aid of A, yield the same genealogy. The verse in praiseof IchugiII in A runs ae follows : 
aiiaiv-aiHijiitan-avazu-khyatam irl-Simha-ja 
ciuHidan- atata-tGjaiii pratapaditndfAcharaBain (11. 13-H) 
meaning that bis (i.e., Bammarasa's) brother was the powerful Acharasa who was the BOB of Siihha, Thi statement is fully borne out by the .relevant portionin the &a<Ji inscription, 0**.,* DittofffwtiidWiIli A^tywjara^an^^^an-JfcAw^maridaile^aram (L 24), i.e., among them (aZK) Sirfigarasa'a mn wip Aehugiraan4ale6vaia. As Acharasa II ia thus described in.nnmistrftable tenon to be the m of SiAha without introducing any princeof the latter name before, excepting Idbmgi (!)* brother SiAga, there is no other alternative but to supposethat he was the aon of thii SiAga ftnd consequentlya cousin of Bammarasa L The expression'atawfammaiht'must, thrd!ote be taken to moan his brother, t'.e., the brother of ichugi I 
W<l to0W from inscriptions at Arasibl<Ji4 and Ka^geri*that Chavu<Ja had married three qiieem, namdiy, DImaladivi, Lakslimadevl and Si^iyftdevl,of whom the last two were the daughters of the Kajachurya King Bijjala. He begot on Demaladovi, Achugi III and Ptwm&41IIl and on SiriyldM, Ylra-ViJja^a and Vlra-Vikraxna, the donors of inscrip tion B. Vlra-Vijja^s queea was TripurftdivS. The portion containing the name of iuim'ii wife is unfortunately broken off. 
The Stoda W^f who played w important part in the mediaeval history ol Kaw^ftta* n their poUticaloareer as feudatories of the Western Chajukyasof Kalya^i ;during the last quarter of the llth century A, D. Thefirst pjmce o the family was Achugi* who iade^nbed in the Sd4i and Ni^gundi* imoriptious with^the significant epithet" MNv^Ua. thereby indicating that with him came into being the rule of the Sinda princesof ' - of 
From the fact that he is eactoUedas Viteaw^aml^id*^'' (a 
liuka4u another provincesin the Chi|ukya Vikrama year7 (A D. 1083)Jhl^^
VikraraMityaVI)andthAtMssoii3MmEarasawa8,accordingtoan epigraphat Savifc rutog family m a ruling power may be placedin or about JLD. 107ft, the yeax<* Vikramatoyas aZLTto theThLe. It I before not possible that ^ **-"7^ diva of a M4gundi inscription who was governing Kisuka4u-70 m A. D. .^J^JvanaikamalJsva, could be identical with the Sind* prince Sunga, I m *g^'""* by Meet- and still accepted by Dr. Barnett in his note referred to abov. There ^^J.how that Ichugi'sbrother Shhgaruled at all whereas it can be definitely inferred from "" ""
112 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX   
inscription A that Bammarasa, the son and successor of IchugiI was succeeded by Ichugi II, the son of Simha to whom there is only a passing reference.1 Bammarasa had, according to the Pattadakal record, won the favour of the reigning sovereign, i.e., Vikramaditya VI and received from him a position of honour and rank in the State. His territory comprised Kisukadu-70 and Narayarhgal-12 .* He appears to have died without issue as, other wise, the Sinda throne would not have passedto the descendants of his uncle Sim#a. From an inscription at Arasibidi3 which states that MaMma%$alP$var(i [Ava]rarasa was administering under Vikramaditya VI, Kisukadu-70 and Karividi-30 in A.D. 1087, it maybe surmised that at the time of Bammarasa's death, Ichugi II was either a minor or not powerful enough to assert the rights of his family. Subsequently, however, he appears to have acquired possession of his hereditary provinces throughthe favour of Vikramaditya, which, thereafter > continued in his line till the end. Only three dates*, MB., 1113-14, 1121-22 and 1125-26 are known for Ichugi II who defeated, for his master Vikramaditya VI, the Pandya, Hoyaaja and other rebels. Thus it may be stated that the three chiefs from Ichugi I to Ichugi II wore the feudatories of the Western Chajukya emperor Vikramaditya VI and took a prominent part in the conquests of their overlord. 
After Ichugi II, the two brothers Permadi" and Chayunda II held the Sinda territory as subordinates of Penna-Jagadekamalla and Trailokyamalla Taila III, respectively. It was during the latter's reign that the Chajukya dominions were usurped by Kajachurya Bi]ja}a who is described in A as having dragged by force the lady of the ChSjukya sovereignty. J-ennadi is stated in his inscriptions to have vanquished KulasSkhara, besieged and decap^tedGhatta pursued Jayakesi and seized the royal power of Hoysaja Vishnuvard dhana. The Eon inscription adds that he captured the Hoysaja king's elephants as well aa alv^rZ^T ^^P^*^^ (A), however, the defeat of the Hoysaja king's army and the capture of his elephants are attributed to Chavunda II for whom we hava 
, 
med Kamad5 - These eventB must be different from 
than of his ddL brother Permadi It'h ,-J?aOi* **POW7 of Chavun^a II 
I* 1?f ^Bombay Kamatok Oolleotioa for 1928-29. 
No Sfi f tt, x. n rr 
p tofi^K1^*8.01 *" B' K" Ue0^' M. *^tL-^^-H?^^"^^.^^^ 
See also J^ K<n. ^Jj* + -
No, 12] TWO SINDA INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENACHAMATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109. 113   
though it waH well established by then, had begunto recogniseit by A. D. 1167, as is evident from the preambleto the grant portionof inscription A. It appearsthat he was holding the reins of governmentin conjunction with his sons Achugi and Permadi in A. D. 1163 when the Paf^adakal inscription was engraved.It is not known under what circumstances the Sinda chiefdom pasaodto the sons of Siriyadeviafter the death of ChSvunda II. 
Chtivunda'B rule must have ended in A. D. 1169-70, for we find his sons Vira-Bijjana and VIra-Vikrama ruling over Kisukadu-70, Bagadage-70, and KeJavadi-300 in A. D. 1170 as recorded in the Aihoje inscription1 dated in Virodhin, correspondingto the 94th year -of the ChUjukya Vikrama era, whereas an epigraph from Hiremannur' bearingthe date Saka 1091 (A.D. 1189) introduces Chavunda as a donor of some gift. Further the Harti inscription8 of 
Vlra-Bijjana dated in the cyclic year Vijaya falling in his 7th yearfixes the date of his acces sion Bomntinw in VirOdhin. Vlra-Bijjana and Vira-Vikrama appearto have ruled conjointly a is shown by the preambleto inscription B which states that both the princes web ruling together from their capital at Erarhbarage.This ia corroborated by other inscriptionsalso.* There arc, however, 'a few epigraphs5 which were issued by the two brothers independentlyof each other. But this does not vitiate the above conclusion inasmuch as jointrulers could make donations separatelyas well. There are reasons to hold that the two princes were very young whim thoywere Invested with power. Two inscriptions at Nidgundi*with datea in flaka 1094 (A. IX 1172) and Saka 1096 (A. D. 1174) style them as toward and introduce patfamnhadtol RiriyadSvtas making some gifts in conjunction with her two children. TMs swmR to indicate that their mother Siriyadevi was actually governingthe Sinda territory as *ogent duringtheir minority.' That they were children then, as said above, is rendered quite probablw bya record' of A. D. 1220 in which year Vikramaditya was still holding the Sinda dominion! undw the Ysdava Sirhganadeva,after a rule of not less than fifty years. 
It is significant to noto that inscription B- does not mention any overlord but proceeds to dMMcibo the two brothers straightawayas if theywere independentrulers. After the Kaja churya usurpation which lasted for twenty yeara,the Sindas retransferred their O*"" *> the Chaiukywunder SSmSsvara IV, who revived his ancestral sovereignty;in A. D,.1185 Sometime tftar this date, the Chajukya territory appearsto have agambecome a conntont attack* of the Yadavas of Devagiri on the north and the rnudi. <n,thouth. During this periodof turmoil, the Sinda 
independence. This is indicated bythe expresmon" 
Oho powerful Vikrama was then the fit personto bear the title of OWrawrfw. But this 
op.. 
a Ko. 4 of tho Bombay Kfttnatak collection for 1927-23. 
No* -57 of I925-2T of the flam collection. 
*/6^ No- 221 of 1926-27. 
Eon Uttd Hsfoti inonptionmentioned above. 
^No*, 208 and 205 of 1920-27 of the Bombay Kamatak ^^'
EHGRAPHIA ItfDICA. [ Vol. XX.   
itself dated in A. D. 1192 and by the statements contained in his Annigere inscription.11 of A. D. 1202 representing Bhillama as having been killed in the fight. The Harihar inscription of Ms son Narasimha II adds to his father's conqueststhe capture of all the stronghold* between Soratik, Eraihbarage, Kurugod, Gutti, BeJJittage, etc.* From this it ia evident tha* Vrra-Balla}a had successfully wrested from the Yadava Mng some portion of theterritory whieh the latter had taken from Somesvara IV, subjugated the Sindas of Erambarage and 
made them pay homage to his banner. The Yadavas, however, were not keeping quiet all tfcig while. They were biding time to reclaim tne lost country. Jaitugi's son SimganadSva who carried his conquests far and wide led an expedition against the Hoysajas during the last days of Vira-BallaJa and snatched back from him the portion of land lying to the south of the Krishna and Malaprabha and even extended his arms farther south as is proved by his inscription at Bajagamve' in Mysore, dated in A. D. 1215. This event must have taken place in or about A D 1210 for, an epigraph at Doni states that the sixteenth year of SinganadSva's entry into that tract correaponded to the cyclic year Vijaya (A. D. 1226). This statement proves that the Yada vas were once again k possession of the territory under contest which must have included Kxsu kadu-70 of the Sindas. That the Sinda chiefs became their subordinates and continued to admow ledge their suzerainty till the end is clear from a stone record at Kajakappanagudda? m 
,^ J*""*% *& u - feudatory of SimgannadSva in the kttr'a 2l r^yearfalhngu,V^ama, i*. A. D. 1220. Nine years later, we find Mahipradhln* Vasudeva-Nayakaruunguader the orders of Simhana, Erambarage "which had cauaed itoe!
No 120 TWO SINDAIN80EIPTIONS FROM BEN10HAMATTI.SAKA 1088 4 1109. 115   
The following places and subdivisions are mentioned in the two records : the celestial Amaravafct, AySdhy*.Madhure, UjjavinI, Bratfcbarapuraiii, Kallton, Kirakl4u-70, Bifafl***-70' itivft$i-300, NaryaihgttM2 and Karivi4i-30. Of these KalMru is the modern villageof that name near MushlgSriin the Bon taluk of the Dharwar district. /\ v4.iiV<iu-70 and KMividi-30 see Fleet's exhaustive note in Indian \/n "-* **>> ** *"- m -w * K 
vai1 XX& PP 259 St. BlgaiJnf-7Q compriseda portionof the modem Bftgalkottaluk in Z" Biiapir district with B%4af, M., B&galkotas its chief town. KeJavadWOO derived ito name fromite chief place Kelavadi which is at present a small village in the Badami lluk of the Bij&purdbtriot, N*r*y*rfa*l-12was a small circle of villages with its headquarters "jj^^y^rtjgul^.,,.,the modern Narfl . in the Bon taluk of the Dharwar district. The remaining pUwen*r too well known to require anyremarks. 
TEXT. 
NimM.t,^4^^Iv 
|| [l|hVri 1| Vilu^t-pSthina-p 
WIlNMi^^ 
^ 
1 ^hinubMv.^vay-ivataftv-eih^dade Q^' 
niohoht- tt-arin-eeevan-l vasumatiyol [C*3 8 gali Klx-kil.viywh-ohaiwawesann-eeevaai 
"--* i- *h^^^
10 mub ** W""** ii.i^| Itn*** ' iliwld'*d(8>' - 
an*i 
"
BHGRAPHIA INDICA. { VOL. XX.   
16 Mrtadevigay*udgha-vikamaiiikM-chara-Mrtti sambhaviBidM kali Permma imhldltara6 manojn-acliBraijani ra^-oddhate-viruddha-nfipalaka-jala-bS 
17 la^fchw^^ 1 t12 fl A Permma ' 
rupa-Manojaifc manSjna-gu^-ga^a-jna 
btapswinijath 
18 ktam r5pit^ripa-npp^hpday4ll5pflifi (^Ivurf^a-mairfal^ara negajdarfi ft [13 1|*] 
*M.*y.v*VfrV*M' MM*W*^ JVP** J7 y-j^ -f 
19 {item C&axfcdWadevJHmtan^^ CMvnifuJarfi J 
MnniBHiblilla-i^ 
20 jhanijajji vanadM-pravyita-kirtti samdra-viWrat-kaiSya-pirp*iridtiakara-mri ehamdra-didhiti lasad-danadbt budha-biata(S)- 
Samar-6dyad-bala-Hoysala-ksMtipa-sen4Bikam=omd-ag^ 
22 yikramadim tage parakrama-krama-yntam Simd-invay-tobhSdM-chaifjidraman* erwatti tad-Kanam maledaram komd=ugra-matta-^- 
28 bha-saiiigliainan=idaiii pi4idam prat&pa-tapanaih C^fivuiiicja-bhiipll^ath \\ [16 1[*] V|i H Bhirugalarfi 6ara^-buguvaraili bhayad=u{i|;udani ikki mlu* 24 varaifc varavadirfid41a-talake vapparan=aiht=ipyalke pSsi sad-vfcaraaeyde komd=eseva misegajiin huri-goiii^a garfMJia p6iii<Jiira* 
25 nian=*aida Siihda-kti}a-i]QLaiii4auano} pa^iy^pp^ g&ifMjarasSr || [I^IPJ Nija* cMturbbaJa-garbbadiih bhuja-baJa-prakshSbhadirii Paifoi<lyatt5]I-jay4- 25 kaniksli0yin=0yd6 vaihdu ka^upiiMaiiii ^Sfe) Chftiniii3i4a'<bhilbhti]aiiak. aiiigade gelda sainyaman=adaiii karh^u^udarii bifrtu nirwijayarfi 27 Kiina-niipaiwrro^dan^varii beiiigottju k&J-va^eyirfi [| [18 1|*] 
28 CteviiiidajQiE^|va}aii-Madte Guttanin^TJjjayanl-puraifn IbruKh-natiidatwniiiide Hastinapuram nere ranijisuv-ante sanitatam Simda-Ghavumda 
29 blifU3lxuJtolnoppaman=S}dud=Eraii^ || [19 1|] D^rakijailigaiirfi [ta yadhu]ku]a-harraiiLva-4atariigalira mahldeva-grihariigaliiu .Dhunu 
30pati*prablia-T$i4ya-kadamba-g6liadiiii p&vanavat-tapQ-vana-topd-dbau-ttlegatiibcta ka^ge-variid=i n^ndb-'l^xadolsale 
SI 4=lraihbar3ptira;rfi || [20||*]* Alii| 
^P' 
l-6tphuUa*8 
|| [21 f] Mattaiii || Vpi || 
33 k|mtto-pradaha-praba]atar$,*iAaJi*op^ 
mechcM xiiehdhadi 
|| [22 f] Sujaim-stutyaj^ 
achaia-sad-dh&rBacia^ 
35TOanniW!^(^ 
36 radiihfe^ ba&<^B%aj*v^wftt^JitalaA fea%ip 
MM*didiiMi | (83||*} Va|| A*tt Wtiwn^^ W frW^Braii^ TtM%I4yaril-Atwc* tad^v-ayatanamiuiiaih mi^rida^a sthanadii-
So. 1 24 TWO SINDA INSCRimONfi IBOM BBNACSAMATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109, HT   
&n*arhnat-ya^a(S)- 
It P&IM T< 
Y6ge6varayatl sat-pum^yarb. 
[25 |l*] Z mummukhyana 
bhfi-ma&itaiti naisfrtMkr&gra-gagyaia vibu<2ia-Btoma-siira-bliiijaE Aiiigaja-stoaja-gaja-vam Ckaitidt'aittat^^yatSmdrarh ||' (8) [26 |j*] kalpa-bMja-tatiyarh mfik-bratam stutya-Vayu-|anariisat 
gi,tb.bliiryyav5=ambh6dliiyain tfi(tri)-jagi0id-byii 
pta-yaaaA fiafi-Siiika-ruchiyaiii kij-ma4e rarajiparii vijit-6dyat<Kali 
Vachana ||Svasti [|j*J Samasta-bhuvan-SSrayaiii Sn-Pptliti-vallablia ma paramabhattarakam Halacliuriya-kula 
46 
kadana-prachamdam nam-adi-samasta-pra^asti-saliitam. 
6ri-3rriat-Tribhuvanamalla Bijjanadevara vijaya-rajyam=u 
46 
li>dttar*ftbhJTtiddM-pKaTi(;r<f^^ 
" 
'' saltittanissire 
S(6)aka~varslxa lOSS^neya Byaya-samvatsarada Faeliyad=anafaTasye (S) 
47 
ray^a^aihipraEbct* 
varacUivar^g-e 
rada uiathad ucharyyar^appa CUiamdramaulid^vara av^em 
karchchi tajad^o 
49 
ga^adalli 
Joju gl^adalli vlsav*aidu gaijain mettuvaralli ^sa?vs*a*fo ma^iakke 60 
61 62 
Kallifita batteyi^f pa^orafo ijtaifcidssiruva koni<iava(S)- 
ralliy-a4akoy^oiiidue^isida dhor^galalli i*a*ykav-a4akeyoiiidiiteife 
63 
buligarv*vi|/t/ayaiiibtaiiKjig^ele nuju he 
jfixixg niiju tale-voreg=aiy(ai)vattu devara mumda]j=aihgadiy=era4u [|641J8 EHGRAPHIA INDICA, [ VOL. XX,   
1 rtti niti.s(6)ara.iiidHye8edaiii || [3||*] Na&biya teradira Smnarfi n^OhUana [tejpadi noh-illada bhaktarft Bftgan-atfite j&^atfi kith bahuna Vira-Bijjal-ava[ni] 
5 pajam || [4||*] SalJalita-kirtti ripu-hyit-sellaifc chaushash#--ka.iegalo][u ditadim tain ballam TripurfidivlyavaUabliaii*! VIra~BiJjal-avani 
nathaih|| [5f] ........ 
ti-kulam chakravarti-padavi-[pati]y=iiliiin=Itan^nal^8evan=un^I-khyata-ya^am Vfra-Vikram-ayani-palaiii || [6i|*] HuHy-erfidan-a^aauvarii phafld-kuja* raa ............ 
7 van=oppe mari^vaih jakkuliparfi javanatfi Biohoha|-gali u^t aivfivo Vira-Vikrama-I>liilpaiii || [7|f*] Vr(y)itta |J 
podarppam [kam<Ju] simga ............ 
S r=ar^vvelaloilar=ar=ppodarpp-udugar=ar==ant=6di 
ar=mmanam-gi(Jadar^ar=BBarvvasvamamtettu bi* ........... 
9 s(6)rat-yiraTi]a'ama-nppa4y%akke kaiy-anar=Srw || [8||*] Kanda vandige fiarai^ene kavaih vibhu ViraTiloram-6rvTl-p51aia [|*]fl 
10 deviya mano-bjini-kala-hamsam || [9||*] g Svaeti [|[] 
6ri-man(u)-mahama9dale^vaja sahasotturiiga bhuja-baja 
11 ladeva-Vira-Vikramadevarasarum Ki8ukfi4=eppactu 
Kela[va]<Ji-munaru NarayaihgaUu-haiiinoraijLU Karivi<Ji-ma[va] IS nija-rajadliamysEiaiiibai^eyobi mildha^ftriikathfi-viii^ 
ire [I*] (6)aka-varshada 1109-neya Plavarfiga-eamvataarada 13 turddas(6)i Sdmavira samkranti pu?flr<M4lt%*aift 
okkala bi(m)nnapadim ^rimad-anadi-patti3^v=Erarhbu*agoya Telli 
14 ppatt^n. gena p4e[yo]lu Jagate^varadevara keyitfa batjagalu mattaru pannera^umam Mumjaya Sftha^iya bi[nnApadim] 16 ......[pa^uvalu gadde ntoro!idiimaib sarwunamasyaifi badia-parililram-agi dhara-purvvakram-a[gi] Vira-BijjaladSva Vira Vikramadiva ......... 4 ...... 
TRANSLATION. 
Verse 1. Invocation to SaAbhu. 
V. 2. The" ocean, terrific on account of excessive roar, looks fait to the sight with voltt billow inked *tth pearls that are tossed about by th* wtion of Wrtois^ with stou^ the dashes of fearful trunks moving to and fro of the big water elephants that ar^ seated, ejubbmgsof the feet of crocodileslosing couiage at the incasing tumult caused by the 
rendered heavier by the movements of the tails, of the wallowing j*fcb fishes, T. S-Bncircled by the beatit^l ditch, the ocean, Ja^bfidvlpalooks highly chaming ; in it the Mount M^ appears very attractive as if he is the best of ail beau^momtam M ST^,go den mountain is Kuifataja, r^semliKng the lock of hnir of the 
Kg an e ,^^^ ^bom^ ^ 
a cha land 
Ohdca fangs (M passed aww),,th ift^ous 
enemie,, looked majestic seeing ti, braid of hi, of the haa^ d clew
Ko. 12,3 TWO SINDA INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENAOHAMATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109. 119   
lady, the land of Kumtala by resorting to strengthof arms, after conquering the refractory (c so as to be highly praised by the whole circle of Earth. 
V. 6. The son-in-law of the emperor was the well-behaved prince Chavunda of white fame, a tough warrior, renowned on earth as a Gandharva of the Kali age. As regardsthe genea logy of that high-aouled (hero): 
V. 7. King Achugi's brothers, viz., prince NSka, Siifaga, the chief of kings, the famous Dasarasa endowed with valour befitting hi* rank, the valiant Davana, Hng Chavuitfarajfa, a handsome lover of victory and prosperity and the virtuous prince Oiava were (powerfvl)like a thunderbolt to mountains, the kingsof uncomparable prowess. Among them 
V. 8. the brave king Chaunda, born of the Sinda family, ever praiseworthyshines on earth with the splendourof fortune and fame unsullied like the nectar-rayed (mow), looting and crushing the foes in furious rage when the confederacy of hostile armies met him in fight. 
V. 9. Among them, to Icharasa was born Bammarasa, a moon to increase the ocean, the 8mda(ii-.a^.),brilliant with fame, a repositoryof great pwwessand endeared to victory 6 
10 His your ger brother was Acharasa of exceeding splendour who, born of the iUwtn 
V 
ous Simha and renowned on earth was, on account of his valour, (Knownto be) ever engagedin killing the hosts of haughtyfoes... V.ll. The wile of Icha-bhupa,thus described, was known by (lit. shose with) the name goodfortune^^ ^ ^ ^^ ^^^ ^ ^ ^^ 
Mafcftdlvi and was of noble family, prudent, extremely calm in disposition, kind and possessed of 
Perma, famed like a Gandharva, exceedingly brave, pleasingin conduct who rendered the Seld* impurewith pure and rolling tears proceeding from the eyesof the young mves (lit girls) of the collection of enemy Hngs who rose in battle. 
V. 13. The youngerbrother of that Perma-bhupa was the renowned chief 
Cupid io tot, possess^of a number, of extent amitiesand who was a woe to the aon of C*a*dalad*rl, courageouslike Mount Maadjraand 
in pllying with^ro^ 6f balls, the heads of the groupsof hostile kings, atoned fame glowmg Uke 0- ^when mstnMt a 8torm to dispersethe gatheringf t 
. When the army of the Hoysa* Mng who had 
him bravely with a united front, prince caxavu^da, 
Ess ssr -rr..i'-js ttttSZZ *+-'*-(helpk*,) and those that got down on earth from horse 
V.18. Puffedupat 
th, |aV4y chiottai* 8torfcca
120 EP1GRAPHIA mICA. [Voi. XX.   
conquered (Aw) army single-handed., Seeing It king Kgxpa threw of? his garment and losing (hopes of) victoryfled by the forest track turning Ms back. Y. 19. Just as Amaravati looked ever beautiful with India v]s*> was bowed to (bu ?A AyodhyS with the descendant of Baghu (i.e., Ramachandra), the 
Ujjaywl with Gutia. andHastinapmawitl tie on o* Marut (* 
pura attained much gracefulneea mtl the Sinda 
Erambarapura Aiaea gieiily on the faee. of this eiiarmiag earth vith numerous palaces containing group* of maide^ h^ses of god* on earth, i.., 
pMOili*8 rf Teffigas (ie" aihaen)' endwe<J' *virtues and B"* -* 
, and' as 
- 
pervading %e three wodda, the luatoe** OCem and
No. 12.3 TWO INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENAOH1MATTI, SAKA 1088 & 1109. 121 LL 4848, On Mondagr,the nWHcaoon day of Pusfcya, which was the day of 0ttara*   
ya^m**!*^^*11^^ m^ Vymtljpit* in the cyclic year Vyaya correspondingto the Saka y^ar 1088, the Fifty Pmffldll of TtUigiui met together and granted the following inoome with the pouring of Wfttar to tli gioriou* god TtlUglivara after laving the feet of Chatidramauli d(Svi the Sch&ryaof 8iihhMv&Fftttt4f&a'' -1' 
Iil 4442, Rfcch family in Cftntoaunmt and Town (%<n*U)each day measure out two sofasa of oil for an oihaill;in th family (mm^mmng) the god'soil mill, oil measuring one sohsa (shoMbe remiwd) ;flva cm an oil mil! fat (tike offmng of) chafara and jro&m ; and five lisas from every ono of them* that prwm the mill; om Jbjoj/a of jwarry per month from each familyfor oonductmgthe feeding of people (** g^tats) that come to the 0tafto ; one mattar of garden situated at* ......*.**.. .wart of the path leadingto Kalluru ;on the sacred occasion of $$p5t^i|*oiia of oil front each family (lAouW 6^ reoetved). 
Li 5244* Ttwi inctonifi granted by the Mve hundred wi^ninf in (Aeir) storehouse : for every gold O0in OBI* atix)a-nut from ntll^t and one from buy^cs ;one areca-nut fwm the countingofficers eaoh time Tht inooiae gmiated by the dealers in betel-leaves : a hundred leaves for one onrUdficl, * hundred tor * buUock<4oftd fifty for a man's load and two shopsin front of the 
temple* 
B.' '' ''" 
1. t.h^ }{IrifuuSIM! famous |(od Tellig6va3pa grant with kindness the prosperity ci ;dom to th world-rnownwl BljjaladSva and kig VIra-Vikrama, V 9* Thar** wor* born to kiztg dilvu^^ of reputedvirtues and to SidtdBvi (two)sofis 
namely, king Blljala and king Vlra-Vitoaina aa if they were the (two) eyesoc (iw) goals of 
life (if parent*}. 
V* 3. Of tlu-m, ihft rfdw wan prinoA Bi|Jla, a Cupidin form, a bee in the lotus feet of b, wltlt ft* mittg by all and au ocoan of polity^ 
V* 4, King Vlra-BIfJa^m triutad Siva Hko Narabi and was like Cfefla, a devotee Who did any rdigiouH ritw -what more to was learned like Baija. 
V. 8* this printw Vfra-BiJJiOa of iaer@aing fame, a shaft in the hearts of his> foes and *a 
foHMttfeh, in th nlxty-foururte was the toband of Triiiut^vL 
" 
ft. King Ylra*>ikrama looks majestic with fame e3dx>lled on earth 
_j tto (propw) lord <to bwr)th0 title of ah^kravartin, 
V, 7. If (Otr twmt a/) a UgerIi takeu (to towpw* *M twfou.r ti*)i 
would .......hiMit 0f rpent s opposeia a fitting manner ......and cow down the Dflfttlt dod. ! Hod 11 Vlra-Vflcrama i indeed a veritable waiasror. 
8 wjitt tttd<***<i can Siirvivo***v**/*^ w*tKfo^'v/1/*"/ *v* * 
Vjw%t** * i* /yy/A^M* iUli</4WJtJt4L4m) "fellft fOrCd CHC IMU& uXOWcBB of Mi 'arm* ! Who <ioi* mrt uKrink in powr1 Who does art rnn way Wpiw *** ^S(Mm) in Ktll ! Wb d not tnuUe or be pertuibedin mind and wfll not . ... .... . ... . . ^ytWB ol hi* own 1' Wtot peou k that* that does not atretot to hands for the g*. rf tt 
* . 
V, . 1I pv^rf l ehkl VTm-Vlkrama gives (^.)to one that praxes t*
EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. VoL. XX.   
with the pouring of^ftad^immun. ^ 
and Vfra-Vikramadiva.............. g^a at the^of 
of Eraifabarage, the fortunate town existing from times inmn 
No.l3.-DABOK INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF DHAYALAPPADEVA . SAMVAT 207. By 
R. B^LDBB, RAJPOTANA MUSEUM, AJMBB. 
i large stonelying in a field 
Bahadur Gaurishankar H. Ojha, 
commonly known 
al ^g* *he^lasa of a^abets( t0 ** J dhUr . of 
the l^r-B.mbol ofa 
m rreCt SaMtrit an<3' 
--following points may be DotedlCOns7ntt T ^ cepbng the two 
the imprecatory verses, the wlot record1 (I- 9), etc. ; and'lefore r as in^Z V( ' 
r<58pe0t f ortt^Phy, " * ^** I J, 
as in 
B,etc. ; is written for i (L 
Other irustakes anpl irregularities are pointed out fcSST1" " "^ta J*1 -^*^(L 14) The 
. of 
jnsorip^^of^^ ^wSLS^f61 """Wfe* the tttt*J ME? **'*, ^-^,*;zrto rv;'as 8ho"n by *** *^
No. 13.] BABOK INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME Of DHAVALAPPADEVA. 123 
(A.D. lOOfi), we know that tho Rashtrakufas-were ruling over RajputanSin the eleventh century A D. We also know from tho Birth inscription*of the RSsht;rakut king AmoghavaxshaI that Gevindaraja HI conquered Kfirala, Malava, Gurj&ra, etc., as far as Chitrakuta (ChitSrin Mcwar). This would how that the R&ihtirakfitnw ol the Deooan held their swayover some partsof Raj 
putan& in th beginningof the ninth century A.D. Feasibly the Rashtrakutas of Dhan3p, which is war Mtmar, were related to the BbhtntHtM of the Deocan, and Dhavalappadeva may Dhavagartft (I. 2). Th CU|rt inBcri^tion'of B&laditya mentions , Dhanika*'
also have bmn related to them. Hi name seems to be of South-Indian' origin. The epigraph under notice deaoribee Dhardka as the son of Guhila, who then ruled over 
Guhil*: On, DhnikMmM a local ruler in the inscription* dated Samvat 887 (A.D. 830), recently diKovl at NiUidn in tho Kharwi estate in Ajmer-Merwaw, but, then, he is de 8cribe/a the father of Itoabhata. to*^*^*!***^ 
son of Ittwbtota. CSowwqiwrtljthere mut have been two Dhamkas and two Isanabhatas. The conteate of the inwrii-tion may be summed upas foUows :- 
After making an obeiace to the godftf and giving the date as the eighth day orO of Ohavagarti, which ^.fl^faautumn f 
as well M in mntmrr) to two   
and the otlwi of Durgftdevi F,',vumly estabhshed u. that th, abovn M4. wore it the Wn of th <l<mr). In line. MO Line. 10-U t,H W that *. Enid. we of the donor awl bU pamt^ M bo line, 12-13, tte aHtumt of Afield, a th* lat line tails w that taeiwwripfcioa WM engrave 
ffl aw ** ** 
4-5 inform .
nd d the i^o shop, ehgious merit and fame 
Labove temple.. In ade. The fifteenth or son of Vaidya Glyaka. 
north todto. Vol. XII, y. U. 
** ** 
Vol, LBC, P 
"^tfl
124 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. Vol. XX. i mir  
  

  

No. 13.1DABOK INSGBimON OF THE TIME OF DHAVALAPPADBVA.1 u   
to ^^^^.^SS^^^^^^^
i-t 18*' bv 121*, witt its corners roundedoff 
This charter 
toloa. Xbe plate W"?**^... .f*4 tlie fax* of the four-armed
, !:!,;, SBOi126 EPIGEAPHIA INDIGA, [ Vo*" xx -   
Us parents. The date of this record is Samvat 1108 MSrgaMra 6udi 15, S6ma-dina,i On this day the ChandiEa king Divavarmadeva, Lord of Klliftjara, meditating on the feet of Vijayaplladeva who meditated on the feet of Vidyadharadeva,offered water to theBarnes of his ancestors, worshipped Sulapa^ior Siva and gavethe village B^tapallikE, situated on the bank of the Yamuna river in the viskayaof Nava-rashfra-maj<Jala, to Pa^Jita Kfekana of the Kpsh$atreya-#<5tfra with 3 pravaras whose ancestors had emigrated from Kura* bhatlbhatagrEma. This Brahma^a was ever readyto expoun4the Vdas, the Vd&6gas Itih5sat the Puranas and Mimamsa and was devoted to skat-karma (shat-karm-Sbhirata), the prominent mention of which leads me to infer that he practised Yoga,8 which is more a^e-iaspiring than the ordinary six3 duties of a Brahma^a. 
The localities mentioned in this record have not yet been identified* excepting Kiiiftjara, whence the record was issued, and the Yamuna river on whose bank the village of Ehflta? pallika was situated. Both of them, viz., the fort of Kalifijara and the river Tamun& or JurnnS are too well known to requireidentification. The mention of the latter indicates sufficiently the locality of the village and the district in which it was included, DSvavarmadSva was the 1 2th king of the Chandella dynasty and, if this record shows anything in regardto his capital and extent of his dominions, it indicates that he lived in the Kalifijarafort and that hie f5j ex tended at least up to the Jwna in the north. But almost the same conclusion is derivable from his other record referred to before and tioae of Jhis predecessors, an account of which IL&S been giveji by the late Dr. Y. A. Smith in hi* exhaustive essay on the history and coinage of the Chandella dynasty.4 But it may be noted here that in, hip zeal to show the great antiquity of the Chandella dynasty and its kingdom JejakaBhukti the designation waa later on changed to Jajhauti and taken as given after Jejaka or JayaSakti, the third king of the linehe has fallen into a blunder, to which enthusiasts, howsoever great, are sometimes liable. IE his article 6 he has attempted to prove that CUh-cUJo, visited and described by Yuan Chwang in 04 1 or 642 A.D., was no other than JijhSti. This would mean, that the country was named after a king, who was bom about 200 years later, as accordingto hiA* Jsj&ka aicended the throme about 860 AJX 
TEXT?- 
)^ 
Hilai's Jiidm ipkmwi* V. 8. HQ*f M%aHr lpf 
1> with no lunar eclipse qa that date* Tlwi date in V. 8 ^ tTT1!?* ^^^8th DMM1*p- A'B- lm'^* b WM 4 10H4T MU9M.* ' 
< The six ba$w-ydga practices are :*^ MMmsw-iKMi tam nm wuliM tr&taka8**tok& 
""to^Aa nMwa^Herdtofew 
\ 
ka&ala-bkaft ch*aitani jfaf.kamm&w sam&chwet\\ 8gee Ante's iSfatwJW Dw^onar^ uiwbr daf-famum* 
* /, 4mt...,Vol. XXXVTT. n nA XXXYII, pp. 1H fi. 
** 
127*
No. 14.1(JHANDELLA. COPPBR-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS.127   
8 
fl 
U
128 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX. 17   
18 
19 Arit(n:) mfiHforft*] igpt mKfl)irw frtw D*] wfir: iD*.u*l *J*ft(ftf) u: irfa 
20 ijftf roro(*80fir i wt ??r H^(^)iwHt ia 
[11311*] irftr ssNrfrfiz n^^t^rrf'ir wf ift^fff qj^: [if] 
21 
i *rT(*r)ratf'rar(ir)tf ^rwr I8 
22 trrfoiR [i*]. 
a 
23 
fc CHABKFARI PLATES OP PARAMARDDEDBVA i 
1336, 
These are two copper-plates having raised rims (f high) rivetted to them* Each plate Wefgha 180f tdw* but their ai^s diSer a little, the first measuring 14f*by UJ* and the second 14* by 10f*. The former contains 18 line* of writing against 14 of the latter, On the first plate thereisa%TOofLate^ of the flr^t three lines, and at the bottom, a round kde in the middle of the last line. In the second plate space was left for a hole, but it was never to*de and hence the plates were not strung together as waa originally intended. The size of the letters in the first plate is y. They are smaller and 'more beautiful than those in 'the second plate, to cover the whole of which the engraver PSlha^a, a skilful artisan, aw he oallft himself, had l^ad to raise the size to f. In the case of the MahflbS plates of Sarfivat 1230,* I remarked htw PSlha^A worked up his way from the position of a ptoataKtoa to that of a wjMnin, and this 
tim% 6*, m years later, he raised himself to the position of a w^ffivUwfaman* (I 32). Dggpi^ this, there is hardly any improvement in his engraving. The fact temains that the 
1 B*d strofiT. Daqfa not required. 
Bend fnrt.*Ahovo, Vol. XVI, p. 10. 
WJiiwr ?Jate (Ixd. 4t, yd. XXV. pg. 208 ft. J, 8ty alatt give this epitbet.-Ed4
FOUR OHANDBLLA COPPEK-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS.129   
and the text 11 unite to th* one*"with aeoe88ary changes, *u one Subha of the previouarecords of Paramarddideya. of Sagau45 village 
P. AT. P. Pritt^amadeva, dMoodad fromJ*>^eroes^ rf^religious merlt of to tb. Vikrm*-Sa^t1236^ ^J^^Laworth I^Hg mentioned and M
viUaefl.
130 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA.[ Vot. XX.   
1 Thefetter^ is superfluous, 
1CPlnral onght to ha
No. It. I 
19 
20 21 
23 
24 25 26 
FOUR CHANDELLA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS. 131 Seoo-nd Plate.   
H|iitn4l: 
:) [M*] 
vrofw(fw)f*T! i iw 
27 
28 
i("fln i ift )U i'] 
29 
with imttar1 mwdi and what hM bwia 10ft 
*--;EcL" 
uted. 
'ghMM BMtri'f SaMkiit Text, p. 284,
132 EPIGBAPHIA INBICA. [Vol. XX.   
C GHARKHABI PLATE OF VIRAVARMADfiVA : [VIKRAMA-jSAMVAT 1311. 
The present charter is the earliest record of the Chandella king Vlravarmadeva yet found. The copper-plate on which it is engraved measures 15J* by llf*and weighs 2301 tolas. It has a raised rim,*in height, rivetted with nails all round it. In the middle of the first six lines there is a seated figure of the fo'ur-armed goddess Lakshml, holding lotus flowera in the two upper, and water potsin the two lower, hands. Over her head is a semi-circular hole appar ently meant for a ring, which is wanting. There are 19 lines of writing with well formed letters the size of which is Y on an average. 
The language is Sanskrit and the orthographical peculiarities are the same aj found in other Chandella records published before. The record is not free from spelling and other mistakes, but they are comparatively fewer than in other similar records of thefamily. 
The charter was issued from Vilasapura by the P. M. P. Vlravarmadeva the devout worshipper of Mahesvara, and the Lord of KSlafijara,, son of the P. M, P. TrailSkyavarman 
r?ueP',^P' *HH*.<ftlP. M.P.Madanavarmadeva, deeded 'from' JayaSakti and VijayaSakti, the famous heroesbelongingto the ChandratrSya (Chandflla) linear Stt 7 *f?JagadVa> ** f R"m DSvaahamG f the K%W"belonging to 
It records the grant of Tumutuma village in the pahl m^ya to 5Sto Abhi, son of Rsm thefanulyo Chandresvara, on Alvina 6udi 8, SSmavara, Samvat 1311, which rLaty corresponds to Monday the 21st formed a deed ofSeptember 1254 A.D, The grantee is stated to hi valour in a tusale with Dabhyuhadavarman in the battle ol S6*Z *B' 
recogmtxonwhereof this grant appears to have been made in spite of the fact that th^ur!! te^n^unteton^toiOfrum&a the Cantor Vlravariva !nH ! name. It is 8teted in.the State GaMeer( uardt Tw) L to ? \^*" town as the remains of the earlier settlement rL\ J ,^1B Certeinl7 ** old ta suggested as the taSlS^^^tiS^ ^""**~ B ^ 
Rai . Our record refers to a battle a like mo^tL aTu^e?^PUrmt f Chand tween members of the same lineage,* the^ndSs if tK *>t, apparently, be name Dabhy^avarmaa would i'nicat ^t^ *T*< ?ll<rf^PPOnent'fl of some importance to have been refe*J TT. - Jt must have be n 
-- .. ' AJU, 4,oiv?u W1O IttiLt) I IT V A. Uwtilli. i , * by *" 
ChandSlla dynasty as one of the powers of Northern I dT T *? hiSt0ry"~- Parmal (Paramarddideva) and the Nm+v, * u--i ~.D * * ^^ ^^>^^^e> death of ' t****** uuovapuure or JCLailaiiiara flnrl itroT^ks "L ^i ** 
mraders. Trailokyavarman succeeded his f th P .^anoos by the Muhamraadan eastern part of the ancestral kingdom and in due co^w* Iocal1ohieftain loMiflg the Bhojayarman' ".aue oourBe was succeeded by Vlravarman ond ^inthis record kvenofc been traced yet.
KWW OOPPIR-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS frfi;   
[w* 
4 vKlMf'I*MM'*!3I''!il'"fWl'?I*JnffI1 
6 
7 
f 
8 
10 
wro: 
n 
uI*
134 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX. 17 ^ ^TsnfT^^Fwirera tfa wfofireft   
19 tfl1i [UK*] iratfvrHft ftfo ^m tfwfa [i*] af IT) 
D.-CHABKHARI PLATE OF HAMMIRAVARMADEVA : [VIKRAMA-]SAMVAT 1346. 
This is the first copper-plate charter of the ChandeUa king HammlravarmadSva whom I broughtto notice, a decade ago,in m7 Damh Dlpaka, the Hindi Gazette* of the Damoh disfcnct in the Central Provinces, from a sati record which I found in the village Baahni of that district.^ When I visited the Ajavagadh fort, I came upon another sati stone record' mention inghis name, which I included in the new account' of the Ajayagadh fort inscriptions revised since the visit of General Sir Alexander Cunningham aa detailed in his Survey Report VoL XXI. It appearsto me that the Hamirpur district of the United Provinces, in which' Mahoba, the civil capital of the Chandellas, is included, derives its name from this Chandeila fang. Ci course,this district which borders on the CharkhSrI State, took its name from the thejumnfiand th 
The record is engraved on a copper-plate 11? long and 8f broad, with a raised rim V h height running all round the plate and secured on thelatter by nails. Its weight is 48 <Z only ^middleof the first four fees of writing there is a 
Lakahmlfigure of the fLarmed god "*-' 
which was either not put in or has been taken ofl and los . ThX^L^' * holdinglotuses and waterpots. On the top of the funire th, i. . fci * 
~ 
1 See above, VoL XVI, p. 10,,f. n 4! 
The record nms as follows :
No. 14.] FOUB OHANDELLA COPPEB-PLATE INSCBIPTION8.   
,,*,^ya tq two Brahmanas who were 
twelfth day ol the dark fortnightof BhSdrapada 
ihe Vikrama Sarhvat 1346, coirespetading to Sunday, the 
' 
The document was written by Pmh[dita*] Rau(E5majpala. 
The lowilitie* mentioned in the record ate not traceable, 
TEXT. 
; VoL V. pt.2, HP"** *1PIGBAPHIA INDIOA. [Vat.   
9 
10 
12 
^m^
P   
CO
a 
02 
*wMl 
> 
Cu 
o 
*uMa 
so 
  

a, initial form of* $, initial form of S, medial form of a, used for ft 
Abhi, 
, 
INDEX/ 
Agmmitra, Suiiga 
aggrah&ra,s, a. agrahdra, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 86 
. . * 
a Mrfft ***, WO, 1*0, 111, 114, 11B. 
115, 119 
110,111,112 
110, 111, U2 
111, 113, 114 
aJuhaOtniM (or akaJioya-n<X) 
. 134, 135 
43,15 
39, 44, 62, 63, m 
copper-plateinscription of 
Valabhipuradated GuptaSafcvat 447 
..***** 
.4T, 48, 49 & n., 50 
tU]dng;--r1*'T
Brftluni,'*   
Gupta, ..- 
Bevanagarl,* 
Jaina, 64 letters of 
Kannft4or Kanarese, 
,M,W 
. 
.,indicationof , byT"""" 
rrfjSSrtu.mdM 
Sditioa.. ThaWUm****" 
^.dynafftf)* 
,yiilMW; *- 
138 
EPlGBAPEIA INDICA, ====== 
PAGE 
[VOL. XX. 
PAGE 
66 &n 
jbabur inscription, 
* 
araUtfr (Skt. waghaffa), .... 124 apwtri1ta*(foavvya$ 
Amga of Anga, co., 
57, 78, 80, 81, 85, 86, 88. 
80 
Amgaja(= Cupid) ...... 117   
Arnga or Anga, Jaina canonical work 77, 80, 89 & ft. 
Aibnigeie, ttf., ..... IIS, 1W 
Jira^yakupagiri,97, 99 
Aranyavasini, a form of Dwg&, * . 07, 99 
Arasib!4i, t., 1U 
,mistake for mbu> ... 104 
Amoghavarsha I, a BfotyraUfr h, . . SO 
Arhat, Atahat or Into, a Jina, 60, 62, 63, 79, 86, 88r 
89 
arihamta, s. a, arhat,. ,* * . 
Arifijaya, a OM\a prince, ... 47 
Atiamalai inscription, 
Anainda or Ananda, a Buddhist teacher or 
** 
ArikulakSsari s, a. AriUjaya, 
Artha6&6tra, a work, , . * 77 *., 81, 82, 87^, 
mm* 11,17,20,27,31 
Aruarni, s. a. Avarni, . * * 
Anaada Vase^Mputra, an architect, . Ananga (=Cupid), 
83 
t. ahamSdha . 
75, 76 wf 
Anavas, . Antjaja, family, 
Ashf&dhy&yi, a work 
Asdka, a Maunja emperor, 
. 102 
47, 52, 53 
58 
8, 36, 56, 74, 77, 84, 85, 86w, 
Andhaka, a demon, Andhraka, a Sunga L, 
. 101 55 
a sacrifice,. 
4, 18, 20, 21, 23, 55, 56, 67,104 
Andhras, peopk 
Atapura inscription of Saktikumfira, 
84 
an officer, 131 and 
yit an epithet of Siri-Chamtamula, 
-clto^^ (8kt. 
Angitttara-Nikaya, a work, . ... 33 
18,24,25,26 
a'^harmacha an 
Aniulwada, 8. a. Anahilapatana, 
epithet of Suddtw, . . . . 22, 20, W 97 
antarahga, an official,. . Aatioclms III, a Syrian h, ^nwtwra, initial forms of, . ,medial forms of,. 
* 102 
76 
Avat 9, a. Avami, , 
. 72 
72 
$6 
84, 88 79t 84 
omission of,* 
awwvara, used for m, o^i*!?dm^ used for w, . - awwsv&ra, uaed for nasals, . 
ATaraiiita or Avarftuta,#. a. Aparintu, or ka * 11 
97 
Avararasa, ch. t 
Avara^aila, a Buddhist convent, *, 
. 122 
Avara^ila, s. a. Avara^aila . 
72 
9 9 
anwvara, superfluous,. Apftrajita, a Guhila fc.,. . 
Avarni, people 
97, 122 
98, 99 
Avaty&kwritii, 
85 
Aparajita, a Pattern L9 . 
48, 49 & w., 50 
Zryaka), 
Sfcli 
/Mat),titie of Demetrios, . 76 a BuddkM 4004 4, 10, 14> 17, 19,20,21,22,26 
or pillar, 
and *. 
2, 3, 4 
a, 7, 
07, 09 
Aparinta{ka), <x?., . 7,8,22,35 
(ayyifa) ( * 26 
Aparaaela, a BudtiMst convent, . , , n 
tra, . a. Skt, 
Apara-selika, a BuMkisi sect, * * . 10 
wyira*haingha or 
BuddMst community, . # 11, 17, 20P 26 
ApBsa4 stone inscriptionof Adityasena, . . 38 
Ayddhyi, C, , 6, 54, 56, 57, 75, 100, 115, 116* 
94, 96 
apsidai slirine at Nagarjunikonda, 
120 
tte figures refer to pages : . after a figure, to footnotes ; and add. to the additions. Th foUo-wing otltet abbreviations are used : ck**6hief ; co.^coimtry; eK.dis(aiot or division; <b,~dittoi %*dyBHMityj Jf* Eagteni;/.*femaie; fe.^king ; m,*Male; wci,motmtain ; n\-tiwj *. a.-same as; w.^Bmwundia temple; vt=TiUage or town; IF, Western,
INDEX, 139 
PAGE 
PAQE 
\, , .....9 
Ay&Uie,,i. Ay&lhyJL . Ayuktoka, oJWol*. 
59, 01 and n* 
. . .' . . . , 
. 185 
B 
*. a, 
Blmda(-Skt. Bhadra), m., . . 22,23*25,32 ohalam, ...,,.,
Bhadalapura, s, a. Bhadrapara or Bhodra 
70 
Bhadalftpura, w\, , . . , . . 85 Bhadila, m,, . .....22 
Bhadafliri(-Skt. Bhadra^/., . . 22,23,32 
65 and it., 08, 
Bhadrabahu II, a Jaina monk ... 00 
70 
BKadrabdhu, a Jaina author, . . . . 42 n. 
Bhadrappa, eft., ......91 
. 115 
110t 113, 115, 118, 
121 
. 94, 97 
*. a* 
107, 128 . . 130 
B 76, 80, 84, 85r88 
BIhU\ m., ., (ulmrb), 
Bhagalabb,a QMlukya queen, . . .69 BJidgavata-Purana, a work, . . * . 55, 84 BhagiyabbS^vara, te., , . . . .07,09 
B*hutttt!y*( Bkt Bdhufarityr*), a 
48 
bhajaibtat s. a. bhadanta, . . * .17,31 Bhaflja,^., .... 100, 10-1, 102 
MiafoklMjh, mistake for khambham, , . . 11, 20 
BftUUUtyft, fc, B*U&|ft (r 
. $9, 40, 43, 44 40 and %   
Bb,anu, a Jaina sage, , . . . 90, 92, 95 
CO., ...'.. 73,78,79,82, 
Bharadhavasa or Bharatavaaa (=Bharatavarslia), 
* 114 
81,127 
94, 90 and n, 
Bharhut, vi., ...**75 
.94,97 
Bharata, an author, 83 
. 134 
Bharata, myth, k 93, 90 
109, ill, 112, 114, 
115, 119 
Bhaaatimita, s> a. Bahasatimita, 
,am <tuth<n\ t * vjU^ I;K, f . 
110, 118, 121 
. . 8,30,84m 
an Ikhdku princess,. 5, 15, 24, 31 
Binnil nunM,ti,/,,* * * 
39, 41, 43, 45 
), an official, 
. 102 
un^ ??t* . 
. . . . 91 
Bhatfa, title of a Brahmin, 
60 
iuka, an IkJuiku qmwf 
. 4,14,19,20,31 72 
. 78 
, 
. 93n. 00, 07, 70 . 80*. 
Bhattdji Dikshita, a grammarian, 
Baraktru> <fi., 
90, 91, 93, 95 
Bhapana, ... 
* a nU'f 
bhaya,s. a. bbariya**8kt. bhfoya, ... 13 BMvapraka&a,a work, 
platw of ( 
. . . 100 . * . 84 * 114 
92, 94, 97 
JO) epithet of EJ&raoela, ... 80 aBuddMrtmonk, .... 12 
Hundred, 
BhiUama or Bhfflamadeva, a Tadava k. ,* 113 Bh!ma Kratha, a Tadava k 81 
04, 60, 07, 09 
bMmgara or bhingara ( - bhringdra ),. 79, 87 and n. 
* 109 
. . . 07, 09 
. 84 
Poromawfc, . MM** 
Bk6jadva,a 
. 07, 09 
/.-fan*;fc 
or
140 EPIGRAPH IKDICA. [ VOL. XX. 
PAQB 
Budha,/. 
Bfcojaka, people*. . .74, 78, 79, 84,S7 and *, 
Budhagupta, a Gupta L, 
PAGK . 25t 31 * 59, 61 
Bhojaka, s. a, Mahabhoja, . Bliojavarmadeva, a Chandetta kn 
Bkujagabbaraai, a, queen, . bhukti, a territorial division, , 
78 
Budluutuouka,/*,. 
135 
Budhavanikina, /., 
Budhi(*Buddhi),/., . 
61 
Budhirtmaka or Budhinaka, w., 
22, 23, 31 22, 23, 31 37 
. 22^ 2a 
Bhutaraprana (BMtaratei fyparvan, 105, 107, 108   
Budhi[va]niya, m., 
BMtopaffika, t., . . . . . 126, 127 
Bundelkhandi, dialect of Hindi, 
Bhuta-Vikramakesari, a Koftumlalur ch., . . 47 
BfouvaneSvar, vi*,. .... 71 
Bhuvanaikamalladeva, a Chdlukya k.,. . Ill 
Bidar, *., ....... 91 Bihar, t?i. s , ...... 40n. 
fcitfSra, possibly 5. a. birfafa (a tar), 94, 96 and n. 
Ceylon, an island, 
Oeylonese Convent, & a, 
Bijjaja <w Bijja}adeva, a Stnda prime, .110, 117, 121 
Chaohoha, m., 
22, n, 31 125- 
. 10, 48 f 10 123, 124 
Bijjana (or }a), a 
bitoma, 8. a. bilma, Irilma, a Mmet ? , 
h, 109, 110, 112, 115, 
Cfcaidya, %., 
118, 120 
chaitra*pavitra9 
79, 87 and n. 
gj 
117* 121 
( -Skt 
Bkwm}a Dugga, w 
chalcra-lafahaya*), an epithet of the Buddha^ , '22, 
Bodh-Gaya, ?>., 
94, 97 
94, 96. 
Chakra-kotya,*. a. 
38, 42 
ChaKmvartin, a Mfo, 
7$, 
. 
4 82,110,118,121 
Bodh-Gaya inscription of Mahanaman, 
. , 38 
BodObi,/......... 22 31 
,28 
B6dhi image, Bddhi or SaifcbodM, Bodha^,, *., 
Oh&lnkya or Oh&lukya, %., 10, 67, 69, 75, SO, 81, 87%. 
Chajukya (Western), dy,, . 109, 110, 112, 115S 
118 
44, 46 
Chanida(Skt. Chandra), m..... m>U 
Cliamba, a 
22, 31 
^Za) ..... 10, 22, 31^ 36 
Bodhi-ruMia*pa8ada( 
BMhisaiSima(Skt. Bodhi-Sarman), ., . 22, 23, 31t Bodhisiri, /.,. . 7,9,1^14^22,23,31*36 10 
a /Sfwb gueen, H0t 114, 116, 110 a BwMMst monk, , 12, 9, 83, 2S 
Cliaihtamula, a, a, Sir 
... 106 
Brahmaputm, n, 
47,49,6^ 
61 
40 
iSri, an IMSJb prinom, 4 nd n.f 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 15, IQ and nt, 17, 19, 21, 28 
ISO, l 130 
Brihadratha, a Mawrya h9 ,a worlc, 
Chaijujika, a goddess, . Ckandraoaaauji (or dSva), a 
m * 97, 99 . 110, 1 1 7t 
Buddha, 15,17,20,21,22,23,33,39,41,4^, 43, 44. 45, 46 and,129 
120, 121 
BudcLhaghosha, an author^ Buddharaja, a Kalacfruri h, Buddhism, a re%ion, . . a, Buddba, . 
10 36 
Chandragupta, a M'aurya fc, Chaadragutti, ^, a Ttvtiuwblcara, 
Chandratreya, 9. a, 
Chandreihrara, 
77 and n,, 88n. ^^ 
# 94, 97 
] 132,133
Charaka, a warJb,89r'' 
Chnla-Chamdamukha (=Skt. Kshudra Chandra 
* 96ft* 
mukha),*.22'23- 28 
Chadtrovardhana, a commentator, , 
Chuk-Cha[rii]tisirinika, /e of KTiamdacha Kkto*w*a 4,18,18,19,88 
OO O9 'Ifi 
Chula-Bha^raagiri,a UU, . * - ^8 
102, 130, 131, 133, 136 
Chula-Mula (=8kt. Kshudra-Mula), m.,. 22,,23, a 
. .94,97 
' f 
ChhathiBiri (Bkt. Shaahthi'srt), Ch&tiniri, *. a, ChaihtisM, . 
Conjeeveram, vt., , consonants, doublingof, 
consonants, doubled after r,. 
Ch&t8$ inscriptionof BiBditya,. ,112   
consonants, used for vowels, .' 
MrdUak aft?fta(). 24,28 
126 
Hour fragrant rH**ii yv****'*w'V'""'" - * > 
c. . 14, 28 
article) 39aad,4344 
d, doublingof,after r, 
Chwwer, an aurtor, ..... <2a( forms of,* 
59 73 
> ...... 
Pabhalaor Pahala, co., 
Dabhyuhacjavarman,* 
Babok, vi. f< 
Dahl, <li., 
niktak for VEva^arwa. - 
. 80 132, 133 
132,133 . '60, 61 
" 
Bakflhinapali,., 
Damila (-Skt. Dravi4a) ^., or people, Damirike,8. a. Tamilagani,* 
7,8,22 23,36 78 
121 
OMdi, iMo.....' 
Bamodarpur copper-platesof *J^^^ ameaswe, . ^ 
105,106 
Wri, an IfcUta e*, 48,49,60 . 79, 87 
Chih-M-Co,co.,.**' '* Chiiiita, Chilada, CHlaa or ChilayafSkt.Ki nUa), a tribe,. 
Ohil&ta(Skt.Kirata), co,, 
China, co.,. 
China, co.,. 
China inscription of Pulumavi, 
Dappula, a Ceylon epithet ofike Buddha, 
China connected with tf/w' (Chitor),tn., 
<sfciw<w*ttl(--monk'B robe) 
. 123 
. 39, 44 
47, 49, 60, 64 
Buddha),/.,. 26,28 
JS.a8enii ., ^.temple;i. village or tow; lf.
142EPIGEAPHU INDIOA. 
Tuetday, . . m 47,50,51,53,65,110 Tuesday (Sevvay-kkijamai), . . 50 
suffix, , 
s. a. Bemetrios,, 
B^buvaka, a locaUiy, . 
Dhannapala, a Pala k 
Bemaladev!, a Sinda queen,. 98, 99 111, 114 
60 
Bemetrios H, do. Bmaiioa, a Roman h, . dentals, cerebralisation of, 
deae, . . 
Bevabhumi, a ^^o &, 
76, 79, 84, 87   
76 
29 
Dhannma. . a. Dhannmanatha' 
73 
19, 29 
. 94, 96 
'5,57 67 03 131 
,a Jaio feacA^r, , 
Bhadi, vi.,, .... 56 
0, 92, 93, 96 
16, 18, 19, 20, 20, 30 
demkvfa (^ temple), . dlvatywt, one of the 18 panas, , Bevapaladfiva, a Pato h, ' 
(4Skt. 
8
Bhaulj, inscriptions of A&ka 
49 
2?, 23, 36 
Bhavagartta, ttf,, 
97, 99, 116 
Bhwlappadeva, a PatamZm 
BarhaeJI, 
Dhakkf, 
Jaina SauruaSnl, . KhandeM 
Koftkan! 
Mapfftdhf, 
MarathI (Northern), 
INDEX, 143 
lunar..... 12Qn., 12 
eolipsos: 
75 
T2tj.ayattimaAgalam, *'.,. * *^^ 
, 82w. 
Bhuvttla (?) Ohanitamula, an IkMku k, t. 10 
&toka, ,..... 3^H- .... 05 and., 67, 01) 
73, 88, 
81a, otic o//Ac four fragrantarticle* (Mtur- 
75 
75 
73, S2n. 
eras : 
75 
Ob&lultya 
Digambara, a Jaim ml, . . - 63n- 91 Dtoha- Majhimd-mk&ya*Buddhist *m&wu, 29, 32 * 1 1 1 7 1 Q 9ft 
Digha-niMya,^ 11, i *,.> *v Dlkshita, /o*if nam . - 106,108 
Chalukya Vikrnma, Gunta 
Hareha, 
DAalava, , 
Eulava-Vikrama 
* 40 98 
Dimita, ^* a. Bemetrioi, .... 
74' 86 
Dimatra, *. a, Bemetrios, . ^ 
. 
Maurya, Nanda 
75,84,87,. 
Dinakaramilra, ct cowiwwwto^*"** * 
AM^eota, . :Wd*..W or 
CS and w., 67, 69 75 
.. 9M3 
i, a 
a BwWItol u?orAr, 
win, 
D6ara, a. a. Totail t 
Vikramaditya,.' 7 
Eukratides, ftactrian Is......7^ 
BraAbarapura,. tf. Erambarage,. H5, 116, 120 
Buthydemoa I, an huto-Qteek h, . ; ^^ 
, 62, 64 
55, 75^,, 86n., 
887i, 
01 4} Old; 
. iU 
8 
D5sarfndf** Tow.ll t 
8 
laridpur copper-plates,. 
. 59 60 116, H7, 
J)r&Hgtto, 
Fifty Families of Telligaa, 10ft 120, 121 
,a 
or DramlK a, a* / grain, 
Eye wMtas, Jaina practices,, 
. , - W 
iprtmghta:- 
. 92, 95 
v63 
^^ 4> 6, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23 
60, 61, 82, 
Forty-Eight Thousand MaheSvaras, 4 
122, 123, 124   
106,107,108,1^0, 
133 
00, forms of 
gadaJbba-namgato, 
Gadag, 
^^rsns^s^^SHr:^^^fyzzzttzzzzz=^=r - '" temple; pi. -villageor towns TT.-Wo.Wm,144 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA.[ VOL. XX. 
Oarfadhara or Gandhara, co., 
. 
,j j 
(= accountancy), 
PAGE 
Govimda^Krishna), . 
.7,22,23,35 
Govinda II, a R&styrakuta k., 
. 68, 70 
Govinda III, do. 
.* 90* 
Govinda-Bhafta, m. t 
PAGB 
116, 120 84 
49, 50, 123 
PW ywtw, commuml and 'professional guilds, . 90, 94 
Guhanandin, a Jaina monk, . 
Gamlharva, a cUu* of demi-ffoti, . . ', 87 
Guhila, progenitor of the Guhila dy.t 
05, 69, 70 60, 62, 63 123 
Guhilot, a family, ... 49, 66 and * 
45, 
Guhila, dy., 
. 97, 98 . 123 
(i&rg*-*aihhito9 a work, . 
76 
Gummacjiduru, vi. t . , . 
(taruda emblem, , 
' 
10 
. 105 
94 97 *" 
ttaruda-Pnruna, a' work, 
Gfummatan&tba, a. a. Bahubali (a Jaina saint), 
Gautama Buddha, a. . Buddha, ^autaznlputra Satakarni, &,, 
58, 69* 
Gupta, dy 
Gupti-Gtipta, a Jaina,pontiff, , . 35, 74 
67, 68, 70 and n. 60 
60 
< tontamiputra Sri Yajna.&ttakarni, an 
Gutta ( Gupta), ... 74 
genitive case, use of-, , gha9 forms of, . 
, a name of Durtfi, 
uddhistinscription, 
Ghosunijr inscription, . 
Gurjara, co., . 
58 
73 
Gutfci, vi. t , 
. 67, 69 
122, 124 
56 
123 
116, 120 
. 114 
H 
Ghugrahati copper-plates, , Girivraja, s. a. Rajagjiha, Oirnar, mo., . 
Girnar, Inscriptions of Asoka Glyaka, w., . 
Ooa, ttf., 
, name of a field, . 
k used for * in Kanarese, 
. 60 
78 
Hagasiri, tn., . 
92 
Haghamna, w., , 
84 
Haihaya, dy 
bala, a land measure, 
122, 123, 125 
half chronogram, . 
35 
124 
25 
* 25, 35 
- 22, 23, 35 80 
105, 107 
- 100 
,*. a. GuMla, Guhadatta or Guhaditya /*fcr o/ a Gohalika, w., 
Gamffia^ra,a^^,. . 
, 
Hammasari, s. rt, Hamraasiri, Hammasid, aw Ihh&kuprinces*, 
. 94, 96 
3$ 
4, 14, 19, 20, 35 
Hatfamasiriaika, *. a. Hamraasiri, Hammiravarmadeva, a Ohand&la 
*t 
Goradhagiri (Gorath.giri), . Barabar ^,73^, 7^ 
an author, . 
134, 135 
, w., 
Gotamlputa, an epithet o gotras : 
IJIiaradvaja, 
Haribhadra,   
do. 
ifti, a work, 
Haridasa, w., . 
Haripala, w,, . 
HarimMa, an epic, 
* %"', 
Hastinapura, w., 
Hathlgumpha, acave, 
Hebbalinscription of Harasimha II, HSmachandra, an author 
Hernadri, do. 
Himalaya, ; 
Hiramflaka 
132, 133 
11 
116, m * 81,36- 
""" 1^^.' 'o, ji, 19, 35
INDEX. H5 
PAQE 
0'SaUimh<w<4-faila^atCMaha3a:p<id- 
&I/K cpithtt of $inCh&vfofaM&la, * 10, 20, 24, 35 . 118 
PAGE 132, 133 
Hirumutfmva, a locality,* Biuen Taiang, a Cftsnm pilgrim, 
Jagate^vara, a god, 
. 22, 23, 36 
Jaggayyape^a, a Buddhist site, 
8, 9, 10, 11, 40, 
Jainism, religion, . 
60 
118, 122 
2, 3, 7, 10, 12 . 77, 88., 95 
Horiu/.i palm-leal manuscript, ... 38 
Jaitugi, a Ycidava k. t. . 
a, form of, 59 
Jajhauti, s. a, Jejakabkuktf, . 
Etottfir inscription- (of Saka 959), ... 65 
Hoaur record, * 65 
Oalihalu, 00., 
Jambudeva, vi.t. 
Jambudvipa, 
Hoyafcl*, c2y.,* 100, 112, 113, 114, 116, 119 
. 113, 1X4 . 126 and t. . 91 
. 61, 62 
109, 115, 118 
Hu$a& o tribe,**40, 41 
Hughs, m, . . . . * 25, 36 
janapada,. 
Janapada,. 
Hul^Cir inscriptionof Saka 960, . ,65 Hut&fona, & gradt ...... 103 
. 79w., 88, 106, 107 . 79, 87 7i. 
^cw, mistake for 2/0^0*,. . . 101,102 
Jayadbhudaya,mistake for Jayabhyadaya,,93 
> & JKw9w3M&& ft*, 7 
JayakSM, a K&damba ch., , , .11? 
a commentary on the Kamaautras 
83 
Jayanandin,a Jaina monk, 
Jayafiakti, a Chandel 
..... 73 
Jayaaiihha (II), a W 
..... 73 
126, 129y 133 . 65 
57 and n. 
i, initial form of, f medial form of 
IcJaiyarru-nlUJu, <#., 
Jayaatambha,a Chamba I 
Jayasvamin, m.t . 
je, used for ye\ 
46, 47, 51, 52, 53 
Jejaka,s. a. Jayasakti, 
. 127 . 125 . 126 
Ikbaku, dy., 
2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
Jej^kabhukti, kingdom,. 
20,21, 22, 23,24,26,27 
Jentaka, m., 
126 and n. . 97t 99 
Ikhaku (Ikkhakus-Ikshvaku),mt/tb. &.,. . 6 
IMa)bt*-f#jte-jw^^ 
Jijhoti,. a. Jejakabhukti Jina, ^4r^a, 
60, 62^., 88 
of the Buddha, ...... &> 2791 (-fifct. Ikehv&ku-rfya-pravara-rshi* 
. 44,46 
,<*n epithet 
Jina (Buddlia),* kara (f 
. . 80 
.,. * - 47,51,53 
^a^oman^Awm),an epithet ofthe Buddha, . 22, 28 
Imnia4i ^adaAiva-Nayaka, aw. o 
W, 92 
itta (*Skt. jita-r&i- 
43,45,116,120 
Buddha, 
100, 104 
^ an epithet ofi 
77, 
' 
Jnan-achara, 
Insoriptionof Chitor dated V. S. 1331, i, a tax, . 
, 
98 
Jodhpur inscriptionof Pratihar* Bauka, . 1^2 
54 
Jogimaracave inscription,.* 81n- 
Xgvara, te.9 
Ifivara-Bhattaraka, a god, 
. 123   
jugala, mistake for yugala*.. . , .101 
. 109 
Juna>ga4hrock-inscriptionof Rudraaamaiu . 3^, ^ 
. 53, 54 
Justin, an author* 
3 
^.^fp.. footnotesodd. to the additions. The fallowing ^^?d 
The figuresrefer to pages: n. after a figure, to other abbreviations are used :<&. chief ; CO^OCPITO w s Eastern ; /.= female ; jfc.=king ; w. male ; mo. le." temple ; 'ti.pvillage or town ; PT. Western. 
, a.-s^me as; ^n
146 EPIGEAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX. 
PAOB PAOB 
K kaniam, a coin, .... 47, 52, 63, 54 
Kanakadri, a. a. Meru 115 
4 doubling of-, after rKanauj, t 40 9(Conjeeveram))W-. 49 
*. doubling of -, bafore V, .' 
' * ' 
5 5 9 
"m26 
105 106 I0***** Kri^vStf o, KrMuja Kaikeyr,^.^'.' "* "*ver^a, ,. . Kp^a . . . . 
*, doubling of-, before a, Kadambapadraka,*., 
' ' 
"*Kanhargadh, * a. Seondha, . ... 132 
Kaaka,7ftfaMt, Kanh^ inscriptions at -, . ... 84 Kailasa, ^o., 
fefajnfataitfo . Kajaohuri, dy., . 
'' ' ' " " 
I ***,**** nuann, 53,5* 80Kwmapa" M 66. 89 
Kalachurya,^., . 109j 11 ', 111,' H2, \ 13,n7,120 H^^a,".,. Kalakappanagudda, w'*''JJ"&W*PW Kawriwwi, . ft ! 
'' ' 
Kalameilvara, fe 
KaM*^w5. Krishna, . . . . i 
Kalaajara,/o<r . .' .' 126 'l^g 132 133 las IK*5ia8la"8ft'a" "fetake for Kai>ur, . . 95 g? 
" 
. 94 ^M^^-e*^***""^^^ Jafww, . 90,92,98, 
Kalant6patina-balke,afotZ%, '. 
' 
'. 
kalanju, a, weigJiit . . ^ g/- . 95, 96 
Kalara-kkurram, &'., . 
' 'KP, Kapi or Kapu, w., . 89, 90t 92, 93, 9*. 95, 96 
"' '' 
Karabe^a. . a. KafihabeAija . . ; 83 
Kaiara-kurram, w'., . \ 
47 
' ' " 'Kar^*Hi record of Saka 933, . . . 65n.   
. 115, il7, i u.**ika':M !**... 40, 42, 44, 45 
b&.anwicalimfrum^, 
J^arapnnnime, a vwwn*, 65 and % ft* TA TOA I,"^ ^ w *na w 00, 7(1 
g ^.f 55 56*75 f ir'* * *^ ^ 
I Jfc^re 
Kalimga or Kalinga, co., \ 8, 36, 72, 73, 74, 77,' arfvi*30'* 
79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 and a., 87 88 
KpaH.lUk.tZUM*,, row I'*****1 **'*'M, f or 'adhi**. m* rhim^ Xutffito-BMHtHUhia, a work, 
KftrWa' (Mt ^iew 127 
80,85,88 
KalirigaorKalMgaaagari.*.-., . 77, 79] 83, MKara*iiPPir5**iySlr' ?" of ParHntaims. * 77 SQ* * * "o^ . 47 
k&whQpana, a coin, . ' 
* * * ^^^^ 
115, 117, 121 Karuriibudhina m, ** 
7 ir 
Kalsi, Inscriptions of Asoka at'"J r,!?.?'-^'' \' ""'*^ Kalya^w., ..'.*.' ni 222'^-' '" 58 1!!!?^^ ^JjJJK^^MKashmir>(Skt.Ka4mIra),^ 7.V J 
Ktarip. 
116,120 tato,acoi * *35^ * 47, 52 aad w., 53 83 and n. Ka^yapgya, name of a field, .... 124 
8?n.nrf ir-/* 
KatgSri, vi., . t 
4,iaand,17,27 Katyayana, an author, '.' ' '*'"* 4g* ...4 1^ ^^mS^*Wen>' 
' ' 
(^^^^J^^^.^ K^w- gi 9' 10' 22^gautalya^Kautiiya.a;^^ | ] j^
KampaYaman/aPotoflfe, 
figures refer to pages : w. after a figure f"""""" ""~ "" - 
l^e 
other abbreviations are used- di=oheif- co =7'tnote8 ; an<i ^^to the additions. "-i;/^female; Jfc^king; w, Jnafc .- !!!!^L*:^ ^o.^dittoj i or
(Skt, 
INDEX. 147 
PAGB 
KS^alas, people, . . . . . . 83 
. 16, 27 
Koaam or Kau6ambi, m., . . . . 75 K6t?avumachgi, m 64, 67 
80 
Kayaaena, a caste, iayaatha, scribe, 
. 123 
130, 133, 136 
le . . . . 91 (=Skt, Kdahthagariba), an official, 7 and 7i., 22, 23, 28 
Kaladi, family, 
Kotitlrtha127 . 115 
Kerala, co., .... 
kdpfa, cow-pen,. . . . . ^8, 70 
Kelava4i-300,di. $ 
K&sana, m., . 
KSiavarasa, w KS^avayya, m., . kha, forms of,. Khainda (8kanda) 
110f 113, 115, 118, 121   
Kottampalugu, a Buddhist site,. . 3, 5, 6, 15 
91, 123 
Arrow*, mistake for fcrimi, . . . .135 
. 94, 97 
ICrishna, ri.,.. 1, 2, 77 and n*, 79, 83, 113, 114 
65 and n., 66 
I^shnavarna, *. a. Elriahna, . . . * 1 
64, 65, 67, 69 
Krishijaveinna, *. a. riahnave*nf, . &3 
73 
Ma, form of, . . . . &* 
. 26, 28 
Icskawralcax, one of iKe 28 panas,. . .9071. 
KhaihciachalikirertimaijakR, ch*, 
5, 18, 19, 28 
Ku<Ja, inscriptions at, . . . . 84 
Khanldas&garinn(or n)aka,. 
4, 16 and n,, 17,21 
Khamdasagammnaka,*. <*. Khamdasagataib. 
Ku4epasirior K&4epa, a Kalihgd 1,,. . 80r 82 
naga,28 
. 90. 
T 
. 6, 10, 18, 19, 28 
Khaitidaviaakhanaka (or Khan4avisakham.- 
Kulahaka, a dan or family, Kulahapt>O#ra, a monastery, . 
^,22,23,28 
$aka),cfc 6,18,28 
Kula^ekhara, ch., . . . 
Khaniy&** pillar, 24,28 
fcfted&,.85 
' 
KulattuAga-Ondla I, a (Mia fc., 
'. 
. 112 .'",78 
" 
11' 61 1 
kulya, measure of grain, 
Khlraveia, a Kaluga fc., 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 
kulyavapa, land measure, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84n*, 86, 86 and n., "87k, 
Kumaramatya, an official, 
83n., 89 
Kmnamnandin, a /afwa monk, 
Khatri, a oa*te, * ** * 7n. 
V' 
60,61,^,03, U02 
60 
. 77, 80, 88 
Kumar! or Kumari-pavata, a MU, 
. 80 
kumbWtica*, one ofthe 
" 
. no 
, 
. . 79, 183 
Kumbha-saifakramti, 
'.''". 86 
; 100,102 
Kanala, sonofAtoka, . 
Eikkana,m.,126,128 
Klra4i, identified with Kirayi^f12d 
Kuntala, co., 
, <i co. or a people,*' * 7> 8 
KunneSvara, *<i., 
126, 127 
. 64, 68, 70 100, 115, 119 ., 83 
Jcuravtokaa (kwrajatoa ?), one of(he IB pa*as* 
. 129,130 
Kuru, myth. L,81 
' 
' ^""39;44,46 
. . 
lA -i,tlo,26 
' 
114 
Kistna, d. fl, 
. 
4 ';"' 
Knrukshetra, w.f* 70 
Klsuka4u-70, 
, HI, 112, 113, 114, 115, 
Icuruva (= Jkt*r6c=a tender cocoanutt), 
JCodaballflirl, 
Ko4ambaiar, dy., K5(or KI)ka4agrama, 
U8, 121 
Kushana, dy., ^. . ^ 
Kusumadhvaja, . 
. 47 
Jeut&nta, mistake for lerit&nta,. 
135, 136 
Kufumbin, 
73 
76 
. 101 130, 133 
JCo^ika, k., 
117, 121 . 88*. 92, 94, 97 
L 
80 
Kopai>a,9. a. KopaU a a, co., . . 
19 changeof,into r, . 
55, 57, 75 
la, changeof,into r, 
. 86 
- ' 
refer to pages:n. after a figure, to 
The 
other 
add. to the addition*. The following do.<=ditto ; *fy.=<f 
E,*~ 
vi\>T0kge or to^m ^.Western,
148 
Joined for Jo, . 
EPIGEAPHIA INDICA,[ VOL. XX 
PACH 
. 109 
LafchmadSyt, a Sinda queen, . 
. 111,114 
width ? 
110, 117, 120 
se 
(of Jatilavamman), . gj 
form of Siva, 
Mftgadha, co., 
. 117t 120 and n. 
121, 125, 127, 128, 132 
. 46 47, 51 
57, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 82, 84, 85, 88 
* 66n, 
LaUtakirtfc, Jain* teacher*, . languages: 
Mah&bliarata, epic, 
92 
a worJet 
78, 83, 84n,, S2n. 55 
Hindi,, 55 
mah&bhikhu-mihgha, 
Kanarose or Kannatfa, , 28, 64, 65n., 90, 109 
Mahabh6jas Bhojakas, . 
75 
78 78 
Pali, 
MahabliojiB, s. a. Mahabhojaa 73 
84 
Prakrit, 73 
Mah&-Chaitidamukha(Skt, 
mukha), m 
38, 65, 59, 64, 66*., 73, 90, 100, 
Mahaohetiya (or Mahaohetlya), 
105, 122, 125, 129, 182, 136 
2, 23, 32 
Tamil, 
Mhika, *. a. Katfiika, . 
,a work, 
Ldniapada, a Tadava h, 
78 
84 
79, 81, 82 . 81n. 81 
. 136 
!or MoMda^a9), an official, 5, 7   
a god,20 
I05' I07- 
, 110, 114, 118 
M 
m, coniTe form ol 
m final, use of, 
*****(-*>. maMMarnato ty ( great prwher of the aw), an epithet, 
*terminal, fonn of 
,nedfor, 
mo, forms of 
,14 
a Me, 
122, 123, 124 
an official, 
16,93,94,95, 96 
an official, . 
HO, 112, J18, 121 106, 107, 108 and n. 
8 
, grandmother, , ] 
MahamSghavahana, , 
title of JKharav<to> 
rt',,
an official, 
INDEX, 149 PAOB 
itahara, 
mistake for MahlrajabMlki, . 4,19 ,, atfto, .* 5, 6, 73, 79, 84, 106, 135 
,a Buddhist work, . 
^, 17, 19, 32, 42?i* 
8 
, 
MaIS4a, m* . 
a title or qpittef,. 67,69,93,95, 
39, 41 und n., 43, 44, 45, 46 and n. 
Malaprabha, rt.,. 
105, 106, 108, 117, 120, U2, 123, 126, 129' 
Millava, co.,. . . . 
133, 135 
Mtilavikdynimitra, a work, > 
86 
Malik, a title, 
.'' 113,114 . .123 
. . 55, 75 41 
Mahlkkhita a BwWIit* kflkJ^r, , 
36 
Hall**)., 
78, 84*. 
' 
'. 
r" 81 
trii, CO., . . . . i, ptopb,. 
MaUa, a demon, 78 
[ 
. 65n. 
78 
co., . . 
, . 91 
100, 102 
i, a form of Siva,. . 
' 
. 
. 65w. 
Malli.ru, vi.,. ,^ . 
, 64, 65 
Hallinatha, a commentator, . 
65 
91, to, 94, 96 
. . IT7, 58 u92 
a JMUEAM MO( 
10 
,*. a, MalEru, . 
. . 
Mabiiina (Skandft), a 0w#> .6, 16, 17, 19, 20, 01, 23 It, a lilli,. 4, * 6f 7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 
a rdigiou* division, ,di 
11 7,' 120n. 
. 117,121 49 
47, 51/53, 54 
Ma^akkal, Maijalkal or Mauarkalt W. 
,a itlb, 
* 7, 13* 18, 19, 32 4p 5, 6, 7 and n* 16, 17* 18, UrAQi.W/M 
a work, 
. ^ ^",'186 ,.,. 4 , , ./^, 54 
. 
i or M, a lilfc,. 4f 5, 7, 13, 14, 16, 17, 
' 
' 
- 
19,21,32 
" ! 
72 
t,** a* 
ctlwi, 
. . *! 
Mafiohapuri Cave insoripi?onor 
Mandara, mythical % 
of a diviai 
WIT' if!4() 
of JayafliAghaof V. S. 1112, ; 105 
MaAgala (a)-trayoda^i, .... 91,94,96 
7 wid n,, 8, 10 n., 
fnfllrf,. . 66andn,,68,70 
28, 36, 48 
Maftgalfiru,di.f .... 90,91,93,95 
. 10 
Maifagalilr,vi* 94, 97 
. 79, 
1, . 10 
i.t*., 
* M r 
a Jm" 
Hai^igaya, mistake for Majjhima, . 42,72 
Man6ja( Cupid),. 
9 
. 20 . 116 
a ( 
JJHansSJtira, Jnsriptionsof at, 
. 132 
. 52, 53, 54 
84 
a BuJOM 
of 1230, 
tomplo; t*
Jfantrin, an official,   
11, 24, 25, 32 
Mann, a sage,. 
81 
Manusmriti, a work, 
. 81 
mawya,a grant,, 
. 128 
Mara, a cfmon,. 
Marakabbe-Bhatari, a 
39, 41, 43 &, 87ft. 
67, 68, 69, 70 . 22, 23 
.67,70 
. 47,48,53 
150 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 
PAGE 
months : 
*. a. Varaguna-Maaaraja I, 48, 50, 
*i**,,aGangach, .... a6n, 
[ VOL. XX. "'TS 
PAGE 
91, 132, 134 
52 
Maravafc Pudiyir, 4. a. Parantakan IJang8yJar, 47 
r 
Mar 
Bhadrapada, . Ohaitra, 
Dhanus, 
122, 123, 135, 136 110, 129, 130 47, 53 
Maravannan, a . 
50 
Karttika, 
M&rgapa, Maiyapati or Marff&a, . 
39,41,43 
90, 93, 95, 105, 106, 108 
Marnimakabhavaka, name of afield, Haramnandana (=BWma), an epic hero, 
. 124 . 116 
Katika, *. a. Karttika, Magha, . 
Marga^ira, . 
. 98, 99 
61, 63, 64, 105, 107 . 126 
Masulipatam, w\, 
. 8,9 
Marga^irsha, . 
9 7 
Margasira, Pausha, 
127 
105, 107 
(or if) puta, an epithet, jmta, *. a. Matfharlputa, 
. 21 14 
64, 65 and w., 67. 69, 110, 117, 121 
Pushya, 
Mathura, t*., 
26, 74, 76, 78, 87 
IWS^alas, , a. Mushikas, 
. 50, 52 83 
Mattamayiim,a^, AW 
105 
Mricfohhakatika, a work, 
woar, a land mature, . 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 117, 118, 
Mi Abu inscription of Samarasiihha, 
121, 122 
Mudrar&lcahasa, a work, 
MukhalingSdrara, te. 
64, 67, 69 Muktapltfa Lalitaditya, a KaaTmir k., 
28 
98 
ft, 8871. 83 
40 
. 55, 73, 75, 77, 83, 
Mula, m 
22 
130,133 
22, 23 
dia changed into tennis and vice versa, 
61, 62 w" "' '0J, oa 
nf, a work,- 
. 12 
w*., 
Migkad^a, a work, -. 
Mula-samgha, a subdivision of the Jaino*, 90, 92, 95 
Mulavaniya, m., . 00 
Menander, <*>* Indo-Qh k,, . 
. -w, ^3 
MGJGra Bejile, m.t. 94, 97 
76 
~v..^f ,.,, t ** 
Mumjaya-Sahani, m.f . f 110, U, m, 122 
57 and n., 58 
' 
Muniohandrad6va, yiim / Devatfandradeva, . 
90 
metres ; 
Anusht 
tndravajra, 
92, 93, 96 ''*""*** .91 mu >94 98 
101, 106 
MuriyaMla*7ft 80 
106 
SaHni, .. 
MQahikaa or Musikas, people, 
. 83, 84w., 87 
Sardttlavikrfdiitam, . ! SmgcLhara, . 
Va&antatilaka, 
101, 106 
Musi, n., 
. 106 
Mflsika or Muaika,r co., -~~f . . m 
44., 101 
Muaika-nagara or anagaram, vi, . 
Musika-nagara, a. a. Muziria (?)t 
39, 44w., 101, 106 
77 aud .t 83 83, 84 and n 77, 79, 84 84 . 77 
Mihkakula, Hfina *., .' . MWndapanba, a work, . 
Mimlanaa, a whool'of Philosophy, 
mithuna, 
Dtame ending in, . 
Mutautha wMutautha-BhaMagrah&ra,   
- 40 and n. 
Muvarkovil insoription, . 
7, Sn., 35, 36 
Muziris, a port, 
66 
25 
. 22, 23 
15 
56 
nt doubling of,,after r, 
129, 130 47 
* S4n,
Nantfivannan III, a PoMava fc. 
used for n, 
,used for, 
f, erratic use of i 
or nala, a land measure, 
Narasixhha II, a Hoysalak. t, 
12, 22, 23, 30 
136 
. 114 
105, 106, 107, 
Naga, a JBwcWMiri monk. N&gab6dhinlk&,/,,* Nagadiman,tf*., 
Naravarmadeva,a Param&ra i 
. 22,23,30 
. 122,123 
Narayana, a god,. 
108 
. 67, 69 
105, 106, 108 
] . '. 66,68,70 
Narayaija, w., 
. 52, 53 
124 
. 22,23,30 
a wiccwwre,. 
39, 43, 44, 46 
one qftKe four fragrantariides, 
r,^. (;*.."'*
. 87 
Naregal,i. f 
. 61 f 63 
t. jt'- ftm /i/HW/iL ** 
an official, 
66 
9 
Nareyangal,'.,. 
115,118,121 , . 67, 115 67 
2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 
_ -VI 
,^. Naregal, Nareyaga,, 
11, 12, 15 
nasal, changedinto cwtiw^a, 
; 1,37 
90 35 
a* 
,a mound of 
N&naghatinsoriptiona,. Kanda, dy.,' 
3$ &aik catve inscription,   
. 25, 30 
NatlxaSannan (nnma),., 
* 60, 61 
or 
. 3, 14, 36 
. 135,136 
47,60,62,68 
37, 38,89 and *., 
90 and *, 94 
. 46,61,^ 
110 and w., 117* 
121 
. 75,84,87 
nikapanika,* 
and n., 88 and n. 
. 74, 83 
uikkil, 
59, 61 and ^. 62, 63 
83, 87w. 
11, 12, 22, 
Tffi 
. . '89 
. . ise 
. .80,61 
..92.M 
..HW 
. . 
. l 
60,63wi. 
. .21,30 
'.. '^.j'iflfijiri,,!,! 
:.' . ^^^.t' 
and n. 53, 64 
. . 
^^^n^onot^^ 
NandaorNandaVardliana, ft ** 
75 
~ "" 
. 52 
46 
41,4I 
. . 
. 8 
! i,se.
) and nt 50, 51.&&$&**o* n*r *--- - *fL -- T^^r^fo"^ othcr ^S^*^SS; T-^^* *; ^co-untry, A-f^i^tii-i -""^ 
153 EPIGBAPBIA INBIOA. [ VOL. XX, 
PAGE 
PAGE 
patuka^ footprint slab, ....37 
niwr&ana, a land measure, 
. 61, 62, 63 105, 106, 108 
(**paduka-pafta or patulca ,or 
Bki. nirv&sa, . Ksiiatrapa, dy., 
. 80, 85, 
Paduma, m., 25, 30 Paduma(Padma),/., 25,30 
n, do., , 
48 and n., 49, 50Padumavanl,/. 15, 25, 30 I Paharpur, vi., 59^^ 
47 
1* .... 
numerical signor symbol for ; 
4, 
5, 
6, 
7, 
PahuflappakapaK, 134 
. 12, 59Pfclasafta, m., 61^ 12*22 PmT>ri' 19 99 fid I* 
i,*,6,w Pama$a, aa engraver, . 129,131 12, 21, 22 Pallava, %j f 0W ^ J0> 4(J^ 4g>^ ^ 12, 21Pallavamalla, epithet of Nandivarman II, 48, 49 and . 22, 59 
10, . 
50, , 
70, . 
100, . 
700, 
Nyasa, a vjorle, 0, initial fona dl, 
12, 21, 22 IPalur% St a j>antapUTa>   
59[Pajlura, vi., 
12, 22, 23pamcJwmdhapataka, 
59pamcha-mcttuJca, . 
12' 19PariwJa^Skt. 
10 1O RQ ' ltff oy p^(Za, mistake for pamcha, "PariKja-Eaja, . . 66 and n,, 67, 70 
j Pa^agam^-Skt. 
, a Sectarian division, 
panch-<ich&raf fin religious practicest 
n., 50 . 8,36 
. 22, 23- 
6^ 
17 
85 
19 flwxd n* . 78', 80 17, 19, 36 * 90n, 60, 08, 70 05 
0, utefe of, in mas. stems ending in a, . 
PaSohala, 
73 
,one of the 
76 
75, *6 and n,Pafkshalftd^^^^cAY, - 
, i jjj |~ ^v.^^^,^ 
81 
110 and w., 117^ 121 Om or SiddhLam> symbol for, 
omission of doubling of consonants, 
73 
. OOn. 66 
100, 102 * 397 44 . 62 91. 
omission* of top Mnes in *at ma and y$, Ompttr^ A* a. Sdinapura, 
OrkKon Inscriptions, . , 
owral&a 
j?> cfmiiged to v, 
Pafioha-stupa, 
Pancha-stHpa-i 
60 
27f Panohatmtra, a work, . 1 * 
t caveinscription, . 
60 
8 
. 104 85 
. 74, 83 
pa, sttodlng for Padmini, a-flto* of women,
48, 49, 50, 77, 85, SB, 100, 112, 
116, _ 
a title of Varagu#a*Mah&rtiya 47, 
a P8w4ya k**^* 
INDEX. 153 
" PAGH 
PAGB 
Paracbakrak61&hala, (StfmSraSrfvallabha ) 
Perma-Jagadekamalla,a Chafatya k.t Pennmadi III, a Sinda p'ince, 
. 112 111, 113 
parakSsarivarman, a Ck&l& & . . * 47 
PerumanadigaJ, a god . 
, a title,. 61, 63, 67, 69, 105, 
Perum&na4iyal-a(l>iy&%, a fo' 
106, 108, 117, 120, 122S, 123, 126, 129, 133, 
Phalgudeva,. 
. 53, 54 
. 40n, 
. 55, 56, 57 
135 
\ (sacred Jaiaa literature),. * 77 titte, . 129, 133, 
brazier, 
. 123 
73, 78, 85, 88 . 84 
Pitinakas, people,. 
135 
jntaotaAfl, afather's t**Ur, 
ParamarcldidSva, a CfaandtiUa &, 129, 132, 
Pitundra, ** a. Pithum(J.a, 
133, 135 
Pkt. cfcafl> cAo. 
,a tW$ . 67, 69, 105, 106, 108, 117, 
Podhiya,*. a, p54iyo (!) 
120, 122, 123, 126, 127, 129, 133, 135 
Polugub64 mound, . 
Pora(=Skt. Pawrot), , 
. 1C, 31 
. 78, 79 
. . 73 83 
15 
79, 87it. 
partotaka I, a OWjto kf ***/., 
Prabhakara, on author,. 
a work, 
17, 19, 20^1 23 
. . 66 . 66, 67, 70 77 
. 62 
. 61 
105, 106, 108 . 39, 41, 43 
t),OW0/^I5jKMM,90n. 
. . . 68, 70 
SO, 31 
pravaras: 
. 106 . 127 
. 88n. 106, 108 92, 04, 97 
Atrd-ArclioliaaattaBft- Sy&va(Sva, 
. 106, 108 
Katyayaaa-Kapilar-VUvamitra, 
Vaia-Bbaiggava-Cbyavarx^f 
.21, 31 80 
Aurwa-iTtoadagnya,. idhara' 
130 129 132 
,a no** 
(.,. 
jali, an oitrtor, 
Prithviraja, a   
. 136 
. 25> 30 
. 89 
83 
75, 76, 77, 85 
Ptolemy, an author, 
. . 37 
Pubba-sela, a B*ddM# convent, 
. 39n. 
Pubba-Belika, a Buddhist sect. 
,50 
. 61,62,63 
. . W 8, 9t 78, 84, 85 
. . 11 
. . 10, 11 
Patfab'fo, 
padi-Mchchapi4ariyfr.ff^ 
106, 1(MT, 108 
47
. . . -21.31 
. .. m,121 
... . 66n. 
^, 
,a work, 
* 
. 8 and n., 9 
109,112,114,116,119 . . 11*.151 EPIGKAPHIA INDICA, [ VOL. XX. Bajapala, w., . .....131 
PAGE 
Fuluinavi, an Indhra k., 74 
PAGE 
R&japwam&vara,a title,. . 93 & ^(d(rf, 
Pundra, co., 81 
Pun<Jravardhana, dL, . . , .60,61,63 
rajapwritsha,. 1SI, 133 
Raja^imha, a Pa%<}ya, k,,. t . . 50, 51 
Ptindravardhana, identified with MaMsthangarli,61 
Mjasi-'Fasu-Ma-viMrito, epitht <?/ ftharavda, 80 
Paphagiri (=Skt. Puskpagiri), a Mil ? . 22, 23, 36 
Puranm, 55,56,58 Purigere, di., 66 
a sacrifice, 56, 79, 84, 87 iWt a work, . . . . * 41 w. 
Bajavali-tray-opeta, a tftfe,. , 135 and w^   
Purika or Punka-grama, w., . . . . 87ft' 
Eajgir, 5, a. Bajagjiha, ... 78 and n 
Purisadata, s. a. Siri-Virapurisadata,. . 2 
Bajendra Clidla II, a. a, Kulftttunga Chdja I, , 78 
pwrisa-yuga, 79, 86w-. 
Eakkhita, a Buddhist monk, . . , , 8, 36 
Purnnendrasena, a Buddhist monk, , 39, 42, 44, 46 
Kamadasa, w., ..... .62 
Eamabhadra (=B.ama), an epic hero, . , 69 
Ptiruravas, myth, k., 80 
PurvadeSachaityaparipati, a toork, . . . 42 w. 
BamI,/., ..... C2, 03 
Purva^ailiya, a Buddhist sect, .... 10 
Purva&iila, a Buddhist convent, 9 
Ramarajayya, aVijayanagara k, . &Q, 91, 93, 95 
Purva&la,^a. Puira&ula, 9 
Ba^abhailja, a Bhanja k, , 100 
Pusamitta, (Prakrit form of Pushyaraitra), . 56 
Mqakft, a title . , # j.00, 102 
Rlmka Niyarnama, cA., . 100, 102 
Pusnkariniglialf, 124 
Ranopali, name of an enclosure, ...54 
Pnsnpajrara, 9. a. Pataliputra, ... 76 
Ranod inscription,, . ,* .105 
Pnshpamitra, mistake for Pushyamitra, . . 56, 75 
Pushyamitra, a Sunga h, . 55, 56, 57, 58, 75, 76 
RMtrakiita, dy., . . 48 and n.$ 49, 50, 77, 83, 
and n. 
in 
Ratana, w? .......130 
RashtraMtaa f Bhanop, . . ,123 
Puatapala, 62 
Puva-mja, mistake for Ava-raja, . . 84 
Puvasela, *. a. Parva&tila, a hill, . 9, 22, 23, 36 
Rathika or Ratnaka, people, 74, 78, 79, 84, 87 and n. 
*. a. Maharatlii, . . . . 73 
Ratita, *i&! ..... 132,133 
.,. . . , l$5f 136 
R&yfan&yaka, a title, .....91 
Rayagiha (Skt. Rajagrihu), . 42, 
chcvndradtiva, ......93 
Bay<frr&ja~gurumarh4al-ach&rya> diruda of Jf-wni 
r, antique form of, . r and J, used for f and 2, ra, use of, . 
Maghuwih$a, a work, . 
(or jya)dSva, eh., 
Kajaganaor g|ilia, vi>, f, one of the 
Revata, w., ....*.22, 23 
38 
Baya*vadi~#itfilmaha) do, t . 93 Revatimnika,/., ......22,23 
64 
73 
. 57, 58 
Risftkas, s. a, Rathikas, 84 R5na (Ron), wf,, . . 64,67,09 
102, 131, 133 
108 and nm 
Rudradaman, a Kshatrapa h,. . . . 4 42, 78, 79, 87 
Eudradharabhatarika, a ^eerv * 4, 5, 13, 19 and and** 
Eudraseim, a Kshatrapa &.,., 
. 4 
. t 47,49^,53 
Rudrasimha, do. * . 
wr. o/ Maj&ndra Chdfa U * 78 
rfijpa, currency, 
Mpa-farfaka (Examiner of coins), . 
Jl&j&naka, a title, 102 
Bvpa-tMra, 
. a. 
. 4 79, 81, 82 . 81 gj 
81 
!Pne %ires refer to pages r n. after a figure, to footnotes ; and add. to the additions. The followmg other tfumfwe^^-4itto; Eaatern; /.-bmk; fc^fcing; m.male 5 mo^m^mim ; n.riyer; . a..aftmo as; . village or town; FT.
INDEX. 155 
S 
PAGE 
saihgJiata, 
saihghayana, assemblage, samka, mistake for fahlca, Saihka^'-Senabova, m.t. 
PAGE 
* 88n. 
. BO, 86, 80ft. . 103 
94,97 
8, initial, changed into h in personal names, . 13 
tfatima-sattobudha (*=Skt. 
s, used for I,. * . 122 
8&biLt'<\, name, of a field, ..... 124 
a title ofthe Buddha . 
*, uso of-, for J and ah,' . , . 72, 90 
16, 18, 19, 20, 34 
Samma-saihbuga, mistake for Samma-sambuddha, 18 
8ammela&kharati'rthamalaf a work, . 
tSabdakal'padruma, a worJk,. . . 39n., 58 
Samoli, i. f 
SabdamM, do 81 
Samprati, a grandson of A&oka, 
&abdanuB#ana, do %3n. 
aamAaro(Skt. *a7?wtora), a layer,. 
SedMiva-Nayaka, a Jft/acK cA., * 90, 91, 93, 90 
Samudragapta, a Gupta emperor,* 
SadWivaraya, a F^aj/awaflwa Jfc*,. , 90, 93, 95 
sandhi9 violation of, . * 
8aotfd*I *, a, ChiEda, 8 
Sagitt46 w',, 129, 130 
aangha, Buddhist community, 
Sagmra, a myA. Jb,,., , . , 69 
Sttgn-raihi^aka, a etaft* 25 
Sankaragana, a Kalachuri L, 
, 97, 98 
34 
10 
S9, 97, 122 12, 39, 40, 44, 45, 46, 88*u . 80 
Bahae<>ttung4,title of Bijjala and Vikrama, , 
jSafikha, jfween of Nandiwrmw HI, 
48 
Madhyandina, 
Buddhist monks), 
Samiibhilgft, a Suluja k., 
^(iMm^^-^wj^ 
.65, 67, 69, 110, 117t 121   
*jpfc'fe, group of seven Jaina texte 
... 57 
saumya-dartana), an epithet ofthe BtkWfta, . 22, 34 
do..... 67, 69, 118* m 
. 39, 44, 46 
. 50 
. 79, 87 
Satakarfmi, or Satakarni, ,an Andhw k> 
- 19,34 
74 and IK, 75, 83, 84 
=- 
wfiftMoiui are-..^-tsstt^iSfiSstst* ed-:-HA.-oliief ; M. country ,~ .- as; jiir^HBwm|ffc.~ Eaetern ; /. female ; fc.= 
or tofn; IT.-Western-
156 BPIGBAPHU INDICA. [ VOL. XX. abbreviated form of &%Udityat ...98 
PAGE 
Sail record of Saifcvat 1346, Sat! stone record, . 
satika s> a. zaptika. 
fiatnibhafija, a Bhanja &,, ^atrmaptangdharanQ, a tifte, 
sattra, . 
8atyaraya, a biruda, . 
. 135   
Silabhafija, a Bhanja L9 100, 101 
134 wu} * 
Sliachandra, m 40, 4, 44 &&ditya, a AfMte fc,. 97,98,99 
100, 101 
Siladitya VI of Valabhipura,. . . D8 and wt 
l 
Sfllditya VII, a ValabM k.,.' . * . 98*r 
. 44,45 
SilamSgha Sena I, a Ceylon k., 48 . 67, 69 
Satyatapa, a &aget 
fiftuddhodani, *. a. Buddha, Saudyumna, a clan, 
Saiilla, name of a street, . 
117, 120 . 43,44 81 
. 124 
[a or Sindhuja, a queen of Siitihapatha, 80, 86 89 
a. a. Six&ha, 
a. a. Singa^ia,. . ,114 
&(*varhnv( Skt. aarvajfia), 
Si&lia, a mnda cA., . 
16, 19, 34 
Sitiihapatha, co., ? 
109, 111, 112, 114, 115, 119 80, S9 
an epithet of the Buddha, * 
. 22, 34 . 34 
a monastery, . 110,117,121 74 
mva-niyuta (=Skt, $arva-niyukta), 8ava-&adhu-vachhala (= Skt. 
Simuka, an Andhra jfc,,, Sind,n,t 
132 
sola), an epithet of Chaihtitiiri,. . *.16,34 Sinda, dy.t 
109, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119 
Sava-aat-anuTcafapaJca (=Skt. Sarva-aattv-anu 
Sindhurftjadeva, a Paramara h, Si&ga I, a Sinda prince, , . 
105, 106, 108 
ka^paka), an epithet of the Buddha, 16, 18, 19, 34 
. 11 1 
. 113, 1H 
Savathe&uapatihata-wihkapa (=8kt. Sarv&rtheshu 
Sirigapaor SiAganadeva, a Yadaw 
tamufa........ 16. 26 
. .111 
apraMhata-saMalpa), an epithet ofSiri Ch&m seasons : 
(II), a Sinda ch, .. 
Singa^adeva, c/i., . . 
Plates, .. 
. 110, 111 
Hemanta (Winter), , 4, 21, 22, 23, 35 
Ski-Chamtamiila (or Siri Ohata ), an Ilch&\ku k.9 8, 5, 
Rainy, . 4,16,19,20,21 
6, 11, 13, 17. 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 28, 34 
Skidev!, a Sinda queen, . . . 110,117,121 
*ete-Miaihbha (Skt. MfattomKhe), . 18, 19, 21, 34 
-maifajava) (=Skfc. Mla-man 
Siri-Ehuvula (or Ehuvala)-Chatamula (or Chaiti tanitla), an IJcMku k. 9 . . 3 and n., 5, 6f 
21,22,34 
. .19,34 
Skt. taila-stambtui), 
.12, 22, 34 
24,34 
t stone mason, . . 
Siripavata. (or Siripawata s-Skt. Srlparvata), 
65,57,75 54 
i? 9,22,23,36 
i, an Andhra Jb,, ;, , # 
^. a, Sondk% 
Siri-Virapurkadata or Vlra, an Itohaku Jc. 9 2, 3 
*ey or chey> . . . Seyya-Aparajita, m 
. 53, 54 
and %., 4 5, 6, 7f 11, 13, 14, 15, 10, )7, . 18,19,20,21,22,24,34 
Sh&baasgarM, Inscriptions of Asoka at . 84 *Aaf.feoma, probablysix yoga, jjrocto'c&Sg 126 and n*9 128 
a. a. Sirid^vi, . , 111,113,114 w:, . .. . . , , 49 
Sirugavtr, 
Am5ghavarsha I, .....J23 
Shuja-'ud-daula, aNawab oj Audh>. , . 54 
inscription of the Rashtrakflfca king 
Sidiihattha, m.9 .. 
Sftalanatlia, a Jaina Tfrthaibkara, ...85 79,86 
. . Siddhantokaumudt, a work, 86n., 88n. 
Siva, a god, . 65n., 100, 110, 1W, 120, 121, 123 
Siddbayatana, 
Sivamara II, a W. Gatiga Jb.,, . . , 49, 50 130 
Siva^aga, m.9 
fiivaflkandavarman, a Pattava k., 
g^$ 84 
gin., 92 
figwm refor to 
f 22, 23 ,36 
a ivorJc, . 
: **. alter a %jre, uo JQOUDOIB ; and od. to the additions, The folloivinf other 
fck, ve nwd; /.^emalei *. 
; ^^dietriot or division; do,ditto; c^. dynasty ; Jf.-
temple; ^village or to^n; F, Western. 
INDEX, 1ST 
Smar&r&ti( - Siva), <* godt Sdbhanarasa, cA. f . 
PAGE 
tfWfhie, 
. 106 
SumerUj mo., 
auihnha (=3kt.< 
65 and tt,, 66 
Sunanda, /., 
. 53, 54 
Suftga, dy,,. 
PAGB 
. 94, 96 
. 43, 45 
. 22,24,34 . . 67 55, 56, 57, 75 
9ofaaa, a 
85ma, a god, , 
*owa (Skt 
SOmapura,, a. Ompur, ttf,t 
, m,, 
a, agod * 
&upabudha*bddhi (-Skt, 8uptabvddhabddhi)t an 117, 121 
epithet of the Buddha* . . , . . 19, 34 103 
Surparaka, a. a. Sopafa. 
22, 34 
60 
svadgfa, . , . . .39 and n., 44, 46 
130 
8vamidatta, tn 40,42,44,46 128 
Svapata, m 130 * 67, 69 
Svarabhakti, use of, 12 
IV, a 
86ttdhf, a locality,. Sopirt, w" 
fc., 
113, 114 
Srargapud, a cave, 72 132, 133 
jSvoatika, a symbol, 74 . 8,35 
Svetambara, a Jaina sect, . . 63n., 77, 89n. 
. 114 
8y&d'v&da> Jaim *<&ool of ptokaopky,. . 92, 95 
57 
Symbol for 200, 122; 123 . 136 
** <* Maxmara 
f)t* 
, 67, 69 
. 66n, 
to, forms of, . . 73 
a- 
toyin,. ...,.*.41 tatfi,. 5^54 
6rimirar a 
firl Satakaripi, an Arr-JR 
liuti, 
fc.,, 
. 125 
. 50,51 
l^iti** ** 
106, 108 
^'(yfw. 41 
49 
Taila II, a Chalutya Jfc,, . . . . 65, 66 
74 
. 100 
Takkolam inscriptionof Rajak&arivarman,. 47 
77 
lakflhaka, a myth, k, 57, 58 
, knowledae of Jaina scripture*, Btambha, *. a. Kambaa, 
77 
Taktthatiia, vi.t. 
BtarabhSSvftri, a goddess,* lw *"*   
* 1AA 1.A9 
Talaivayan, in.,. 
talavAtato* - 
Btrabo, an atcffor,7fl 
Talavara, an official, 
83 
_ . 129 
Tal-w&r, a sub-taste. 
Taxhbapaihnaka,monJfc* ofToMawtkni or 
Subh&nanda, *. *. Subh&txanda Vtotoyya, . 132 
gubharija, ml86 
Tambapattaji,or Tarfibapaafani-dfea 
^ 39,41,45 
flOdl Inscriptionof the Kaladfcarya king,1W) 111 
tdmwa, miatake for titara* 
8nff&nga or SxiaMJi^lya, a pafoee,. 75, 80, 88 and *. 
^^ ^^81 
Smhma, co,, 
Tamllagam, co., 
Tamira, . . Dravi4a, 
-9ira),aM. 103,126,127 
rtW*fttf. a**^^ ... 33 
Tamira or Tramira, *. 
m "130 
temple ; *rf,HDagt of fcoimi "*"
158 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. [ VOL. XX. Tosala, co., ..*   
Tanasuliyaor Tanasuliya-Vata .75, 78, 79, 87 and n. 
Tapa-achara, ...... 95 
Utntnwyiw, one ofthe IS panas,. ^n' 
taravara, , ..... 7 
Tobias, people83 
Tariht, an official, ..... 7 
To3ali,c0 7,8,22,23,36 
Trailokyamalla, epithet of Taila III,. . 1 12 
Buddha, ...... '.2^20 
Tarna>diw$a1cara-pabha, an epithet ofthe 
TrailSkyararmmadeva,a Chandella h, . 132, 133, 135 
Tepjrermda, epithet of Nandivarman H, 49,, 51, 52 
o.: . . 78,79,88 
trit used for tri,127 
Tepirerinda-Nandippottavarman,a Pallava &, . 48 
. . . 46, 49, 50, 51, 52 
Tellaru, ri.,. 
TcHige^ara,a 
Tribiiuvanamalla, epithet of Kdachurya king 
Bijjana, 110,117,120 
121, m 
. 109, 110, 116, 117, 118, 120, 
Tribhuranamalla, title of Vikram&dityadgva (F), 64, 
Tetoka-dha^ma-dhura-vaha (Skt. 
dharma-dhura-mha), an epithet ofthe Buddha, 23,29 
Tripuradyi, a Sinda queen, 
gdvelar, ....... 47 
67,60 
110,111, 11 8, 121 
Termavan IJaiigSvejar,s, a, Parantakai* I}an 
Tuju or Tu]uva, co.,. Tumu^uma, vi. t 
91,92,03,95,96 132, 133 
Twya (**tw*ya), group offour Jaina text* . 77,80 
Terasa-iwa-sattJcaih, , 88ft. 
twiyati ( Skt, toaritaifo),. * 73, 89. 
to, change of,into dha, . . , . 73, 82 
Thakura Ke^ava, an official,, 106, 107, 108 
tvak, one ofthe four fragrantarticle*$ 
sSkt. $thavira), a senior Buddhist monk,* 29 
T\Vo Khiftjalis, ft, 102 
Buddhist monks, .....22, 29 
fheriya, fraternity or community of the 
Tibet, co., ....... 41 
fhira> mistake for sthira, . , . .101 TiJdm, ..... 39,41,43,45 TiLJdai (Piladai),s. a, Chilada, ... 8 w, used for fi9 
U 
Tffla&thanara, w., .... 47,49^ tila-gMfakas, one ofthe 18 pa@as,. 90w, 
. urdhvayita)f 
19,26,27 . 112 
Uoholiangi, w.> 
Tillaistlianam inscriptionof Rajakesarivarman, 47 
UdayMityadeva,a Paramftra k, 
Tiriitriiji-gacliolilia, a mbdim&ion, of the Jaims, 90, 92, 
UdayagM, mo., 
105, 106, 108 
Tiraioheiidurai inscription, * Tirumalarasa or Tirumarasa, $ur. of Madda 
Udyapui inscriptionof Aparajita,. . .38, 97 
82, 90 
Udayeudiram plates,. , 49 
47 
Udlchlpati, a title, . . * .39,41,43 
Tiramale, $, a. Tirapati,. 
.. 92, 95, 97 
Udraka, w., 
. 90,93,94,96 
Udwhatatva, a work, .* . . . . 58 
Urnppalattatai, m.t 
47 
Ujanika,5. a, Uje"nika ? , 
- 46, 51, 52, 53, 54 
. , 4, 35 . . 10 
Tiruttavatturai, a. a. Lalgu4i> 
Ujanika,s. a, Skt, Ujjayim, . 
Ujjain Plates of Bhdjad&rt of V, S, 1078 . 105 
TiraYelJarai, m*9 ...... 50 
Cjjantagiri,. a. tJrjayat-giri (Mt Girnr), , 92, 
Tiravalanga^u plates, 49 
94,97 
Tiravoniytr Adhipuri^vara temple inscription, 78 
Ujjayini (=Ujjain), m., 
Ummachige, ^'., , , 
41 
ia,^. a. Dhannaka^aka, . . 9 
4, 6, 109, 115, 116, ItfQ 64t 65, 68, 67, f 
epithet of 
IdifgaL 
www (saSkt, wJwteha), a coping stone, upadhmamya, use of,. . 
, 25, 27 . 122 
Tne figrires refer to pages : . after a figture, to footnotes? and odd. to the additions. The following ether abbrorotioiis are used ; c^chief ; ca.?oountry ; diandistriob or division | do*** ditto j %. dynasty ; 2f.=Easteni;/.female; ^.*Mng; m,aale| mo. mountain j nWher; 3. a.* same as; wr,fs /e. temple ;.=village or town: W,** Western,
INDEX. 159 FAOB 
Varftsa, co. ? 
VamMvall of the Ohamba Rajas, 
li., . . 105,106,108 
81 
. 57, 58 
5, 6, 7 and n 
' 
un" 
. . . 47,53,54 
Vanavasa (North Kanaraj, co,, 
tTrocJoya, village officer, ... 05, 66, 68, 70 
94, 96 
Vanavasas or Vanavasikas, people,. 
6, 15 83, 84t&. 
Utarapadha,or Utarapatha (= Skt. Uttarapatha), 
Vanavaai, VanavM or Vanavaaa, C3$, 
22, 23, 24 
oo 78, 78, 79, 88 and*. 
36 
Otkala, co,,* 
: inscription,* 
tJ, ouraiva form of 
^ used for 6, 
Vanga, co., 22,23,81 Varagu^al, aPan^yak., . . 50 and,,51 Varagu^a II, do, ^0 and n Varagu^a II, 5. a. Varaguijavarman II, 49 Varaguijta, Queen of Bhutivikramakeaarin. 47 Varaguija-Maharaya, a Panfya L, , 47, 48, 52, 53   
Varagu$a-Maharaja I, do *&f M Varaguija-MaharajaII, do49 
* 109 
Varaguj^avannan II, do, ^8 
39 
wrtJ*,eot 91and,,4 
vffl, contraction of 
16,18,19,20,21 . 90 
ftft Tfl 
va, secondary fon of% 
Vara^a^i, vi,- * * Varddhamana Mahavira or Mahavira, Jaina 
afwritten like ra, 
90 
QQ* OA QO QU 
(or ka) rai 
ffwthamkarat* OOT&,, wu, *, ^w 
. fl, S3, 54 
Varthdhamana, mistake for Varddhamana, * 92 
74 
, . 103 
i, ( Vardhamina),** a*, Ui 
Varaha, a god,* **j.,*, 
. 107, 108 
Vaaethiputa,an, epithet of Bbi-XhwNl*OMto>* 
-T *^ 5 
mula,'t 
80 
V&sethiputa,5. a. Vasi^hlputa,- -21, 24 100,102 
Vtoiy&H, 
Vaida^Ah 
Vaidya (1 
Vaidya YaWdlva. TO.,* 
. 124 UK; 131 130, 133 
* 123 . 7,10 
Siva-fei- Satakarm, an ^wdftra fc., 74A a metronymic, 
aw ejpi^e* o/ Kamdasiri, . *> 16 17 aw epithet of KhawdachalilMTeifa 
a. a. Vayiragara , 
manaka,4, 18, 19 
Vasithiputa, on e^ei o/ MaMkaihMri, 6, 20, 21 
and m, 17, 18, 19, 20 
Vasithlputa, an epithet of Siri-Pufrmayi,. 
78 
Vastavya, a Rayastha family,. . . 182 
. '. 78 
. 78, 87 
a, *.,' 
Vajraxnitra, a Sunga fe.,. 
. 56 
44, 46 and ft 
s, one of the 18 panaap . . . 90 80, 81, 86t 88, 89 
( - Buddha), 
,. _ _ ^ Vasudevanayaka, ch.>J 
1)T 
100 and nt . lOOw, 
aSungah55* 56 
. 124 
, 
. 60, 61,^ 
,mtetakefotWa, Valabhl or Valabhipnra, VaUabha9 aw 
(Bengal) 
Vat?a-G6haH,identified with 
. 101 
,vi 
vt.,
60, 61, 62, 63 . 97f 98, 99 I and tL, 99 
160 
Vatapura, a. a* Vasaataga4h, Vfttsyayana, an author . . * 
EPKJRAPHIA INDICA, 
PAGE 
Vilata, mistake for CMata, 
Vinayavijaya, an awftor, 
[ VOL. XX- "T"" v:i* 
FAOB 
8 
7n. 
vavahara (=Skt, vyavahfrv)* CM law, 
Viadkya, wo., 
8)t, 63 
Yavaijarasa, ,* * * Vaylragara, a. a. 
.79,82 
wnrfw, mistake for bindu, 
. 65, 66 
Vi^huka4a Chutukullnanda, 
78 
117, 120 
Vira-Ballala, a Hoywfa 
58, 75, 61 
. 104 84 
113, 114 
135,136 
^a or 
110, 111, 
Vedesaitha, dj\, vedinait a tax, Velama, 
54 
a Jatna wrfe, ... . 88n. 
113, 114, 117, 118, 121 
......22, 23 a UJOTJk, 
VeUwaIxi-6Utta> 
VSlurpaJaiyam platea, 
Ji grant, . 
ai 
ViraihiukE,/. .......22,23   
. . 33 
16 and., \1, 33 
. * 
YiwpwMpt,a title of Vijayawgara Ung*, . 93, 95 
* * 4 
VIra-Vikrama or diva, . a. VJkrama, . 110, 111, 
113, 114, 117, 118, 121, 122 
.62 
Vtrfiohia4 m., 
. 53, 54 
i, a tax 
* $4 
Vlrflpakka, 
fland*. 
Yidarbha, a Yadava king, .... 81 Virupakhapati, a titk of MahfaSna, 
a work 
33 
. 0, 10, 17, 
Vidarbha, co. or ttf . . . . .82 
\rira-Pai?(}ya, o Pa$4ya ch. 
Vidliika, a ^cme wa^ion, .... 12, 22, 23 
ViravarmmadSva, a Chand&la k, t * 
ei<Z&, religious law . . . 79, 852 
Vi^akh-acharya, a Jatna ^orUt^r, 
19, 20..21, 23 
112 
132, 133, 135 
.. 60 95n 
viwrga, omission of,.. 
m., 
Vidyadharas, 
a eeac^er, 
Visakhaijaka, a c?anf 
136 
. 4% 45, 87 
vittarga, wrong use of, 
. 126,127 
HO, 1.16 WO 
25 
* 97 97 
100,127 
Vijaya-chaka, .. 
Vijadhar-adhivasa, Vijayonagam, m., 
.. 8n 
. % 7,9 
Yishj?ua6ma, name 1J54 q^ 91 
Vishpiuvardhaaa, 
. l?6 
Mfa(8lBb. an architect (!), 84 
. . \l$ 
. 22,23,36 
IttkUfciM 
ijayS^a^^ a 8iw ti1>q&, 
ToeWiitta(Skt. 135 
Yra<Bra)hmaqia, 
33 l(K) 
eijfldnt'n, artisan, . . *, 
. 100, 102 
.,. 1^9 
i$tf 66 
,a /Siwfo jwtwce, . . Yikiamiditya, *. 
J^o, lJ7fc Ul 
.. 79 
Vyamharika, one of the IS jpenkw, - Siva), a god, . 
114, 1S1 
63 
100, 107 
Vikramaditya VI, a Chafakya &> 
87n f 1U, ^3 
W 
VikramaditjadSra (V), a W. CWvkya k$. 64, W 
. 67, 
t*.twiplei t^ village or taw; IF*- Western,
Wairaga<Jh, *. a, Weatern Gaftga, 
INDEX. 161   
*Thefigweirefer to pagea:. after a figure, to 
teeing other abteevfctai. e d -*-chief, eo.-oo^try,*~ 
dynMtT; J.-Bartems /.-female, taking j .-male; mo.- 
surnames to..*.mplej ^.-villageor town; KF.