



ADVANCED 
HISTORY OF INDIA 


K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 
G. SRINIVASACHARI 






PREFACE 






CONTENTS 


PART ONE: THE ANCIENT AGE 

Introduction 

I. Prehistoric India 

II. The Vedic Period 

III. Later Vedic Period 

IV. Jainism and Buddhism: Pre-Maury an India 

V. The Age of the Mauryas 

VI. India 200 B.c. to a.d. 300 
VII. The Age of the Guptas 

VIII. Northern India (a.d. 550-1200) 

IX. The Kingdoms of the Peninsular India 
(a.d. 550-1300) 

PART TWO: MEDIAEVAL INDIA 

X. Early Muhammadan Invasions 

XI. Sultanate of Delhi 

XII. The Nature and Effects of Muslim Rule 

XIII. Minor Muslim Kingdoms of the North 
(a.d. 1200-1600) 

XIV. The Southern Kingdoms (a.d. 1300-1600) 

XV. The Early Mughals and the Surs (1526-1605) 

XVI. The Mughal Empire at its Zenith (1605-1707) 

XVII. Government and Social Life under 
the Mughals 


35 

47 

64 

94 

136 

182 

239 


327 

341 


390 

403 

481 

524 











INTRODUCTION 


Country and People 

The Name ‘India’: ‘India’ comes from the name of the river which 
the Indians called ‘Sindhu’, the Persians ‘Hindu’ and the Greeks 
‘Indus’. Foreign chroniclers call the country ‘India’. Indians 
themselves called their land ‘Bharatavarsha’ which now has been 













ilation. Among those that migrated were Persian Muslims 
lo-Aryans in physical features besides Turks and Afghans. 











east as far as th> 


How improv 
throughout lar 




it city Jericho in Palestine, 
f about 6500 B.c. to Jarmo and 











view that Australia received her aboriginal population by migra- 
tion through Ceylon and Melanesia from Southern India. The 
Tamils of the Neolithic Age show a fair degree of civilization, as 
judged by the prehistoric antiquities of South India and the 
materials brought to light by excavations of graves. Tamil literature 
of the Sangam Age, though belonging to the early centuries of 
the Christian era, may well contain subject matter showing the 
cultural continuity of the Tamils from Neolithic times. It is not 
possible to give an adequate picture of the mode of life of the 








Toys 

The concern of the Harappans to provide playthings for the 
amusement of their children is known by the number and variety 
of toys unearthed. There are tiny figures of cows with heads that 



precious stones were worn by men, as well as 
the goldsmith was wonderfully well advanced 













CHAPTER n 

THE VEDIC PERIOD 

















isokan inscriptions coult 
. development through s 






treatises named Aranyakas or ‘books of the forest’, specially for 
study by recluses. (3) The upanishads, philosophical treatises of a 
profound character, embodying the brahma-vidya, on which the 
six darsanasy or the great systems of philosophy are built up. They 
are many in number, reckoned as 108. Of these iO' or 12 of the 
earliest are called Major and the rest Minor. 

The samhitd of the Rigveda has already been mentioned. About 
half of the hymns in the Yajurveda are also found in the Rigveda. 
There are two main versions of the Yajurveda , (the Black; Krishna) 
or Taittir'iya t in which the samhitd and the brahmana are mixed up; 
and the White (the Sukla) or Vajasaneya , in which the samhitd is 


















gazer ( nakshatra-daria ) and calculator ( ganaka ) are 
The year of twelve months (360 days) was arranged in 
the nakshalras (lunar mansions) are known and reckone 
seven or twenty-eight, Abhijit being omitted in the small 







laws, etc. All the three comprise the kapla, method of life The 
general student’s interest lies in the grihya and iharma sutras. The 
complete kalpa of only a few schools of thought is now available- 
and that of Apasthamba, who probably lived in the Andhra region’ 
is the best known. The grihya sutras give full details of all the rites 
at all stages of a man’s life from birth to death. Rules regarding 
valid marriages, defilement by eating and touching what is un- 
clean, the types of food permitted, etc. appear for the first time in 
the gnhyasutras. These rules are found in a form more liberal and 
rational than the parctice and prescription of a later time. It is 
the observance of these rules, certainly with minor modifications 
that has produced a remarkable uniformity of social ceremonies 
and forms over the whole of India. Rural life is regarded as superior 

The beginnings of civil and criminal law are found in the dis- 
cussions of royal duties in the dharma sdstras. They refer mostly 
to the duties of a local raja, rather than to a king of a large State 
The established practices of families, localities and corporations 
were duly respected. Doubts regarding the application of a proper 
rule were settled by sabhds of sishtas (elite). The chief duty of 
the king was to maintain peace, protect the State, and punish 
criminals. If stolen property was not recovered, the king had to 
make good the loss sustained by the subjects. The king had to 
guard his subjects from want and arrange for the care of the sick 
The revenue he got by way of taxes on land, trade, etc was looked 
upon as wages for his services to the community. 

The sutras contain a fairly complete list of duties of classes 
(varua) and stages of life (airamas). The house-holder (grihastha) 
was the pivot of the society, for on the faithful discharge of his 
dunes depended the student (brahmachdr i) the forest dweller 
{vanaprastha) and the ascetic (sanydsl). 

„, The one of * he s,x aux ‘>iaries (veddngas) to the Veda. 

^ ( Phoneti cs), Vydkarana (Grammar), 
Nurukta (Etymology), Chhanias (Prosody), and jyotisha (Astronomy 
” C “ d ” g astroI °gy)- Secular studies were organized as upavJas 
Subsidiary vedas), and they included Ayurveda (medicine), Dhanur- 
veda (archery), Gandharvaueda (music) and Arthatastra (technical 
arts), which in later days came to mean the science of polity 

On the whole in the sutra literature every department of thought 
and acuon is crystallized and codified into cut-and-dried form 









folk with the help of 
and the Mahabhdrata a: 







JAINISM AND BUDDHISM : 
PRE-MAURYAN INDIA 

On the Threshold of Actual History 























ion and philosophy to 
type of organization ] 











and were stimulated by the 
land by the Achaemenid emj 
Alexander the Great. 












merce and an important seat of learning including teachnical 
sciences like those of medicine and war. Princes and commoners 
came in large numbers to this university to complete their studies 


‘in the three Vedas and the eighteen accomplishments’. Among 
the customs of Taxila, noted by Greek writers, are the exposure 
of marriageable girls in the market place for inspection by pros- 
pective husbands, the exposure of the dead to be devoured by 
vultures and salt. The kingdom of Taxila extended from the Indus 
to the Hydaspes (Jhelum). 


The Paurava : Beyond Jhelum lay another kingdom ruled by 
the Paurava (Porus of the Greek writers). He was very tall and 























The edict dated in the thirteenth year after Asoka’s coronation 
(probably 258 b.c., at the latest) shows the Chandragupta’s grand- 
son Asoka, was a contemporary of five Hellenic kings, namely 
Antiochus II, Theos of Syria (261-246 b.c.), Ptolemy II Phila- 
delphus of Egypt (285-247 B.c.), Magas of Cyrene (date of death 
probably 258 b.c.) to the west of Egypt, Alexander, King of Epirus 
(272-258 B.c.), and Antigonus Gonatas of Macedon (276-239 
B.c.). On the basis of this evidence it could be said that Asoka’s 
coronation was about 270 B.c. 

The date of Chandragupta’s accession can only be approximately 
determined. The Puranas give the duration of his son Bindusara’s 
reign as twenty-five or twenty-eight years. All relevant factors 
considered, 322 B.c. may be adopted as the date of the accession 
of Chandragupta, 298 as that of his son Bindusara, and 274-73 for 
the accession of Asoka with 270-69 for his coronation. 

Political History 

Chandragupta : Chandragupta’s rise to greatness is indeed 
a romance of history. Born of peacock-tenders in humble 



circumstances, he worked his way through the help of 
Chanakya and carved out an empire which for the first time 
in the history of India gave political unity to the country. 

akhadatta, 




















hich his edicts explain to be ‘mercy 
kindness and goodness’. According 
(reached by example, by tolerance, 
in speech’, ‘government by religion, 
digion’. This was Asoka’s rule, and 
lly King who has subordinated all 

















Kautilya exalts royal power and claims for the kir 
highest validity in its own nature. Perhaps he got 
the Hellenistic monarchies of Egypt and Syria. 1 






THE AGE OF THE MAURYAS 115 

by a moat which had a depth of about 60 feet (30 cubits) and a 
width of 200 yards (6 plethra). The moat was thus navigable. 
It was filled from the waters of the Son, and it received the sewage 
of the city. The city was further protected by a massive timber 
palisade surrounding it along the moat. The palisade was pierced 
by loopholes through which archers were to shoot. It had also 
64 gates and 570 towers. Historians in general accept the estimate 
made by Megasthenes of the size and splendour of the city wherein 
he dwelt. 







of caste rules, combinations to influence prices, boycott and other 
acts of employees, use of fraudulent weights and measures. These 
were special courts introduced by Kautilya to meet the require- 
ments of the rapidly changing political and social condition's in 
the Mauryan empire. Such courts are not heard of in subsequent 

Army : There was a large standing army adequate for all the needs 
of the empire, internal and external. The total number of men 
in Cliandragupta’s army is computed to be 6,00,000 infantry, 
30,000 horsemen, 36,000 men with the elephants; and 24,000 men 
with the chariots, totalling 6,90,000 in all, excluding followers 
and attendants. According to Megasthenes, the army was controlled 


by a War-Office constituted by thirty members distributed among 
six Boards of five members each. The six Boards were in charge 
or the following departments of the army, viz. (1) The infantry, 
(2) The cavalry, (3) The war-chariots, (4) The elephants of war, 

(5) Transport, commissariat, and army service, including the 
provision of drummers, grooms, mechanists, and grass-cutters, 

(6) The Board ‘to co-operate with Admiral of the Fleet’. According 





iautilya was reproved by Bana; but Kamandaka and 
l him in high reverence. 

upta and Chanakya were really the first empire- 
India. They must be held to have faced the task of 
re imperial administration with courage and initiative. 



agricultural productivity of 1 
tion, encouraging the surplus | 

Villages were well organi 




to Pataliputra as a road existing in earlier times. Prof. 
f 4 has made a masterly study of these developments and 
• is needed for citing him at some length. ‘India supplied 
t ivory, tortoise-shell, pearls, pigments and dyes (espe- 

























the length of individual reig 
may well be correct. 



























inch of the &akas might have entered by tl 
route via Kashmir and Udyana as Fa-1: 
iyana places the settlement of the &akas z 
; and the Yavanas in the extreme nort 









itadphises was succeeded by 












































upta dynasty ar 
ewhat obscure. 


the century lyir 































he was the Baladityt 
. Buddhism by built 
confederacy to fight £ 
Mihirakula. 























ir example. 

kti resulted in the annexation 
[oshangabad to his kingdom > 
f Berar only at the beginning, 
luring his life time, probably 













horses and elephants. He wa 
and built Jain temples at I 
son Ravivarman restored th 























notable contributions to the gallery of cave 
of Ajanta. 

Sculpture and Painting 

In the realm of sculpture and painting 















record found near Kedah. 

The existence of Indianized kingdoms in Java z 
attested by inscriptions from the fifth century onward 





GENEALOGIES 


I. PALLAVAS OF THE SANSKRIT CHARTERS 
Skandavarman (370-85) 

I 

Viravarman (385-400) 




(510-30) 

I 

Buddhavarman 

(530-40) 

I 

Kumara vishnu III 


II. VISHNUKUNDINS 






236 






ADVANCED HISTORY OP INDIA 




NORTHERN INDIA (a.d. 550-1200) 


Political Trends After the Fall of the Gupta Empit 

For over six centuries after the decline of the Gupi 
Northern India was divided into a number of independt 
kingdoms. Certain it is that no trace of a paramount p< 
be found in the scant records of the later half of the sixtl 
The Later Guptas and Maukharis continued their suprei 
Magadha for a time. Damodara Gupta lost his life in 
with Sarvavarman (Maukhari). The empire of Harsha 
(a.d. 606-647), f° r a time maintained unity over a Iarg 
Northern India, but Harsha left no one to succeed hin 
empire crumbled after his death. 

Rajput dynasties of mixed foreign and Indian desce: 






















i by the then reigning king of 
rcond half of the tenth century, 



cemury. ne wrciitu « 6- i — 

long reign of forty years he was on 
varman Chodaganga (1076-1147) of 











ij, till it finally 












454 or 514) to settle their canon. 

.uen Tsang mentions one Siladitya I Dharmaditya who reigned 










last king worthy of note 
from a.d. 1165 to 1203. 




preferred by tl 
of Srinagar led 
enerally neglecte 


that Nepal serv< 














CHAPTER 


THE KINGDOMS OF THE PENINSULAR 
INDIA (A.D. 550-1300) 


Introductory Remarks 

The mediaeval history of the Peninsula relates roughly to two 
groups of States, namely, the kingdoms of the Deccan Plateau 
lying between the Narmada in the north and Krishna and 
Tungabhadra in the south, and those further south. The region 
of Mysore is more closely connected with the Deccan Kingdoms 
than with the Tamil States. The history of the Tamil group of 
kingdoms, Pandya, Chera, Chola and Pallava may be regarded 
as a distinct subject. The kingdoms of these two geographical 
regions were closely in touch with one another but the political 
contacts of both these groups with those of Northern India were 

Inscriptions form the main source of information. They are 
found engraved on stones and slabs in pillars or on copper-plates. 
They arc written in Sanskrit and Kannada in the western zone 
and in Sanskrit and Telugu in the eastern zone, and arc usually 
donative or dedicative in purpose. In the Tamil kingdoms they 
are written in Sanskrit and Tamil. Although scholars find diffi- 
culty in choosing and rejecting data from the inscriptions for various 
reasons, it may be said that the information yielded by inscriptions 
can be eked out with the aid of literature, monuments and coins 
to give a fairly detailed account of the several dynasties that ruled 
over the kingdoms. But any attempt at giving a dynastic history 
would make the narrative tedious. It is here proposed to highlight 
only those events that are meaningful to the march of events in 
the history of the Peninsula. 

In the middle of the sixth century in the far south, the evil rule 
of the Kalabhras was put an end to by the Pandyas and Pallavas 
who rose steadily to power thereafter. About the same time. 














yukkarasu or Appar, 
T Pulakcsin’s attack 
Narasiibhavarman I 
/as another expedi- 


te as already indicat- 






























wanted a separate plate to be reserved for each at a dinner, the 
rich merchants of the city were greatly surprised. The Chola 
embassies, already mentioned, were really trade missions to China. 



















yangondar, the poet-laureate of the Chola co 
of the paranis (war-poems) and is rightly reg 
; which beautifully adapts metre to sense s 





















MEDIAEVAL INDIA 
























His ambition for conquests in the west brought 
Vhile he encamped on the Indus, the Khokkars 
avenged the death of their kinsfolk by murder- 





342 ADVANCED HISTORY OF INDIA 

After the death of Muhammad Ghori, Kutb-ud-din firmly grasped 
the reins of power in India while civil wars continued for nine years 
(1206-1215) in the other provinces of the empire, until their 
incorporation with Khwarizm. About the time of Kutb-ud-din’s 
accession Muhammad-ibn-Bakhtyar died or was assassinated in 
his bed, after his total failure in a disastrous attempt to lead an 
expedition to Tibet across the Himalayas. 

Kutb-ud-din strengthened his position by marriage alliances. 
He married the daughter of Yaldoz, gave one of his daughters in 
marriage to Kubacha and another daughter to Iltutmish (also 
written Altamish or Altamsh in Persian), one of his own slaves. 
Kubacha recognized the suzerainty of his father-in-law. But Yaldoz 








for many years the roads in the neighbourhood c 
md further east up to the base of the Himalayas. 

















where close to th 
‘Oh, subjects o 






laid him open to the suspicion i 
grapher and correligionist says: "1 
consideration for his people. So 



[ 36 1 

5 escape the danger of 
:d the new capital on a 
tion by improving its 
1 the two places was 
thing abnormal in the 




















377 

















temples. 





MINOR MUSLIM KINGDOMS OF 
THE NORTH (a.d. 1200-1600) 


For some years in the first half of the fourteenth century the 
sultanate of Delhi included nominally the whole of India with a 
few minor exceptions. It has been already noted that the control 
of the centre over the outlying kingdoms was feeble and that the 
disintegration which began in the reign of Muhammad-bin- 
Tughlak was completed by the anarchy following Timur’s inroad. 
The attempt at recovery under the Lodi kings was a failure except 
for the extinction of Jaunpur. In a general history like this it is not 
possible to give a detailed account of each of the kingdoms that 



































' the dynasty 







GENEALOGY 


Bahmani Kings 

(1) Ala-ud-din Bahman Shah (1347-58) 


! I 

(3) Mujahid Faith Khan 
(1377-78) 


Khan Mahmud Khan 

(5) Muhammad II (1378-97) 


: i II 

Daughter Daughter (6) Ghy- (7) Shams- 
j (1397) (1397) 


(1397-1422) (1422-35) 


(11) Humayun Hasan Khan 
Zalim 
(1458-61) 



(12) Nizam Shah (13) Muhammad III Jamshid 
(1461-63) Lashkari (or Ahmad) 

(1463-82) 

(14) Mahmud 


(15) Ahmad (16) Ala-ud-din III (17) Wali-UUah (18) Kalimuliah 

(1518-21) (1521) (1521-24) (1524-27) 











ucted the government in 
Lama Raya to the south. 






































panicky at the first shock of Sher 
; battle and with difficulty escaped 
lee to Lahore. Sher Shah reached 
himself in the tajsk of settling the 
s general in pursuit of Humayun 











































THE MUGHAL EMPIRE AT ITS ZENITH (1605-1707) 483 

Jahangir provided a bell of justice to be used by any suppliant 
who wished to draw the emperor’s attention. But there is no instance 
of its actual use on record. 

Nur Jahan: Jahangir married Nur Jahan, the daughter of Ghias 
Beg in 161 1. Her original name was Mihr-un-Nisa (Sun of Woman- 
kind). She was married to Ali Kuli Beg, better known as Sher 
Afghan (Tiger-thrower), who was placed under Prince Salim in 
his campaign against Mewar. When Salim revolted against his 
father, Sher Afghan went over to Akbar. However, Jahangir at 
his accession forgave Sher Afghan, gave him an office and jagir 
in Burdwan in Bengal. When he was suspected of treason, the 
emperor ordered Kutb-ud-din Khan, governor of Bengal to arrest 
Sher Afghan and send him to Agra. When the governor and Sher 
Afghan met, there was a scuffle and both of them were mortally 
wounded. Sher Afghan’s widow was sent to Agra and placed 
under the care of the dowager queens. In the New Year’s day 
celebrations of 1611 Jahangir fell in love with her and married 
her two months later. He gave her the title of Nur Mahal (Light 
of the Palace) which soon gave place to Nur Jahan (Light of the 
World). The legend that Jahangir had fallen in love with her in 
childhood, and later procured Sher Afghan’s murder to be able to 
marry her himself is not supported by contemporary history. 
Nur Jahan’s charm and beauty were unequalled. Her devotion to 
Jahangir was great. Indeed she was an asylum ‘for all sufferers and 
helpless girls’. She was an extraordinarily intelligent, energetic and 
capable woman. Jahangir himself writes, ‘how she killed a tiger 
at one shot from his gun’. She was somewhat selfish and favoured 
her own relatives. Jahangir placed himself completely in Nur Jahan’s 
hands. Her father Ghias Beg became the prime minister. Her 
brother Asaf Khan was raised to the highest office in the court. 
Coins were struck with Nur Jahan’s stamp. The imperial firmans 
were covered by her signature. Every morning the amirs came to 
prostrate before her and receive her orders. No doubt she was the 
empress of India. Her niece Arjumand Banu Begum, better known 
as Mumtaz Mahal, daughter of Asaf Khan, was married to Prince 
Khurram, who later became emperor as Shah Jahan. 

Rebellions and Wars: In the early years of Jahangir’s reign 
there were rebellions both in Bengal and the Deccan. In 1612 

















































ist his policy of persecution 
listrict early in 1669. They 
in the end were suppressed, 
as Satnamis rose in revolt, 
t were mainly traders and 





Vkkanna. They 
: really friendly 























Sikandar, the last of the Adil Shahis, was defea 
among the Mughal peers with the title of Khan 
He got an annual pension of 100,000 rupees. 
Satara Fort in April 1700 at the age of 32. Bijapt 
the provinces of the Mughal empire. 

After Bijapur came the turn of Golkonds. Shah 
a strong force against Hyderabad in July 1685. 





GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFF 
UNDER THE MUGHALS 


Government 


Good government by the Muslims in India may be said to have 
begun in the days of Slier Shah. When Humayun was restored to 
the throne, the seed that Sher Shah had sown sprouted and Akbar 
by his originality contributed greatly to the development of good 
government. Akbar no longer considered himself as the chief of a 
small body of military adventurers who held the country down by 
force. Before him the sultans and the Mughal emperors regarded 
Hindus as people who were allowed to live by sufferance. They 
held the idea that India was a Muslim country and the practice of 
Hinduism was illegal. 

By the sixteenth century the Muslim population of India had 
increased greatly bv immigration and by conversion and birth and 
they were available in larger numbers for military and civil services 
than in the days of the sultanate. The result of mutual intercourse 
was gradually breaking down the barriers between the Hindus and 
the Muslims. One result of the intercourse between the Muslims 
and the Hindus was the evolution of Urdu as the vernacular of 
Indian Muslims. In spite of the advanced ideas of Akbar, his 
government must be characterized as purely mi'itarv in its nature. 
‘The court was a camp, and the camp a city in motion.’ 

The Emperor : The form of government was autocratic monarchy. 
The king was the highest temporal authority. He was also regarded 
as the shadow of God upon earth. He was the source of the entire 
administrative law, but there was no written law. In practice, how- 
ever, the customary law was respected. Even in religious contro- 
versies the emperor’s decision was final, provided it did not con- 
flict with canon law [sharia). The Mughal emperors did not hanker 




















536 








brahmin of Paithan who died in 1608, Tukaram (1608-49), a low- 
caste grain-seller born near Poona and passionately devoted to 
Krishna as Vitthala or Vithoba of Pandarpur, and Ramdas 
(1608-81), accepted by Sivaji as his guru. The Bhagavatas of 






of Mewar, in an allegorical setting. To him, Gc 
of love, disguised as a woman. Birbal, Raja A 
Bhagavandas and Abdur Rahim Khan Khan: 
poets in Hindi. Tulsi Das (1532-1623) was the ' 
his age — ‘tallest tree in the magic garden of 
poetry’. He spent most of his later life in Banara 








nodels, the Mughal school o 
efly to the adornment of man 



' Aurangzeb, 




MODERN INDIA 




THE MUGHALS AND THE MARATHAS 


Indian Imbroglio and European Rivalry 


In Europe the sixteenth century marks the beginning of a new era. 
This was an age of discovery, of exploration, of navigation and of 
invention, all of which led to colonialism and economic imperialism. 


ment. The beginning of the modern age in Europe almost syn- 
chronizes with the establishment of the Mughal rule in India. 
Before the Mughals, the Afghans had settled in India and made it 
their home but they did not freely mix with the Indians from a 
feeling ofsupcriority as the ruling race and from religious differences. 
The Mughals almost all except Akbar, remained right through as 
foreigners in India. It was Akbar that followed the policy of India 
for Indians. Conditions in Central Asia and Afghanistan were such 
that it was not possible for the Mughals to draw men for military 
service in India. The army had to depend largely on recruits from 
Hindustan. The unsuccessful expedition of the Mughals in the 












Charles II had received as part of his 
ry, was made over to the English East 
for an annual quitrent of £10. At Madras, 
y exercised sovereign powers by viitue of 
of Chandragiri. Soon Bombay replaced 
f the company in India (1687). 






Hyderabad had to 
Kam Baksh was 


o fight a 



560 ADVANCE 

Bahadur Shah I : His admi 
intolerance. He had no Hi 
collection of jig/a was not 







I been already 
nacy than by 



















the death of Raghuji Bhosle at Nagpur i 
pute between his sons Janoji and Muc 































































id Rohilkhand, roughly half 
a vastly increased subsidiary 




5 to their plan. Meanwhile, 
He had not enough resources 



































CHAPTER XXII 

FROM THE COMPANY TO THE CROWN 


Factors in British Policy (1818-58) 

The British expansion in India did not end with the defeat of the 
Peshwa and the suppression of the Pindaris. The four decades that 
followed the event witnessed a further extension of the British sway 
; whole of India and a part of Burma. The British 
cd by European high politics. After success in the 
(1815) Britain had no fear of the French. How- 
he fear of Russian expansion and possible threat 
Persia and Afghanistan. The British had entered 
Persia in 1814 by which they had pledged them- 
Pcrsia against any European invader. But in 1826 


65O ADVANCED 

practically no European pov 
either on land or on sea. Her 
having access to the Medite 
particularly, the later half 1 
history of England. It was a 











blockade of the Irrawaddy be lifted 


:d. 

States: Dalhousic was t 


rongly convinced 
.1,. tmcfit nf the people 
1 laid down 
don ‘should 























M THE COMPANY T 


Brahma Samaj in 1845 with the help of Raja Ram Mohan Ray. 
The Samaj split into two sections owing to the disagreement of 
Keshab Chandra Sen (1838-84). The Samaj experienced a further 
division because he had his fourteen-year-old daughter married 
to an Indian prince in contravention of the Samaj’s condemnation 
of child marriage. Among those that reacted to the denunciations 



The Sepoy War and the 1 
A good deal has been written about 







y for the British. The Indian States did not join the rebels, 
5 princes knew that the slightest suspicion would dislodge 
from their positions. Hyderabad, under the guidance of its 
, Sir Salar Jang, remained true to its treaties. There was no 



672 

loyal fled 
leaders as 


ADVANCED HISTORY OP INDIA 

to Agra. The Rani, ‘the best and bravest’ of the rebel 
Sir Hugh Rose described her, fell fighting in June and 













:h became a productive 
rentier and Afghanistan 



VICEREGAL RULE , 68 1 

by sending him five thousand rifles and ten lacs of rupees. Sher 
Ali accepted the rifles and returned the money. In March 1874, 
Disraeli became Prime Minister in England with Lord Salisbury 
as Secretary of State for India. They both distrusted Russia and 
in order to. strengthen their positions they wanted to instal a 
British Resident in Kabul. In spite of Northbrook’s protest Salisbury 
persisted in his policy. The Viceroy resigned (1876), warning Salis- 
bury that his policy would lead to another unnecessary and costly 
war of Afghanistan and he was right. Lord Lytton who became the 
Viceroy by his foolish Afghan policy brought about the fall of 
the strong Conservative ministry of 1874. 

Second Afghan War: Lytton requested the Amir to receive a 
complimentary mission to announce the assumption by the Queen 
of the title of Empress of India. The Amir declined saying that 
the reception of a British mission would involve his according a 
similar privilege to Russia. Lytton started a quarrel with the 
Amir. At the end of 1875 Lytton negotiated a treaty with the 
Khan of Kelat. This led to the occupation of Quetta, a place of 
great natural strength which commanded the Bolan Pass and a 
climate suited to European and the base from which a British army 
passed into Afghanistan in the first Afghan war. This move 
alarmed Slier Ali, and when a British agent was about to be 
established at Gilgit in Kashmir, the Afghans became even more 
uneasy. 

Under instructions from Disraeli, Lord Lytton demanded that 
a British envoy should be stationed at Herat. Sher Ali was unable 
to guarantee the life of any Englishman in his country as the (people 
were self-willed, and independent and prized their honour above 
life and hated the presence of any foreigners. But Lord Lytton 
would not listen to reason. In 1878, he insisted on sending a mission 
to Afghanistan which was turned back at the entrance of the 
Khybcr Pass. Thereupon war was declared. Three columns of 
English army invaded Afghanistan. Sher Ali fled to the Russians 
and they refused to help him and he died miserably in exile shortly 
afterwards. Sher Ali’s son and successor, Yakub Khan, signed the 
treaty of Gandamak (May 1879). The Amir agreed to accept a 
British Resident at Kabul. He also agreed not to make treaties with 
foreign powers. In return, the Amir got a subsidy of six lacs of 
rupees. In July 1879, Sir Louis Gavagnari took up his residence in 














iployed actively 
















VICEREGAL RULE 697 

said that in Indian democracy, Muslims would be overridden by 
the Hindus. But the dynamic movement for separation did not 







It was finally 
revolutionary. 




ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT 

Administrative Policy 











r the people and the 

' ' in the spread of 

;oods, particularly 
d strength by the 
fho had dedicated 
il Society of which 







CHAPTER 


STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM (1914-1947) 


The First World War and Its Effects on India 

We have noted that the ill-feelings caused by the partition of Bengal 
had been appeased by His Majesty’s visit to India. About the 
year 1914 it seemed that India was on the verge of a new era of 
prosperity and contentment, in spite of the sporadic disturbances 
of anarchists in some parts of Northern India. Suddenly, the world 
was startled by the news that Germany had declared war on France 
and Russia. Germany violated the neutrality of Belgium. So 
England declared war on Germany. We have no place here to 
describe the details of the war. During the first two years of war 
(1914-18) moderate politicians, the princes and the people in 
general were full of enthusiasm for the British cause. Indian troops 
were sent abroad to France, Africa, Mesopotamia, and Palestine. 
Munitions were provided on a tangible scale and the Munitions 
Board to co-ordinate the activity was set up (1917). This meant the 
development of manufacturing resources of India. In fact, India 
became a base of supplies for many articles sent for the use by the 
Imperial and Allied Forces. War loans were raised and subscrip- 
tions for them poured in. Nearly 1.75 millions of people were 
recruited for war; of them nearly two-thirds were combatants. 

The response of Indians was an index both of the prestige of the 
British Government and the esteem in which it was held at the 
time. It was hoped, that the authoritarian regime would transform 
itself into a popular one, in appreciation of the loyal support of the 
Indians. But nothing of the kind happened, so that Indian politi- 
cians became bitter. The enthusiasm of the people for the British 
cause was only taken as an expression of their tribute to the bene- 
volence of the British rule in India. While there was persistent 
demand for recruits to fight overseas, the British Government 
made it clear that every political issue would be postponed to a 
712 




















remarkable 
ipathy with 















732 ADVANCED HISTORY OF INDIA 

himself left high and dry, when Indian nationalism j 
strength and velocity, assumed a distinctly hostile attitude 






CHATPER XXV 

THE PARTITION OF INDIA AND THEjTRANSFER 
OF POWER 


The Second World War and Its Sequel 

The Second World War broke out in September 1939, when Lord 
Linlithgow was Viceroy of India. This war ‘put the whole question 
of India's political future into a new perspective'. It was Hitler, 
the Nazi dictator of Germany, that started the war. No one in 
India had any sympathy for him. Great thinkers and writers like 





















CHAPTEf 

PROBLEMS O: 

Refugee . 

The question whether the partit 
have been avoided at the time 
certainty. However, among the c 






12 January 1948, declarin 
undertaken it on behalf of th 










on the principle of 
long ago approved th 





GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


The Constitution of India 

From J5 August 1947, the Indian Constituent ;• Assembly was 
the legal sovereign body which svas competent to frame a 
constitution for the country. Indian politicians were well 
acquainted with the democratic constitutions of the world; 
and the framers of the Constitution of India drew on many 
sources. The Government of India Act 1935 served as the 
frame work- the innovations were the ‘directive principles 
embodying many Gandhian ideas and modelled on the 
Constitution of Eire, and the chapter on fundamental rights 
drawn from the constitutional theory and practice of the 
U.S.A. The federal structure in the constitution was influenced 
by the Canadian pattern. But the basic principles of the 
Indian Constitution are the British principles of parliamentary 
government and the rule of law. 

The Constitution, is a document of three hundred and 
ninety-five articles and nine schedules, and it embodies the 
ideals and incorporates the modern political experience of a 
nation of five hundred million people. 

The Constituent Assembly held its first session in December 
1046 eight months before India became independent and a 
Republic. The new Constitution was enacted on 26 November 
iqaq, and it was inaugurated on 26 January 1950. This memorable 
day in the country’s constitutional history is annually celebrated 
a, the Republic Day. The Preamble to the Constitution 


all its 


citizens: 














DOMESTIC POLICY 


Economic Progress 

In 1947, agriculture, though the most important, was in some ways 
the least satisfactory branch of the Indian Economy as India had 
to depend on substantial import of foodstuffs. The deficit was 
aggravated by a steadily increasing growth of the population. 
The non-availability of Burma rice accentuated the problem. 










' in the people, thereby bring 
ive farming has not made mui 













784 ADVANCI 

of representatives of Canad 








Democratic India i 

ent of the total budge 
j-56. In 1961-62 evei 












BIBLIOGRAPHY 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Asiixal. Kimoi! Muhammad— Life and Conditions of the People of Hindustan 



802 


ADVANCED HISTORY O 


Fact of the Ancient Orient (Routlcdge and Kcgan Paul, London). 

The Making of British Mia (1756-1858), (Ix>ndon, .923), 
Munshi, K. M., Gujarala and its Literature (Calcutta, 1935). 

Nakain, A. K„ The Indo-Greeks (Oxford, 1962). 

Nazim, Muhammad, Saltan Mahntud of Ghazni (Cambridge, 1931) 

New History of the Indian People, Vol. VI, Vakataka-Gupta Age, ed.ted by R.C. 

Majumdar and A. S. Altckar (Lahore, 1946). 

Mu MCANTA Sastri, K. A., The Pandyan Kingdom (London, 1929). 

_ — The Colas, 2 Vols. (Madras. 1935-One Volume, 1955). 

The Tamil Kingdoms of South India (Bombay, 1948). 

Sri Vijaya (Madras, 1949). 

South Indian Influences in the Par East (Bombay, 1949). 

History of South India (Oxford University Press, 1958). 

History of Mia (Central Art Press, Madras), Part I, Third Edition (1963), 

on (1959); Part III (1952). 

I the Jesuits (Dugarnic), (Broadway Travellers, London, 
i Jesuits (Guerreiro), (Broadway Travellers, London, 1930). 
Indent Cities of India (O.U.P., 1945). 

. . - »_V tens — L’htde Jusque Vers 300 


Part II, Second 
?AYNE, C. H., Akl 
1926) ; Jehangir 


A.V.J.C. (Paris, 1934). 

des Mauryas et des 

trie L'lnde, depuis K 


(Paris, 1930). 

Dynasties et Hisi 

Prasad? Beni, History of Jahangir (Allahabad, 1922). 
Quanungo, K. R., Sher Sha (Calcutta, 1921). 

Q.UER1SH1, I. H., The Administration of Sultanate o/Brfti^Lahor 


co, Seythes, Parlhes et yue-lchi 


1936). 


:kak uuu aw. s- A, Bengali Lite\ 
H. C., Political History of Ana 


„„„„ P E History of British India, (Second Edition, London, 1938). 
" Dr . e. c.’ Alb, rum's India (Popular Edition, Two Volumes in One, 
London, 1914). 

5 AMA "’. P n * mbZv^A History of Urdu Literature (Allahabad, 1927). 

I^desm 0 1 2w History of the Marathas, Vol. II (1707-1772), (Bombay, 1948); 
.' 4 Vols.1 I (.739-1754), (Calcutu, 

SAB ,932)f n™ 754-1771), (Calcutta. 1934); III (1771-1798), (Calcutta, 1938); 
IV (1789-1803), (Cateutta, J950).^ ^ ^ ^ ^ f ri J — l — (Cikultt Univer- 
ty, 1935). 


iition, Oxford, 1924). 



Oxford History of India, (Sect 
A History of Fine Art in India 
Codrington, Oxford, 1930). 


mtras (Srinivasa Varadachari 
ise and Fulfilment of British Rule 























INDEX 






























843 












849 











854 



































