



AGE OF THE 

NANDAS AND MAW 


Edited by 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 


Published for the Bharatiya Itiiias Parishad 

by 

motilal banarsidass 


PUBLISHERS AMD BOOKSELLERS 

B A N A R AS 



jrlal Jain for MJs* Mot Hal Banarsidass , Nepali Khapra t 
, Banaras and printed by Shantilal Jain for Swatantra 
Nava Bharat Press , Kadamkuan , Patna . 


First Edition, 1952 


To be had from : 

T- 

1. Motilal Banarsidass, Post Box 75 , Banaras. 

2. Motilal Banarsidass, Kinari Bazar, Delhi. 

3. Motilal Banarsidass, Bankipore, Patna. * 



PREFACE 


The Bharatiya Itihas Parishad was founded in 1937 with 
the specific object, among others, of preparing a New History 
of the Indian People in twenty volumes. The scheme was 
initiated by Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Rector of the Parishad, 
and Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Editor-in-chief. Volume VI, 
THE VAKATAKA-GUPTA AGE (G. 200-550 A. D.) edited 
by Dr. R. G. Majumdar and Dr. A. S. Altekar was pub- 
lished for the Parishad in 1946 by Messrs Motilal Banarsi- 
dass of Lahore. 

The plan for the present volume, IV in the series, was 
finalised hi 1941, and thanks to the cooperation of the scholars 
who were invited to contribute the different chapters to it, 
the manuscript became ready for the press in 1945, and it 
was despatched to Sir Jadunath Sarkar in April of that year. 
The printing of the book was commenced, but before much 
progress was made, the Publishers met with a serious disaster 
in the Lahore riots. For this reason and others of a similar 
nature, the printing had to be stopped and could only be 
jimed in 1950 after the publishers had successfully rehabi- 
Sited themselves and found a new home in Banaras and 
i?atna. 

Meanwhile at the suggestion of the Government of India 
the scheme for the New History of the Indian People came 
to be amalgamated in 1948 with another started by the Indian 
History Congress, one of the terms of the amalgamation being 
that the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad will not continue their 
series of the New History but may print or re-print the volumes 
already prepared. Accordingly the present volume is issued 
as an independent book styled AGE OF THE NANDAS 
AND MAURYAS. 

The names of the contributors of the different chapters 
are mentioned in the table of contents. I must thank them 
all for their valued cooperation and more for their patient wait- 
ing as the publication has been de’nyed so long for reasons be- 
ykrond control. I must also express my gratitude to Dr. Rajendra 
rrasad,now President of the Indian Union, who has throughout^ 



iv AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

taken a personal interest in the production and publication 
of the Volume. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, although he felt con- 
strained to give up his place as Editor-in-chief in 1946, 
continued to make kind enquiries about the progress of the 
work and my thanks are also due to him. They are also 
due to Dr. N. P. Chakravarti, formerly Director-General of 
Archaeology, for permission to reproduce the map of Anoka’s 
Empire published by him in Ancient India , No. 4. I must 
also thank the Director-General of Archaeology and the 
other authorities mentioned against particular illustrations for 
their permission to reproduce them in the volume. The authori- 
ties of tfye British Museum kindly supplied the casts c^f the coins 
illustrated in Plate I. Sri Jayachandra Vidyalankar, Secretary 
of the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad, did me the favour <5f reading 
my chapter on Alexander’s campaigns in India and offering 
suggestions of value. The publishers, it will be seen, have 
spared no effort to make the volume worthy of their great 
standing among Indian publishers. The reader will notice 
that the transliteration is not uniform, but combines two 
systems using s-sh, and c-ch indiscriminately; this has been due 
in part to my ill health at the time I prepared the book for 
the press, and I crave the indulgence of the reader for any 
inconvenience he may feel on this account. 


Nilesvar, Madras. 

26. 12. 1951. 


K. A. N. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Preface 


iii 

Table of contents 


V 

List of Plates and Maps 


X 

Abbreviations 


xi 

Page. 

Introduction by Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

— 

1 

CHAPTER I 

India in the Age of the Nandas 



By Prof. H. G. Raychaudhuri 

I. Empire of Magadha 

„. T - 

9 

The Nandas 

...... 

11 

Mahapadma 


13 

Administration 

, 

21 

Later Nandas 

. 

23 

II. Regions beyond the Magadhan Empire 



26 

(1) North-West India A. Physical Aspects 


27 

B. The advance of Persia 


to the Indus 


30 

G. Successors of 

the 


Achaemenids 

...... 

34 

(2) The Far South 

— 

42 

CHAPTER II 

Alexander’s Campaigns in India 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Subjugation of the Swat valley 

__ 

47 

Aornos 


51 

Taxila 


55 

Battle of the Jhelum 

_ 

57 

After Jhelum 

tlim 

64 

On the Beas 


66 

The Return 


68 

Republican tribes 

„„„ 

70 

Voyage along the lower Indus 

.. 

74 



Vi AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Exploration and return to Babylon 76 

Results ...... 78 

CHAPTER I<I 

India in early Greek and Latin Literature 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 
Introductory ...... 81 

Scylax 82 

Herodotus 84 

Ctesias 86 

Historians of Alexander 87 

Greek Ambassadors , ...... 89 

India : Size 91 

Climate ...... 92 * 

Rivers 93 

Fertility of Soil 94 

Minerals 95 

Animals 95 

Legends 100 

People 101 

Taxila 103 

Sages 104 

Philosophers 106^ 

North-Western India 108 

Arms ...... 109 

Skill in arts ...... 110 

Slaves 111 

Deposits 112 

Seven classes of people 113 

Marriage and occupation rules 116 

Food and drink 116 

Crime and punishment 117 

Pataliputra .... 117 

Women in the Palace 119 

Administration 120 

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III 
Early Foreign Coins India {Nanda-Maurya Period) 

By . Dr. J. N. panerjea _ 123 



CONTENTS vii 

CHAPTER IV 

Chandragvpta and Binduaara 

By Prof. H. C. Raychaudhuri 


Chandragupta 


132 

Bindusara 

— 

165 

CHAPTER V 

Mauryan Polity 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Sources 


171 

Empire of Magadha 


172 

Republics 


173 

Foreign Models 


173 

Royal Power 



174 

The King 


175 

Ministers and Council 


176 

King not owner of land 


177 

Bureaucracy 

f1Mll 

178 

Central offices 


179 

District and Town administration 


181 

Villages 

.... 

181 

Provinces 


182 

Finance 


183 

Justice 


185 

Foreign Policy 


187 

Army 

. 

188 

Review 

__ 

189 

Excursus on the Arthasastra 

— 

190 

CHAPTER VI 

Asoka and his Successors 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Sources 


202 

Name 


207 

Early life 


208 

Adoption of Buddhism 


210 

Rock Edicts 


212 

Pilgrimage 

-- . 

212 



Viii AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Other edicts 213 

Tradition : Third Council 214 

Buddhist Missions 216 

I^hotan 220 

Nepal 221 

Assam and Bengal 221 

* Tribes 222 

Administration 223 

Yuktas 226 

Anoka’s part 228 

Religious policy 229 

Anoka’s Dharma 234 

The Successors of ASoka r 243 

CHAPTER VII 
South India and Ceylon 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 
South India and Ceylon 249 

CHAPTER VIII 

Industry, Trade and Currency 

By Dr. U. N. Ghoshal 

Introductory 

Industry ~ ^ 

I; ad ' . _ 269 

I he Organisation of Industry and Trade 274 

State Industrial and Commercial Policy 07® 

Currency ” 279 

CHAPTER IX 

Religion 

*By Dr. P. C. Bagchi 

Literary Background 234 

Brahmanism _ 

The ascetic movement , 293 

The Ajivika and Nirgrantha movements 00= 

Buddhism 

299 

Theistic Movements •*" 

304 



CONTENTS 


UK 


CHAPTER X 

Language and Literature 

By Dr. S. K. Chatterji and Dr. V. Raghavan 


I. Language 

•MB 

308 

[I. Learning, Literature and Popular Life : 

Brah- 


manical Learning 

- 

324 

^ Sanskrit Language 

■MM. 

325 

Sanskrit Grammar 

- 

326 

Classical Sanskrit Literature and Fine Arts 

_ 

329 

Philosophy 


334 

ArthaSastra 


336 

Kama-Sastra 



337 

Popular Worship 


338 

Popular lores 


338 

Architecture 


339 

Prakrit, Buddhistic and Jain literature 

— 

340 

CHAPTER XI 



Mauryan Art 



By Dr. Niharranjan Ray 



# I. Introduction 


342 

II. Socio-historical Background 

...... 

348 

III. Columns 

_ 

361 

IV. Animal Figures 


369 

V. Alleged Mauryan Sculptures 

— 

378 

VI. Cave Architecture 

— 

384 

VII. Concluding Remarks 


387 

.Bibliography 

— 

392 

Index 

- 

401 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


List of plates 

I. Foreign coins (British Museum) with key — P. 122* 

II. The Lion-crowned column of Basarh ( DA ) 

III. The Lion-crowned column of Lauriya Nandan- 

garh ( DA ) 

IV. Elephant Capital, Sankissa ( DA ) 

. V. Bull Capital, Rampurva ( DA ) 

VI. Lion Capital, Rampurva ( DA ) 

VII. Sarnath Lion Capital ( DA ) 

VIII. Lion Capital, Sanchi ( DA ) 

IX. Rock-cut Elephant, Dhauli ( DA ) 

X. Elephant from the abacus of Sarnath Capital (DA) 

XI. Horse from the abacus of Sarnath Capital ( DA ) 

XII. Bull from the abacus of Sarnath Capital ( DA ) 

XIII. Lion from the abacus cf Sarnath Capital (DA ) 

XIV. Yaksha from Patna, front view ( Patna Mueum ) 

XV. Yaksha from Patna, back view ( Patna Museum ) 

XVI. Yaksha from Patna, front view ( Patna Museum ) 

XVII. Yaksh? from Patna, back view ( Patna Museum ) 
XVIII. Stone torso of a Jaina image, Lohanipur ( Patna 
Museum) 

XIX. Baroda Yaksha, back view ( Mathura Museum ) 
XX. Parkham Yaksha, ( Mathura Museum ) 

XXL Didarganj Yakshi, front view ( Patna Museum ) 
XXII. Didarganj Yakshi, back view ( Patna Museum ) 
XXIII. Besnagar Yakshi ( Indian Museum, Calcutta ) 

XXIV. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum) 

XXV. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 

XXVI. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXVII. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXVI II. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXIX. Plans of Sudama and Lomas Rishi caves ( after 
Fergusson ) 

XXX. Lomas Rishi Cave, facade ( DA ) . * 

♦The copyright of all photographs vests in the authorities 
mentioned against each or in the Department of Archaeology 
of the Government of India ( DA ). 



abbreviations xi 

Maps 

1 . North-Western India 

2. The Empire of A£oka 

List of Abbreviations 

ABORI. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute 

Ait. B. Aitareya Brahmana 

Archaeological survey of India, Annual Reports 
BMC. British Museum Catalogue 

BSOS. § Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, 
London 

BS. Brahma Sutras 

Bom. Gaz. | Bombay Gazetteer 

GAI. Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India ( in 

the British Museum ) b ; John Allan, London, 
1936 

CHI. Cambridge History of India Vol. I. 

CII. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. Vol. I. Ins- 

criptions of Ascka Ed. E. Hultzsch. 

ClT. Carmichael Lectures 

DKA Dynasties of the Kali Age ( Pargiter, London, 

1913 ) 

DV. Dipavariisa. 

DPPN Dictionary of Pali Proper names 
EHI. Early History of India by V. A. Smith, ( 4 th 

Edition Oxford, 1924.) 

El or Eplnd. Epigraphia Indica 
HC. Harsha Charita 

Ind. Alt. Indische Alterthumskunde ( Lassen ) 

IC. Indian Culture 

JRAS. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 

Britain and Ireland, London 
JHS. Journal of Hellenic Studies 

JNSI. Journal of Numismatic^ Society of India, Bombay 
JBORS® Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 
Patna 


ASI. \ 
ASR. J 




• 9 

XU 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


JASB. Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 

Jat. J a takas 

JISOA. Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, 
Calcutta. 

KA. Kautilya’s Arthaiastra 

KS Breloer, Kautilya Studien 

Mbh. Mahabharata 

NIA. New Indian Antiquary 

MV. Mahavamsa 

PE. Pillar Edict 

PTS. Pali Text Society 

RE. Rock Edict 

SBE. Sacred Books of the East 

WZKM. Weiner Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgen- 
landes. 

ZDMG. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft, Leipzig 

ZII. Zeitschrift fur Indologie und Iranistik 


ERRATA 


Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

20 

21 

Brihakatha 

Brihatkatha 

46 

Beg. of Para 2 

326 

327 

51 

28 

fom 

from 

74 

12 

Alexander’ 

Alexander’s 

77 

13 

Lenonnatus 

Leonnatus 

132 

26 

Chakravartain 

Chakravartin 

144 

4 

draw 

draws 

152 

13 

Indus 

Indus 

190 

25 

hapiness 

happiness 

248 

29 

amperium 

emporium 

318 

11 

Mriecchaktaika 

Mrjcchakatik 

337 

2 

description 

descriptions 



INTRODUCTION 

The natural frontiers of India, the mountains and the 
seas that serve to emphasise her inherent unity, have seldom 
acted as barriers to. her intercourse with foreign lands. The 
progress of Indian historical studies has shown that the isola- 
tion of India is a relatively recent feature, and that in the 
earlier epochs of her long and by no means uneventful history, 
she maintained live contacts with many lands, far and near, 
to the mutual advantage of both sides. The age of the 
Nandas and Mauryas (c. 400-185 B. C.) witnessed great 
changes sweeping over the face of Western Asia, over lands 
with which India had much to do from the dawn of history, 
and account must be taken of their effects, direct and indirect, 
on the political, economic and artistic life of India. In this 
seminal period when Indo-Aryan civilization may be said to 
have attained its maturity, India did not hesitate to borrow 
political and economic plans and artistic motifs from abroad, 
and put them to the most appropriate uses in her own institu- 
tions and monuments. Thus to view the history of India on a 
wider background and point to her contacts with her neigh- 
bours# is by no means to detract from the independence and 
originality of her culture; but only to lay stress on the ca- 
tholicity of its outlook and taste, and its genius for drawing 
sustenance and strength from diverse sources. For in no single 
instance did borrowing result in mere imitation, but led to a 
thoughtful and harmonious integration of the borrowed feature 
with the indigenous setting in which it was placed. 

Alexander, Ghandragupta, Chanakya, and ASoka domi- 
nate the period. The overthrow of the Achaemenid empire 
of Persia by Alexander, his campaigns in*the north-west of 
India, intended perhaps more to complete and round off 
his conquest of Persia than to further a scheme of world 
conquest, and his early death (323 B. C.) followed by the 
partition of his extensive empire into large territorial mona- 
rchies formed a chain of events that in one way and another 
prepared tjje ground for the extension of the Mauryan empire 
in the North-West, and fixed the political map of the regions 



2 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with which that empire was to maintain a fairly lively in- 
tercourse for well over a century. The revolt of Bactria and 
Par£hia from Syria ( c . 250 B. G.)was the only notable change; 
but during our period their independence was far from assured, 
and the revolts had little historical significance as yet to India 
except perhaps by inducing the distracted Seleucid rulers of 
Syria to maintain friendly relations with their powerful neigh- 
bours on the east, the Maurya emperors. The importance of 
Alexander’s Indian campaign has been both exaggerated and 
under-estimated. There was no Macedonian occupation of 
Indian territory worth the name, and what there was of it 
lasted only a few r years. Yet there ensued two abiding results. 
The monarchies and tribal republics of the North-West were 
much exhausted by their sanguinary conflicts with the invader; 
this paved the w j ay for the easy establishment of the Mauryan 
empire in these lands by weakening their pow’er of military 
resistance to the advance of the empire, and possibly also by 
teaching them that submission to a strong state within the 
country was the best protection agaiiist the recurrence of danger 
from outside. Secondly, the Macedonian episode opened an era 
of some centuries during w hich Hellenism was to be the domi- 
nant factor of government and civilization on the western con- 
fines of the Indian world. The contact between India afld the 
Mediterranean world became more direct and constant. And 
this is a fact of immense significance not only to the history 
of India, but to that of the world. 

In marked contrast to the precise and detailed notices of 
Greek and Latin authors on Alexander and India, are the 
vague and contradictory legends which issue from various 
sources and constitute the only aid to our knowledge of 
Chandragupta and Chanakya. There is little reason to doubt 
the truth of the main story in its outline : an unusually 
valiant Kshatriya warrior and a Brahmin statesman of great 
learning and resourcefulness joined to bring about the down- 
fall of an avaricious dynasty of hated rulers, and establish 
a new empire which made the good of the people the object 
of its chief concern; they freed the land from the foreign 
invader, and from internal tyranny, and established a state 
which in due course embraced practically the whole of India; 



INTRODUCTION 


3 


together they organised one of the most powerful and efficient 
bureaucracies known to the history of the world. Kshatra 
(Imperium) and Brahma (Sacerdotium) came together and 
engaged in the most fruitful cooperation for the great good 
of the land and the people. The Arlhasdstra of Kautilya 
(Chanakya) holds a» place in the literature of Indian polity 
corresponding to that of the Mauryan empire in Indian 
history; there are two sides to both. The Mauryan empire 
was the culmination of a long centripetal development of 
which Magadha had become the nucleus for centuries; but 
its administrative system made new and bold departures from 
ancient practices and started innovations inspired by alien 
models, perhaps immediately Hellenistic, but traceable # ulti- 
mately to Achaemenid Persia. Likewise, the Arthasdstra is the 
culmination of the Indian political thought of several genera- 
tions on the one side, while on the other, large sections of 
it were consciously based on the study of political practice, 
a good part of it doubtless contemporary and foreign. 

The forty years of Asoka’s rule form a great epoch not 
only in the history of India, but in the annals of mankind. 
In the remarkable series of his inscriptions found over the 
entire length and breadth of India, we hear the authentic 
voice *of the great emperor explaining the purpose behind 
many of his actions. This enables us to check and control 
the numerous legends that have gathered round his name, 
as around the names of all great leaders of humanity. One 
war of conquest was enough to turn the mind of this monarch 
for ever from all thought of war and military conquest, so 
sensitive was he to the sufferings of men, and indeed of 
animals as well. He found instruction in the company of 
the Sangha and solace in the religion of the Buddha. His 
abstention from war and conquest was by* no means a mere 
negation of a part of the king’s duty as it was generally 
understood; the true emperor was a conqueror ( vijiglshu ) 
according to the political theory of Ancient India, and Asoka 
accepted this ideal, and practised it vigorously for the rest of 
his life; only the conquest he pursued was of a higher order 
than that jjictated by lust of ppwei* or territory ; he became 
a vijigishu in the. cause of Dhammavijaya. But he was no 



4 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


visionary who sacrificed temporal well-being in the pursuit of 
spiritual objects. He combined energy and benevolence, justice 
and charity, as no one else did. He bent all the material 
resources of his great empire to the ethical education of his 
subjects and to the organisation of peace within his realm, 
and universal amity and order throughout the world. A£oka 
strikes us as the most modern of all the great rulers of India. 

The work of the historian, unlike that of the novelist, is 
limited by the nature of his sources. Little or no evidence 
worth the name is forthcoming on many matters of interest 
in our period, and several questions that naturally rise in the 
mind as we recall its main events have to remain unanswered. 
Did Chandragupta deliver his attack on the Nanda empire at 
its heart and effect a revolution in the capital to start with, or 
did he begin by building up his power in the North-West at 
the expense of the Greeks and then proceed against the 
Nandas ? What exactly was the role of Kautilya in the events 
that led up to the abhisheka of Chandragupta ? How long did 
Chandragupta take to build up his empire, and who were the 
enemies, if any, who gave him fight ? Did he turn Jain and 
abdicate towards the close of his reign as Jaina legends allege ? 
What happened in the Mauryan empire during close upon 
three decades of Bindusara’s rule ? We hear little of* that 
monarch besides his love of Greek wine and figs, and his futile 
effort to buy a Greek philosopher. Yet this king could not^ 
have lacked ability as soldier and statesman, for he successfully 
guarded the vast empire, perhaps even extended it into the 
Deccan, and handed it over intact to his successor. Was 
Asoka’s succession to the throne disputed ? Did he rule as 
emperor to the end of his life, or did he abdicate and live as 
a monk in his last years ? And why did not the empire, 
reared by three generations of exceptionally talented rulers, 
hold together for many years after ASoka’s time ? 

Historical truth is many-sided, and there is always scope 
for differences of interpretation of the evidence at hand; the 
scope for such differences is particularly wide in our period in 
which almost all the sources bear a certain bias — Brahmanical, 
Buddhist, Jaina — and offA divergent accounts of r the same 
set of events. As nothing is gained and something may 



INTRODUCTION 


D 

be lost by an artificial smoothening of these differences, it has 
appeared best to leave untouched the slightly differing yiews 
of the contributors of the different chapters and give the 
reader the opportunity of realizing the difficulty of reaching 
categorical conclusions on complex issues. 

The account of the period opens with a chapter (I) on 
India in the Age of the Nandas from the pen of Prof. H. C. 
Raychaudhuri who reconstructs, with great ingenuity, from 
very meagre sources a vivid picture of the establishment of the 
empire of the Nandas and its polity; in his survey of the out- 
lying parts of India, he offers a succinct treatment of the 
political geography of North-Western India and of the 
advance of Persia and its rule on the banks of the Indus, 
and prepares the ground for the detailed study of the Indian 
campaigns of Alexander by the present writer (Chap. II), 
The hardest fights in which that great Macedonian warrior 
engaged were all fought on Indian soil, and his Indian 
opponents, though they did not win victories against him, 
generally won his approbation of their fighting qualities. 
These campaigns have been treated at some length, and 
their place in the history of India and of the world has been 
adverted to above. Alexander was accompanied by several 
scientists and literateurs whose writings communicated to 
Europe a vast amount of knowledge about India; they also 
formed the basis of many of the observations made by the 
ambassadors of the Hellenistic monarchs to the Mauryan 
empire, of whom Megasthenes is, of course, the most celebra- 
ted; in one chapter (III) all the notices of India by Greek 
and Latin authors bearing on our period have been brought 
together and reviewed also at full length with a view to put 
the reader in possession of most of the primary data now 
available; the chapter is followed appropriately by a com- 
prehensive note, by Dr. J. N. Banerjea, on the foreign coins 
of the period found in India. 

The thread of the main story is taken up again by 
Prof. Raychaudhuri in the chapter (IV) on Chandragupta and 
Bindusara. A brief criticism of ttys sources is followed by a 
discussioif of chronology which may with advantage be read 
together with a further discussion of the same topic that 



6 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


follows in the chapter on Asoka (VI). Prof. Raychaudhuri 
hoicks that the classical sources were well aware of the over- 
throw of the Nandas by Chandragupta though it might appear 
to some that in speaking of his overthrow of the existing govern* 
ment and liberation of India they meant only the destruction 
of the Macedonian domination in the Indus valley. He dis- 
counts heavily the part attributed to Chanakya in the internal 
revolution that resulted in the fall of the Nandas and the 
establishment of the Mauryan empire, and is inclined to con- 
sider Chandragupta as the hero of the drama. He has also- 
grave doubts about the age and authenticity of the Arthasastra * 
But the whole of his narrative shows that he is .quite fully 
aware of the possibility of other views being taken on tl ~se 
subjects and of the need for putting before his readers all the 
available evidence to enable them to form their own opinions* 
A brief study of the Mauryan polity, based mainly on 
the Arthasastra , follows (Chap. V) ; this sums up the state of 
government and administrative organisation as it was in 
the reigns of the first two emperors and provides the back- 
ground necessary for the proper appraisal of the innovations 
of Asoka in the administrative system, to which references 
occur in the inscriptions of that ruler. The present w r ^ ter 
is inclined to accept the Aithasastra as a valid picture of con- 
ditions that prevailed in the Mauryan empire and has attemp- 
ted to explain the basis for tins view in an excursus on the 
Arthasastra at the end of the chapter. * 

The chapter (VI) on Asoka and his successors, also by 
the present writer, aims at presenting the primary evidence 
arranged under convenient heads with the necessary minimum 
of comment and criticism. The object has been to let the in- 
scriptions tell the ftory as far as possible and to accept le- 
gendary evidence only to the extent to which it works in 
with and is not contradicted by the inscriptions. Asoka’s 
relations with the Sangha, the nature and content of the Dliam- 
ma he propagated, the extent of success that attended his 
missionary efforts, and the question whether he was both 
monk and monarch at ojie and the same time have been 
considered in some detail; the legends connecting Asoka with 
Kashmir, Khotan and Nepal have also been considered with 



INTRODUCTION 


7 


some care. All is darkness after Asoka; the faint gleams from 
late and diverse sources, the earliest being the Divyavadana and 
Puranas, just render the darkness visible; no connected hiftory 
is possible here; the available evidence has been summed up 
and the process of the dissolution of the Mauryan empire has 
been lefc largely to the imagination of the reader aided by the 
few scraps of evidence set forth at the end of the chapter. A 
brief account (Chap. VII) of South India and Ceylon rounds 
off the political history of the period; the vexed question of the 
identity and location of Satiyaputa has been discussed; and all 
the references to Nandas and Maurvas in early Tamil literature 
have been^described in their proper setting and their historical 
value determined ; and the evidence of the early Brahml in- 
scriptions of the Tamil districts and of Ceylon, as also that of 
the Ceylonese tradition in the Mahavamsa assessed. 

The remaining four chapters in the volume are devoted 
to studies of different aspects of the culture of the period. 
Dr. U. N. Ghoshal describes the Industry, Trade and Cur- 
rency of the times in a chapter (\ III) which is as well docu- 
mented, as it is replete with significant facts culled from va- 
rious sources and set forth with remarkable lucidity and 
cogency. A perusal of this chapter and portions of the 
chapter on Art which form an excellent supplement to it, 
may well set at rest the doubts, sometimes expressed by 
scholars, that the state of technical arts depicted in the pages 
of the Arthasdstra appears to be too advanced for the age of 
the Mauryas; for relying only to a very little extent on the 
evidence of the Arthasastra , the writers of these chapters have 
sought to trace the trend of development from earlier epochs 
up to and beyond the Mauryan epoch, and to indicate clearly 
the place of that epoch in the course of this development. 

In the chapter (IX) on Religion Dr. P. C. Bagchi makes 
a penetrating study of the ascetic movements in general, of 
Brahmanism, AjI vikas and Nirgranthas, as well as of Buddhism 
and of the beginnings of theistic movements; he may appear 
to rely rather more on Buddhist texts than on other lines of 
evidence, but that has seldom stood in the way of the justice 
and trutii of the interpretations ctffered by him. He has ijot 
included in the scope of his chapter forms of popular worship 



8 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


centring round flag-staffs, yakshas and so on, which have 
been noticed incidentally in the two succeeding chapters. 
The chapter (X) on Language and Literature and the life of 
the people is contributed by two scholars. Prof. Suniti Kumar 
Chatterji, the most competent linguist of India, offers a com- 
prehensive and critical survey of the distribution and deve- 
lopment of language and script in the various parts of Mauryan 
India. Dr. V. Raghavan’s contribution in this chapter on 
Learning and Literature and popular life is the necessary com- 
plement to that of Dr. Bagchi on Religion. Depending more or 
less on exclusively Sanskrit and Brahmanical sources, Dr. Ragha- 
van has produced a compact and illuminating account of the 
learning and literature of the age in their various branches, 
of the rites and forms of worship prevalent among the 
different strata of society, and of the habits, beliefs and 
modes of thought prevalent among the common people. 

The final chapter (XI) on Art from the pen of Dr. Nihar- 
ranjan Ray is a comprehensive and up-to-date survey of a 
difficult and interesting subject. The great acumen with 
which the author traces the development of the artistic tra- 
dition within the Mauryan period, even within a single 
reign, and adopts tests for the separation of the play of indige- 
nous from that of foreign inspiration will not escape the atten- 
tion of the discerning reader. Dr. Ray does not hesitate to 
declare as post-Mauryan several pieces that are generally held 
to be Mauryan on grounds of the material and technique 
which are hardly adequate in his eyes. His main thesis is that 
all the Mauryan art accessible to us is court art strongly mark- 
ed by extraneous influences, Hellenistic and Achaemenian. 

Viewed from any angle, the age of the Mauryan empire 
was an age of great endeavour and noble achievement. Poli- 
tically India became one, and the cultural unity in the 
midst of diversity that has always characterised her civilization 
became more marked than ever in this period. India ^was in 
the van of human progress, and one of her greatest emperors 
sent forth into the world the message of universal peace and 
love. It is to be hoped that the different chapters in this 
volume may help its readers in some measure to recall the 
life and happenings of that great epoch. 



CHAPTER I 

INDIA IN THE AGE OF THE NANDAS 
I. Empire of Magadha 

The dominant characteristic of the period with which 
we propose to deal is the rise and growth of a New Monarchy 
in Eastern India cf which we have a presage in the Aitareya 
Brahmana : 

“In tjiis eastern quarter ( prachyam disi) whatever kings 
there are of the eastern peoples, they are anointed for imperial 
rule ( samrdjya ) ; ‘Oh emperor* ( samrat ) they style him when 
anointed.” 1 

The eastern peoples ( prachyas ) are not specified by the 
Brahmana in the same way as those of the South, the North 
and the Middle Country. But there can hardly be any doubt 
that they lived to the east of the dhruva madhyama dis and thus 
answer to the Pr isii of the Greek writers and the confederate 
nations who dominated the valleys of the lower Ganges and 
the Son. The most eminent among these nations was Magadha 
which embraced the modern districts of Patna and Gaya. 

Several factors contributed to the greatness of the new 
star in the firmament of Indian politics. It occupied a 
strategic position between the upper and the lower parts of 
the Gangctic plain. It possessed an impregnable fort in a 
mountain fastness and built another at the confluence of two 
mighty streams, the highways of trade and commerce in 
those days. It had a fertile soil and its resources included an 
elephant corps which was truly formidable.. 

But advantages of position and material resources alone 
cannot raise a nation to eminence. It is the character and 
the spirit of the people “that give all their life and efficacy 
to them”. As in Western Europe, so in Magadha, we have 
a commingling of races and cultures. Kikatas and other 
Andryas blended here with priestly and fighting clans of Aryan 


i. Keith Rigveda Br,, p 330. 



10 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


India as Celts did with Latins and Teutons in Gaul and 
some neighbouring lands of Western Europe. It is possible 
to detect two strands in the cultural as well as the ethnic 
texture of the Magadhan people. The same race that pro- 
duced fierce warriors and exterminators of princes and peo- 
ples listened to the quiet teachings of Mzfhavlra the Jina and 
Gautama the Buddha. It played a part in the evolution 
of a universal religion as it did in the foundation of a pan- 
Indian empire. The w r ide outlook of the Magadhans was 
not a little due to the absence of the rigidity that marked the 
social polity that evolved on the banks of the Sarasvati and the 
upper Ganges. In their realm Brahmanas coulcj fraternize 
with .Vratyas. Kshatriyas could admit plebeian (Sudra) girls 
to their harem, blue-blooded aristocrats could be done to 
death or otherwise deprived of the throne to make room for 
the child of a nagara-sobhini , and a barber could aspire to im- 
perial dignity. 

Magadhan kings and statesmen were sometimes ruthless 
in their methods. But they had the wisdom to establish an 
efficient system of government in which high bureaucratic 
functionaries ( mahamdtras ) as well as village headmen ( gramikas ) 
had their share. Foreign observers speak with evident ap- 
probation of their judiciary, roads, irrigation works and 
care of alien residents. While not fighting shy of meta- 
physics, they laid great stress on exertion ( parakrama ) in this 
mundane life with the object of welding the diverse elements 
of greater India (Jambuvdlpa) into a unit bound by political 
as well as cultural tics. This was facilitated by the ancient 
idea of the all-encompassing Purusha — later called A laha 
purusha (The Great Being) — and his political counterpart the 
Sole Sovereign (I^zarat or Chalcravarlin). In the Magadha 
minstrelsy the rulers of the Prasii had an instrument w r hich 
they could use for popular education and inspiration in 
times of trouble and despondency. We owe much of our know- 
ledge of ancient times to these bards. 

The early dynastic history of Magadha is shrouded in 
darkness. We have occasional glimpses of war-lords and 
statesmen, some probably entirely mythical, others having 
more appearance of reality. True history commences with 



THE NANDAS 


11 


the famous Bimbisara of the Haryanka kula who launched 
his people in that career of conquest and aggrandisement 
which only ended when Asoka sheathed his sword after the 
conquest of Kaliiiga. 

The family of Bimbisara was responsible for the fortifi- 
cation of a village # at the confluence of the Son and the 
Ganges which grew into the city of Pataliputra and soon re- 
placed the old capital, Girivraja-Rajagriha. It also saw, and 
actively supported, the growth of the religious movements 
associated with Vardhamana Mahavlra and Gautama Buddha. 

According to Buddhist tradition the Bimbisarids made 
room for a new line styled Saisunaga. The Puranic chro- 
nicles, however, do not distinguish between the two families 
and make Saisunaga the common ancestor of the kings belong- 
ing to both the groups. 

Saisunaga rule seems to have ended in a tragedy. The 
last notable ruler of the line fell a victim to a plot engineered 
by an all powerful official who had “advanced to too near a 
place in the confidence of the monarch”. 

The JSandas 

With the passing of the Saisunagas from the stage and 
the assumption of supreme authority by the regicide, who is 
no other than the famous founder of the Xanda line, we 
enter upon a new epoch in the history of this country. For 
the first time we have an empire which transcends the boun- 
daries of the Gangetic basin. It is not a loose assemblage 
of virtually independent states or feudal baronies which have 
a wholesome respect for the power and might of a roi soleil , 
but an integrated monarchy under an Ekardt (single ruler) 
possessed of vast resources in men and •money. The old, 
almost uninterrupted, ascendancy, of clans claiming the blue 
blood of Kshatrivas is at an end. The new ruler is a riovus 
homo who wages a war to the knife on the Kshatrivas and 
rouses the relentless hostility of the most astute of the politically 
minded Bruhmanas of the age. He incarnates, according to 
the Puranic chroniclers, the spirit ^>f the Iron Age (Kali) and 
his accession is taken to mark a chronological epoch like the 
birth of Parikshit several centuries earlier. 



12 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Unfortunately the chroniclers disagree among themselves 
as t£> the exact period of the rule of the first Nanda and 
show divergence from Jain and Buddhist traditions in re- 
gard to the duration of the dynasty as a whole. In the 
absence of a clear and unanimous tradition speculation is 
unprofitable. The family was still on the throne of Patali- 
putra when Chandragupta, who was then but a youth, 1 met 
Alexander in the Punjab in 326 B. C. It had possibly come 
to power before the death of Xenophon sometime after 355 
B. C. That famous historian refers in his Cyropadia to a 
powerful king of India who aspired to be an umpire in 
disputes between the great nations of Western Asia and was 
‘a very wealthy man*, a description that has a special appli- 
cation to the Nandas. The enormous wealth of the kings of 
the line is vouched for by all our authorities. It is hinted 
at by the most famous of the Chinese pilgrims and was known 
to the Tamil poets of the Sarigam. Xenophon was referring 
to the sixth century B. C. But his description of the Indian 
monarch may have been reminiscent of his own days. 

Some scholars read a reference to a Nanda era in the 
Hathlgumpha inscription of Kharavela. No such era was 
however known to Alberuni who gives a concise account of 
the reckonings prevalent in his days in Chapter XLIX of 
his work on India. The interpretation of the expression 
ti-vasa-sata , which measures the interval between Nandaraja 
and Kharavela, is also a matter of controversy. In any case, 
the uncertainty of the precise date of the Hathlgumpha * 
record and the doubtful character of the readings of several 
of its passages, make the chronological references of little 
value in determining with accuracy the exact epoch of the 
first Nanda. % 

Curiously enough the dynastic name Nanda is not known 
to any contemporary authority. It is no doubt mentioned 
in the Kautiliya Arthasdstra , which is traditionally assigned to 
the age of Chandragupta Maurya. But the work contains 
references which point to a much later date. The reading 
‘Nandrum* in the place of ‘Alexandrum’ suggested by some 


i. M'Crindle, Invasion of AUxender, p. 311. 



THE NANDAS 


13 


modern writers in the narrative of Justin, who epitomises the 
account of Pompeius Trogus and may have had access to 
earlier sources, is absolutely unjustified. Among extant 
works, which may, with some degree of plausibility, be assi- 
gned to a period anterior to the Ceylonese chronicles and 
the Puranas, it is tha Milinda-panho which refers to ‘the royal 
family of Nanda*. But an earlier notice of Nandaraja is con- 
tained in two passages of the famous Hathlgumpha record 
of Kharavela ; 

Pamchame cha dani vase Namdaraja ti-vasa-sata ogkatitam 
Tanasuliya-uata-panadirh nagaram pavesayati . 

‘And then, in the fifth year, (Kharavela) caused the 
canal, opened out by king Nanda three hundred (or one 
hundred and three) years back, to be brought into the capital 
from the Tanasuliya road”. 

Again, in connection with the twelfth year of Kharavela’s 
reign we have a reference to Namdarajajitam Kalimga-jana 
samnivesam (or, according to another reading, Namda-raja - 
nitam Kalimga Jina-sarhnivesa), that is, a place for assemblage 
of people or a Jaina shrine in Kaliriga acquired by king 
Nanda. 

.For a fairly connected history of the dynasty we have to 
make use of Indian tradition. Indian writers were concerned 
with the period of Nanda rule partly as marking a stage in 
a socio-political movement, and as an episode in the story 
of Jaina pontiffs, and partly as an important element in the 
Chandragupla-kalha of which we have Buddhist fragments in the 
Milinda-Paiiho and the Ceylonese chronicles and commentaries, 
and Brahmanical versions in the Puranas, folk-tales, one 
famous drama, and certain works on polity. 

Mahapadma 

The first Nanda bore the name Mahapadma or Maha- 
padmapati, “sovereign of an infinite host” or “of immense 
wealth”, according to the Puranas, and Ugrasena according 
to the Mahabodhivamsa . The Puranas describe him as a son 
of the last king of the preceding line by a Sudra woman. 
Jaina wor|js, on the other hand, present Nanda as the son 
of a courtezan by a barber. This tradition finds support in 



14 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the classical account of the pedigree of Alexander’s Magadhan 
contemporary who was the predecessor of Ghandragupta 
Maurya. Referring to this prince who occupied the throne 
of Pataliputra when, according to Plutarch, Chandragupta 
met Alexander in the Punjab, Curtius 1 informs us that “his 
father was in fact a barber, scarcely staving off hunger by 
his daily earnings, but who, from his being not uncomely in 
person, had gained the affections of the queen, and was by 
her influence advanced to too near a place in the confidence 
of the reigning monarch. Afterwards, however, he treache- 
rously murdered his sovereign, and then, under the pretence 
of acting as guardian to the royal children, usurped the 
supreme authority, and having put the young princes to death 
begot the present king”. 

There has been some difference of opinion as to whether 
“the present king” (Agrammes) of Curtius ruling in 326 B. G. 
refers to the first Nanda himself or to one of his sons. The 
classical testimony leaves no room for doubt on the point. 
Agrammes was born to the purple. His father had already 
usurped supreme authority and put the legitimate heirs to the 
throne to death. The description of “the present king” can 
hardly be applied to the first Nanda who was ganikdkushi - 
janmi (born of a courtesan) and whose father did not exercise 
sovereign power. We have therefore to conclude that Agram- 
mes, or Xandramcs as he is called by Diodorus, belonged to 
the second generation of the usurping family and his father was 
the first Nanda, the Mahapadma-Ugrascna of Indian tradition. 

The murdered sovereign must have belonged to the line 
that preceded the Nandas on the throne of Pataliputra. The 
ruler who answers best to the description given by Curtius 
and Diodorus is Kakavarna-Kalasoka whose tragic end is 
alluded to in the \larshachariln , and whose sons — nine or ten 
in number — were, according to Buddhist tradition, ousted by 
Ugrasena Nanda. The name Agrammes is possibly a dis- 
torted form of the Sanskrit Augrasainya, “son or descendant 
of Ugrasena”. It may be noted in this connection that 
Augrasainya as a royal epithet may be traced back to the 


1 . M'Crindle, Invasion of Alexander, v. 220. 



THE NANDAS 


15 


Aitareya Brdhmana where it occurs as a patronymic of Yud- 
dhamsraushti. 1 

The rise of an all powerful official in the time of the 
later Saisunagas probably indicates that the system of ad- 
ministration had undergone remarkable changes since the days 
of Bimbisara. That monarch had exercised a rigid control over 
his mahdmatras, dismissing those who advised him badly and 
rewarding those w’hose counsel he approved. The result of the 
“purge” was the emergence of the type of official repre- 
sented by Varshakara and Sunltha whose rigour and efficiency 
are well illustrated in the Buddhist Texts. The situation 
must have changed considerably towards the end of the 
Saisunaga epoch. The career of Ugrasena reminds one of 
that of Bijjala in a later age, and his early relations with 
the preceding royal family had important points of resemb- 
lance with that between Cardinal Mazarin and the family 
of Louis XIII. If tradition is to be believed the office of a 
chief minister was maintained throughout the Nanda period, 
though the functionary in question never reached the pre- 
eminent position that Ugrasena occupied in the days of his 
royal master. Jaina and Hindu writers refer to a distinguished 
line of imperial chancellors from Kalpaka to Sakatala and 
Rakshasa. It is difficult to say if these traditional figures 
had any historical reality. They are not mentioned in con- 
temporary or semi-contemporary documents. But “advisers 
of the king”, very small in number, but most respected on 
account of their high character and wisdom, are mentioned 
by Greek observers who wrote about conditions in the fourth 
century B. G. 

Next to the “advisers of the king” probably stood the 
“generals of the army”. One official of this class, Bhadra- 
sala, finds prominent mention in the Militida-Panho . The 
Nanda army was a powerful lighting machine and we are 
told by the classical writers that the last king of the line “kept 
in the field for guarding the approaches of his country, tw r enty 

i. The use of patronymics, or mctronymics, instead of the personal 
name, is by no means rare in Ind'an lii^ory. r Ihe cases of Assakemis, 
Porus, Pandiftn show that in several cases classical writers did not take the 
trouble of acquainting themselves with the personal designations of princes. 



16 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


thousand cavalry, and two hundred thousand infantry, besides 
two thousand four-horsed chariots, and, what was the most 
formidable force of all, a troop of elephants which ran up 
to the number of three thousand ”. 1 Diodorus and Plutarch, 
raise the number of elephants to four thousand and six thou- 
sand respectively. The latter puts the strength of the army 
of the Gangetic nations at eighty thousand horse, two hun- 
dred thousand foot, eight thousand war chariots, besides six. 
thousand fighting elephants. 

It is no wonder that the lord of such an immense host 
should aspire to be a sole monarch, an Ekardt , of the vast 
regions stretching from the Himalayas to the Godavari or its. 
neighbourhood. The historians of Alexander speak of the* 
most powerful peoples who dwelt beyond the Beas as being 
under one sovereign. Q. Curtius Rufus, for instance, gives, 
the following particulars : “Beyond the river (Hyphasis or 
Beas) lay extensive deserts. . Next came the Ganges, the largest 
river in all India, the farther bank of which was inhabited 
by two nations, the Gangaridae and the Prasii, whose king 
was Agrammes” 2 . The account of Diodorus is similar. But. 
he calls the king Xandrames instead of Agrammes. The* 
account of Plutarch, or the English translation, seems to- 
suggest that the “Gandaritai” (Gangaridae) and the “Pra- 
siai” had separate kings, and this is said to find support in 
the number of horses, war-chariots and fighting elephants, 
assigned to the “kings” of the two nations, which is larger 
than those assigned to Agrammes-Xandrames by Curtius* 
and Diodorus. But the number of foot soldiers remains the* 
same in all the accounts. The discrepancies regarding the- 
number of elephants etc. may be due to divergence of tra- 
dition rather than reinforcement by contingents supplied by 
an allied king. Pliny informs us that the Prasii surpass, 
in power and glory every other people in all India, their 
capital being Palibothra (Pataliputra), after which some calL 
the people itself the Palibothri, nay, even the whole tract, 
of the Ganges. > 

1. M'Crindle, Invasion^ Vp* 221-22. 

2. Ibirl. 



THE NANDAS 


17 


Jaina writers refer to the subjugation by Nanda’s minister 
of the whole country down to the seas : — 

Samudravasan sebhya dsamudramapi sriyahl 
upayahastairdkrishya tatah so'krita Nandasat'ii 
Puranic chroniclers speak of the extermination by Maha- 
padma of all kshatriyaS. This is taken to imply that he up- 
rooted all the kshatriya families which ruled contempora- 
neously with the Saisunagas ( tulya-kalam bhavishyanti sarvs hy 
ete mahikshitah ) 1 , viz., the Ikshvakus, Panchalas, Kaseyas, Hai- 
hayas, Kalihgas, Asmakas, Kurus, Maithilas, Surasenas, and 
the Vitihotras. 

The Ikshvakus were the ruling clan of Kosala, roughly 
corresponding to modern Oudh. They had been humbled -by 
Ajatasatru, the son of Bimbisara. The history of the clan 
after the famous rulers Prasenajit and his son Viduratha is 
obscure. A passage of the Kathdsaritsdgara refers to the camp 
(kataka) of Nanda in Ayodhya. Apparently the king had 
undertaken an expedition to Kosala. An important section 
of the Ikshvakus seems to have been driven southwards as 
they are found in the third or fourth century A. D. in 
occupation of the lower valley of the Krishna. 

The Panchalas occupied the tract of country between the 
upper Ganges and the Gumti together with a part of the 
Central Doab. They do not appear to have come into hostile 
contact with the Magadhan monarchy before the rise of the 
Nandas, and must have been brought under control by that 
dynasty, as the evidence of the classical writers seems to suggest. 

The Kaseyas, or the people inhabiting the district round 
Benares, had come under the Magadhan sway as early as the 
days of Bimbisara and Ajatasatru. It is recorded in the Pu- 
ranas that a Saisunaga prince was “placed in .Benares” when 
the founder of the line took up his residence in Girivraja, the 
Magadhan capital in early times. It was apparently from 
a descendant or successor of this prince that Nanda wrested 
control over the people of Kasi. 

The Haihayas are found in possession of a part of the 
Narmada valley down to mediaeval^ times. Their earlier 


i. Pargiter, DKA.. p. 23. 



18 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


capital was at Mahishmati, which has been identified by 
Pargiter with the rocky island of Mandhata and by others 
with a town named Mahesvara on the northern bank of the 
Narmada within the boundaries of the Indore state. The 
subjugation of this region by the Nandas does not seem to 
be improbable in view of the Puranit statement about the 
humiliation of the rulers of the neighbouring realm of Avanti 
by their Saisunaga predecessors. But there is lack of confir- 
mation by independent witnesses. It has however to be 
remembered that both Malwa and Gujarat formed integral 
parts of the Magadhan empire in the days of Chandragupta 
towards the close of the fourth century B.C., and the way 
may have been prepared by the Nandas. 

The Kalingas occupied the extensive territory stretch- 
ing from the river VaitaranI in Orissa to the Varahanadi 
in the Yizagapatam District. Its capital in ancient times 
was the famous city of Dantakura or Dantapura which has 
been identified with the fort of Dantavaktra near Chicacole 
in the Ganjam district, washed by the river Languliya 
(Langulini). The conquest of a part of Kalinga by Nanda 
is suggested by the Hathlgumpha record. The phraseology 
of the inscription hardly supports the view held by some 
scholars that the Nandaraja mentioned therein is a local 
chief. The reference is doubtless to a conqueror who estab- 
lished his authority over a sannivesa (place) of Kalinga and 
constructed some irrigation works in the province. 

The Asmakas occupied a part of the Godavari valley 
with their capital at Potali, Potana, or Podana. The last 
form of the name reminds one of Bodhan to the south of 
the confluence of the Manjlra and the Godavari not very 
far from Nizamabad in the Hyderabad state. The exis- 
tence on the Godavari of a city called “Nan Nand Dehra” 
(Nander), a little to the west of the Nizamabad District, 
renders it probable that the dominions of the “Nine Nandas” 
may have embraced the classic land of the Asmakas, though 
independent confirmation by contemporary or scrrii-contern- 
porary writers is not available. 

The Kurus, as is well known, occupied the country to 
the west of the Pahchalas stretching from the Ganges to the 



THE NANDAS 


19 


river Sarasvatl (modern Sarsuti) which flows past the sacred 
site of Kurukshetra near Thanesar. The subjugation of Jhis 
territory by the Nandas is not expressly mentioned by any 
contemporary authority, but is rendered probable by the 
Greek evidence in regard to “the dominions of the nation of 
the Praisioi and the? Gandaridai” which seem to have em- 
braced the whole tract of the Ganges. 

The Maithilas wer * the people of Mithila, a city famed 
in the epics owing to its connection with the heroine of the 
Ramayana anid her father Janaka. It has been identified with 
the small town of Janakpur within the Nepal border, north 
of where the Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur Districts meet. 
The greater part of Northern Bihar, over which the power- 
ful confederation of the Vrijis (including the Lichchhavis) 
had exercised sway, had been annexed by Ajatasatru, and 
his successors are known to have graced Vaisall, the capital, 
with their presence on occasions. If the Puranic tradition 
has any value the chieftains of Mithila must have retained 
a certain amount of independence in the fastnesses of the 
Nepalese Tarai. The periodical floods from the Gandak, the 
Bagmatl and connected streams during the rainy season must 
have rendered this part of the country very difficult of access 
and it is not surprising that the forests of the Tarai should 
have sheltered an autonomous principality when the great 
city of Vaisall fell before the onslaught of Ajatasatru. The 
Nandas attained greater success as they could operate from 
their base in Vaisall. 

The Surasenas, the Sourasenoi of Megasthenes, had 
their capital at Mathura on the banks of the Jumna. Their 
subjection to the Prasii appears very probable from the accounts 
of Alexander’s historians. 

The Vltihotras are closely associated with the Haihayas 
and the Avantis in Puranic tradition. Their sovereignty is 
said to have terminated before the rise of the famous line 
of Pradyota. If the Puranic statement, found in a later pass- 
age of the Bhavishyanuklrtana , about the contemporaneity of 
some of the Vltihotras with the Saisunagas, has any value, 
the latter n*ay have restored some scion of the old line when 
they took away the glory ( yaiah kritsnam) of the Pradyotas. 



20 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

As already stated, the undoubted control that Chandragupta 
M^urya exercised over Western India including the 
Girnar region makes it highly probable that the way had 
been left clear by his Nanda predecessors. Jain writers ex- 
pressly mention the Nandas among the successors of Palaka, 
the son of Pradyota of Avanti. • 

Much of the information given above relating to the 
conquests of the first Nanda is derived from late works. But 
the evidence of Greek writers, taken together with the testi- 
mony of the Hathigumpha epigraph leaves no room for doubt 
that the dynasty that ruled over the eastern nations of India 
in the days of Alexander exercised sway over practically 
the- whole of the Gangetic basin together with some portion, 
if not the whole, of Kalinga. Some ingenuity has been shown 
by certain writers in drawing a distinction between Purva 
Nandas (earlier Nandas) and Nava Nandas (new or later 
Nandas) and identifying a prince of the former group with 
the Nandaraja of Kharavela’s inscription. But the theory 
rests on an unjustifiable interpretation of the expression purva 
Nanda used by Kshemendra and other epitomisers and redac- 
tors of the Brihakatha. The Puranic as well as the Ceylonese 
tradition knows of the existence of only one Nanda line and 
all writers including those belonging to Jaina persuasion take 
the word Nava in the expression Nava Nanda to mean nine 
and not new . Purva-Nanda is the designation of a single 
king and not of a dynasty and he is distinguished not from 
the Nava Nandas but from a pseudo-Nanda (Yogananda), 
the reanimated corpse of king Nanda. 

Several Mysore inscriptions state that Kuntala, a territory 
which included the southern part of the Bombay Presidency 
and the contiguous portions of Hyderabad state and 
the state of Mysore, was ruled by the Nandas. But these 
are of comparatively modern date (< c . A. D. 1200), and too 
much cannot be built upon their statement. It has however to 
be admitted that no satisfactory account is yet available of the 
expansion of the Magadhan empire beyond the Krishna and 
the Tungabhadra which must have taken place before the 
promulgation of the Asolcan inscriptions oj the Kiurnool and 
Chitaldroog districts dated in the thjW^^y^^ C. 



THE NANDAS 


21 


Administration 

We have very little information as to the way in which 
the vast dominions of the Nandas were administered. If 
tradition is to be believed the founder of the line clearly aim- 
ed at the establishment of a unitary state. The reference 
to the extermination # of all the Kshatriyas, coupled with the 
use of the terms ekarat and ekachchhatra can have no other 
meaning. Greek writers, however, make separate mention of 
the Prasii and the Gangaridae, though hinting at their sub- 
jection to a, common sovereign, and Arrian notices the exis- 
tence beyond the Beas of “an excellent system of internal go- 
vernment under which the multitude was governed by the 
aristocracy, who exercised their authority with justice and mo- 
deration”. The aristocratic government, to which the classi- 
cal writer refers, cannot fail to remind one of the sanghas of the 
Kurus, the Panchalas and others, mentioned by the Kautllya 
Arthasastra , who bore the title of raja ( rajasabdopajwinah ). The 
flourishing condition of the areas in question where “the 
inhabitants were good agriculturists”, the land exceedingly 
fertile and the internal government excellent, is in striking 
contrast with conditions prevailing in the home provinces of 
the Prasian (Magadhan) monarchy where “the king was 
detested and held cheap by his subjects”. It appears from 
the evidence that is available to us that Nandas allowed a 
considerable amount of autonomy to the people in the out- 
lying parts of their empire, e. g., the Gangetic delta and the 
territories lying beyond Oudh. But the home provinces em- 
bracing the ancient janapadas of Magadha (South Bihar), 
Vriji (North Bihar), Kasi (Benares), Kosala (Oudh) etc. were 
treated in the same way as the sultans of Delhi dealt with 
the metropolitan province and the river country of the Doab. 
The presence of the king not only in Pataliputra, the ca- 
pital of Magadha, but also in Visala or Vaisali, the capital 
of the Vriji country in North Bihar, is vouched for by tra- 
dition, and we have also an interesting reference to an en- 
campment at Ayodhya. The strong position held by the 
Nandas in the heart of their dominions as contrasted with 
their comparative weakness in the frontier regions is the 
theme of certain interesting anecdotes that the Buddhist 



22 age of the nandas and mauryas 

commentator on the Great Chronicle of Ceylon, and other 
lat^ writers tell of Chandragupta’s ambitious adventure on 
the threshold of his career. The stories no doubt belong to 
the domain of folklore and certain motifs have a surprising 
resemblance with the Alfred saga. But the central idea may 
have been based on genuine tradition. * 

Greek observers of the fourth century B. C. and the 
epitomisers of a later age allude to a system of provincial 
government under officials styled nomarchs and hyparchs. 
A nomarch is a local ruler or governor of a nome or dis- 
trict. The word hyparch is sometimes used to denote a 
satrap. But the functionary in question is at times spoken 
of as a subordinate of a satrap. Though the officials are 
mentioned chiefly in connection with the Punjab in the days 
of Alexander and the Magadhan empire in the Maurya 
period, it is permissible to conjecture that the provincial system 
under the Nandas, specially in the districts under their 
undisputed sway, was not very different. In the third cen- 
tury B. C. we hear of administrative charges called ahdra , 
vishaya , janapada etc. under functionaries styled mahdmatras 
rajukas , pradesikas and rashtriyas who seem to answer to the no- 
marchs and hyparchs mentioned by the Greeks. 

The lowest administrative unit was the village. In the 
Prasna Upanishad , a later Vedic text, we hear of adhikritas 
appointed for gramas or villages by the samrat or emperor. 
Gramikas or village headmen lind mention in the early Pali 
Canon who possibly correspond to these adhikritas . In the 
early days of the Magadhan monarchy the king appears to 
have kept himself in close touch with these village function- 
aries. We hear of a big assembly of thousands of gramikas 
held by Bimbisara. There is no evidence that the Nandas 
followed this example and the detestation of the people, to 
which classical writers bear witness, ill accords with any close 
touch with life in the rural areas. Such a contact was only 
reestablished when Asoka in the third century B. C. under- 
took pious tours even to villages in outlying areas in pursuance 
of his policy of dharmanusasti . 

According to certain manuscripts of the Ydyu Parana , 
which is one of the oldest works of this class and is referred 



THE NANDAS 


23 


to by Bana in the seventh century A.D., the first Nanda ruled 
for twenty-eight years, and was followed by his sons who 
ruled for twelve years. Taranatha, too, assigns a period of 
twenty-nine years to Nanda. If this chronological scheme 
be accepted, the first Nanda could hardly have died before 
c. 338 B.G. as one of* his sons was reigning in 326 B.G. and 
the dynasty must have come to power not earlier than c. 367- 
66 B. G. But as stated above there is hardly any unanimity 
among our authorities, Puranic, Jain and Buddhist, regarding 
the reign period of Ugrasena Mahapadma and the total du- 
ration of the rule of his family. 

Later Nandas 

Among the sons of the first Nanda referred to in the 
Pur^anas, Sahalya or Sahalin seems to have been the eldest. 
Most of the Matsya Mss. spell the name as Sukalpa. But a 
Vdyu Mss. gives the form Sahalya which, as pointed out by 
Barua, corresponds to Sahalin of the Diiyavadana. The names 
of the sons of the first Nanda given in the Mahabodhivamsa 
are altogether different, and have not yet been confirmed 
from independent sources. The name of the last prince, 
Dhana Nanda is unknown to the classical writers who men- 
tion Agrammes or Xandrames as the name of the prince of 
the “ barber” dynasty, who occupied the throne when Al- 
exander was on the banks of the Beas. 

Xandrames, the name mentioned by Diodorus, has been 
taken by some scholars to answer to the Sanskrit Ghandramas, 
and identified with Chandragupta Maurya. But Plutarch 
clearly distinguishes between “Androkottos” and the king 
of the “Praisiai” in the days of Alexander, and his account 
receives confirmation from that of Justin. Xandrames or 
Agrammes was the son of a usurper born after his father 
had obtained the supreme authority among the Prasii, while 
Chandragupta was himself the founder of a new sovereignty, 
the first ruler of his dynasty. The father of Xandrames 
was a barber who could claim no royal ancestry. On the 
other hand, Indian writers are unanimous in representing 
Chandragupta as a scion of a racS of rulers, though they 
differ in regard to the identity of the family and its claim to 



24 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

be regarded as of pure Kshatriya extraction. Jain evi- 
dence clearly suggests that the barber usurper is identical 
with the napita kumdra or napitasu who founded the 
Nanda line. 

The figures of the eight princes who succeeded the first 
Nanda are rather shadowy and we do not know how far the 
tradition recorded by late writers can be accepted as sober 
history. The last of them is said to have been addicted to 
hoarding treasure. He amassed riches to the amount of 
eighty kotis. In a rock in the bed of the river Ganges he 
caused a great excavation to be made for the purpose of 
burying the treasures he had acquired. Levying taxes, along 
with other articles, even on skins, gums, trees and stones, he 
amassed further riches which he disposed of similarly. This 
account taken from the commentary on the Great Chronicle 
of Ceylon can claim some antiquity. Professor Nilakanta Sastri 
points out that a Tamil poem contains an interesting reference 
to the “very famous” Nandas “victorious in war, who having 
accumulated treasure first in beautiful Pataliputra hid it in the 
waters of the Ganges”. Hiuen Tsang, the famous Chinese 
pilgrim of the seventh century A. D. refers to “the five trea- 
sures of king Nanda’s seven precious substances” 1 . 

The accumulation of an enormous amount of wealth, 
to which all our authorities bear witness, probably implies 
a good deal of financial extortion and it is not surprising that 
the Nanda contemporary of Alexander “was detested and 
held cheap by his subjects as he rather took after his father 
than conducted himself as the occupant of a throne.” 

The oppressed people soon found a leader. Plutarch and 
Justin refer to a young lad named Androkottos or Sandro- 
cottus, doubtless identical with the famous Chandragupta, who 
visited Alexander in the Punjab, and showed a keen interest 
in the affairs of the Prasii. “Not long afterwards” he moun- 
ted the throne and “shook off from the neck” of India “the 
yoke of servitude” by overthrowing the existing government in 
India and expelling the prefects of Alexander. Indian chroni- 
cles introduce by his side another figure, a dvijarshabha named 


Watters, ii p 296. 



THE NANDAS 


25 


Kautilya or Chanakya, whom tradition represents as an in- 
habitant of Taxila. 

» 

While some of the Indian writers, notably the author of 
the Sanskrit play entitled the Mudra-Rdkshasa , are chiefly con- 
cerned with the battle of intrigue conducted by Kautilya, 
the Milinda Panho affords us a glimpse of the clash of arms 
between the contending forces of the Nandas and the Maur- 
yas. “There was Bhaddasala (BhadraSala), the soldier in 
the service of the royal family of the Nandas, and he waged 
war against king Chandagutta ( Chandragupta ). Now in 
that war, there were eighty corpse dances. For they say 
that when one great head holocaust has taken place by 
which is meant the slaughter of ten thousand elephants,, and 
a lac of horses, and five thousand charioteers, and a hundred 
kotis of soldiers on foot, then the headless corpses arise and 
dance in frenzy over the battle field”. The passage contains 
a good deal of mythical embellishment. But we have here re- 
miniscence of the blood bath through which Chandragupta 
had to wade to the throne. 

The glamour of the Nandas has been dimmed by the 
greater splendour of the succeeding dynasty. But it is well 
to remember what the kings of the line bequeathed to their im- 
mediate successors and to posterity. They had, to use the 
words of Smith, “compelled the mutually repellent molecules 
of the body politic to check their gyrations and submit to 
the grasp of a superior controlling foice”. They developed 
a fighting machine that was used by the later rulers of Ma- 
gadha with terrible effect in resisting the onslaught of 
foreign invaders and carrying on the policy of expansion within 
the borders of India that had been inaugurated by Bimbisara 
and Ajatasatru. 

If tradition recorded by the epitomisers of the Brihat - 
kathd is to be believed, Pataliputra under Nanda rule became 
the abode ( kshetra ) of Sarasvatl as well as Lakshml, the home 
of learning as well as of material prosperity. A galaxy of 
scholars — Varsha, Upavarsha, Panini, Katyayana, Vara- 

ruchi, Vyadi — is said to have added lustre to the age. While 
much of JLhe traditional account may be mere folklore un- 
worthy of credence, we may well believe that the cultivation 



26 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of grammer received an impetus in this age. The scholia 
on Panini, presupposed by the great commentary of Patanjali, 
show acquaintance with the Tavana lipi , and it is by no means 
improbable that some of the predecessors of Patanjali are 
to be assigned to the Nanda Age. Kings of the line are cre- 
dited by certain grammarians with tho establishment of a 
particular kind of measure ( Nandopakramani manani). 

In social matters the rise of Nandas may be regarded 
as symptomatic of a surging up of the lower classes. The 
Puranic chroniclers represent the dynasty as harbingers of 
Sudra rule and as irreligious ( adharmika ). The last state- 
ment is significant in view of the traditional connection of 
the family with Jain ministers and patriarchs. But the evi- 
dence on the point is of a character which makes it difficult 
to build too much on it. 

II. Regions Beyond the Magadhan Empire 

No account of India in the age of the Nandas is complete 
without a brief notice of the vast stretches of territory within 
the confines of this country that lay beyond the limits of their 
empire. Unfortunately, the exact boundary of the Nanda 
dominions cannot be determined with any amount of precision 
with the aid of available evidence. This is particularly true 
of the south. In the north the inclusion of the Ganges valley 
within the Nanda empire is, as already noted, suggested by 
Greek and Puranic evidence. We shall perhaps not be far 
wrong if we regard the upper reaches of the stream, that once 
flowed through the Ghaggar-Hakra bed, as forming roughly 
the boundary line between the Magadhan empire of those days 
and the autonomous tribes and kingships of the Uttarapatha. 
In the south Greek evidence is not of much help. Puranic 
testimony, as we have seen, hints at the incorporation into 
their empire by the Nandas of the principalities of all the 
leading Kshatriya families of the day, including in all pro- 
bability those of the south. Among the latter prominent’men- 
tion is made of the Haihayas, Kalihgas and ASmakas. 

Following this evident, which comes from sources assign- 
able to the commencement of the Gupta Age, we may 



THE NANDAS 


27 


tentatively fix the southern boundary of the Nanda empire, or 
at least of the arena of its political and military activities, at 
the river Godavari. Barring some mediaeval Jaina treatises and 
inscriptions, of doubtful value for early times, there is hardly 
any evidence that the hegemony of the Nandas extended far 
beyond that famous river. Persian inscriptions, observations 
of Greek and Latin writers, supplemented by brief notices in 
Indian literature and epigraphs, enable us to say a few words 
about the two great regions of India — namely the Indus basin 
beyond the Ghaggar and South India beyond the Godavari — 
which, in the light of the evidence we have adduced, seem to 
have lain beyond the limits of the Nanda empire. 


(i) North-West India . 

A. PHYSICAL ASPECTS 

Bounded on the north by the Outer Himalayas; on the 
west, by the eastern Hindukush, the Safed Koh, the Suleiman 
and the Kirthar ranges; on the south, by the surging waters 
of the Arabian Sea and the “ immense salt-water waste of the 
Ranh of Cutch”; and on the east by the sand-dunes of the 
Thar or the Great Indian Desert and the uplands and ridges 
of the Eastern Punjab, the extensive valley of the Indus and 
its feeders constituted a little world not much affected by the 
eddies and currents of Magadhan history before the rise of the 
Great Mauryas. 

The country falls into three natural divisions : — (1) the 
mountainous regions extending from the upper reaches of the 
Sutlej to the basin of the Chitral and certain outlying rocky 
areas; (2) the flat rolling plains of the Punjab intersected by 
a network of rivers and brooks; and (3) the almost rainless 
tract of the lower Indus and its delta, an important part of 
which now forms the province of Sind. 

The land described above presents great varieties of 
scenery. The eyes meet in the north the snow-clad speaks and 
glaciers of the Himalayas and the luxuriant vegetation that 
clothes th« submontane region. A striking contrast to this is 
afforded by the plains of the Indus, which look like an 



28 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


“interminable waste**, overgrown with tamarisk scrubs and 
ultimately merging in the great desert of Rajputana, the 
Registan of Sind and the sandy, surf-beaten shore of the 
Arabian Sea. The dreary and monotonous sight is only 
redeemed by the green verdure of the riverine fringes and 
“endless expanse of waving crops of different shades of colour’* 
that covers the country at the approach of the harvest 
season. 

The history of the region cannot be properly understood 
without a reference to its river-system. The central stream 
of the Indus, taking its rise in the heights of the Tibetan Pla- 
teau, meanders its course through the whole length of the 
land. It has not only given its name to our country but, 
according to some Greek writers, formed sometimes its north- 
western boundary. Near Attock in the north-western part of 
the Punjab it receives the combined waters of the Kabul and 
its confluents, including the Swat, the Panjkora, the Kunar 
and the Panjshir. The rivers which contribute most to the 
stream of the Indus, however, lie to the east and sweep through 
the plains of the Punjab proper, the “Land of the Five Rivers.” 
The nearest among the “Five Streams” is the Jhelum or Vita- 
sta, the Hydaspes of the Greeks. It adds to the wealth and 
beauty of the sunny vale of Kashmir and unites with the 
next stream, the Chenab, the ancient Chandrabhaga or 
Asikni, the Akesines of the Greek writers, near Jhang. The 
whirling of waters produced by the confluence threatened to 
spell disaster to a flotilla of Alexander in the, fourth century 
B. C. The next of the sister torrents, the Ravi, ancient 
ParushnI or Iravati, the Hydraotis of the Greeks, rises in the 
Chamba State and falls into the united waters of the Jhelum 
and the Chenab. To the east of the Ravi flows the Beas, 
ancient Vipas or Vipasa, the Hyphasis of the Greeks, which 
is now an affluent of the Sutlej, Sutudri, or Satadru, the Hesi- 
drus or Zaradros of the Greeks. The five streams mingle 
their waters into the Panjnad and join the Indus above Mithan- 
kot. The mighty river then sweeps on into the Arabian sea 
through a number of shifting channels. Traces of old river 
beds are found in severaf directions and remains of ancient 
cities stud the neighbourhood. 



THE NANDAS 


29 


During winter the rivers of the Punjab look comparatively 
small but at the approach of the hot season, when the snow 
of the mountains begins to melt, and particularly when ttie 
monsoons burst, the streams are lashed to fury and rush 
through their wide beds “in uncontrolled vagary”. Large 
tracts of the country assume an almost oceanic character. 
Greek writers, as we shall see, bear ample testimony to the 
vagaries of these rivers and their effect on the landscape. 

Although drained by a large number of rivers the soil of 
the Punjab is comparatively poor. The scarcity of regular 
rainfall and the absence of sufficient facilities for irrigation in 
early times added to the difficulties of extensive cultivation. The 
forest-clad sub-montane region, including the country round 
Taxila, has, however, been noted for its fertility since times 
long gone by. Besides agricultural products, salt added to 
the wealth of the Indus basin, being found embedded in rocks 
particularly the Salt Range, and the delta of Sind. No trace 
of gold mines has been found in this region, but the metal was 
met with in the sands of the Indus, and the Kabul rivers and 
the upper reaches of several other streams. 

The gold-washing industry is no longer remunerative. 
But Herodotus informs us that in the fifth century B. C. “India”, 
i. e ., the Indus valley, paid a tribute of 360 talents of gold-dust. 
The existence of gold and silver “mines” in the countries of 
Sophytes and Mousikanos and certain other regions was re- 
ported to the companions of Alexander and the Chinese pil- 
grims of the seventh century A. D. The forests of Gandhara 
supplied teak for a Persian palace, and the country in general 
ivory for its adornment. Alexander, too got timber for his 
flotilla from the hilly region flanking the north of the Punjab. 

Geographical factors exercised a controlling influence 
upon the history of the Land of the Five Rivers as on the 
rest of the country. The mountains on the west and the 
north that frown on the riparian plains afforded shelter to 
fighting clans, who turned every rocky eminence into a 
citadel of defence and braved the wrath of the mightiest 
conqueror of antiquity. The numerous streams and rivulets 
that intersqpt the plains made each Voab or strip of territory 
between two sheets of water nourish centres of autonomous 



30 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


political life. The mighty Indus with its confluent streams 
at times promoted an opposite tendency. They served as 
hfghways for ambitious rulers who sought to compel the 
political molecules of the Punjab and Sind to submit to one 
controlling force. The story of the mineral and agricultural 
wealth of the country must have been carried by travellers 
and merchants beyond its border so as to reach the ears of 
the King of Kings who held his court at Susa and Ekbatana 
from the sixth to the fourth century B. G. The riches of India 
and the lack of political cohesion among the children of the 
soil invited invasion from outside. The existence of a cen- 
tralised monarchy in Iran indicated the source from which 
it was to come. 

B. THE ADVANCE OF PERSIA TO THE INDUS. 

Some sort of military activity in India and its border- 
land and even conquest of a well defined territory in this 
direction are attributed to Cyrus (558-529 B. C.), the founder 
of the Persian empire, by Xenophon and other writers. But 
the evidence points to the inclusion within the dominions of 
the first Achaemenid of only the Kabul valley as far as the 
Indus. We learn from Pliny that Cyrus destroyed the famous 
city of Kapisi and Arrian tells us that “the district west of the 
Indus as far as the Kophen (Kabul). . submitted to the Persians 
and paid tribute to Cyrus”. Kapisi, the Ka-pi-shih of Hiuen 
Tsang and Ki-pin (cf. Greek Kophen) of other Chinese texts 
stood at or near the junction of the Ghorband and the Panj- 
shir. The eastern part of the realm of Ki-pin comprised, 
according to later writers, K’ien-t’o-lo or Gandhara. Classi- 
cal writers thus make it clear that the region between the 
Panjshir and the Indus, embracing ancient Kapisi or Ki-pin 
and Gandhara proper (Peshawar district), was under the sway 
of Cyrus, a fact that accords with the appearance of Gadara 
or Gandhara among the subject peoples in the earliest epi- 
graphs of Darius (522-486 B. C.). > 

Another eastern people who owed allegiance to the Per- 
sians were the “Thatagus” or the Sattagydians. They toge- 
ther with the Gandarians - , the Dadicae and the Aparytae con- 
stituted the seventh satrapy. Herzfeld is inclined to regard 



the nandas 


31 


the Sattagydians as an Indian people located in the Punjab. 
Rawlinson, however, thinks that they lived near the Aracho- 
sians (of Kandahar) and occupied a part of south-eastern 
Afghanistan. According to Sarre they are to be located in the 
Ghazni and Ghilzai regions. Dames placed them in the Hazara 
country. The exact 'position of the Sattagydians still remains 
uncertain and the matter cannot be finally decided until the 
discovery of fresh evidence. 

A more famous name that occurs in several inscriptions of 
Darius in the list of subject peoples is Hidu (Hindu), which 
corresponds to the “Indians” of Herodotus. The circum- 
stances leading to their subjugation, as described by the fa- 
mous Greek historian, are too well known to need recount- 
ing. We are told that “the Indians, who are more numerous 
than other nations with which we are acquainted, paid a 
tribute exceeding that of every other people, viz., 360 talents 
of gold-dust. This was the twentieth satrapy.” Herzfeld 
takes Hidu to refer to Sind. The description of Herodotus 
that “the tribes of India are more numerous than any other 
nation and do not all speak the same language”, taken together 
with the information that they paid an amount of tribute 
exceeding that of every other people, suggests that the twen- 
tieth province of the Achaemcnid Empire could not have been 
confined within the narrow limits of modern Sind. If the 
sandy tract, which is said to have lain ‘eastward of India’ refers 
to the desert of Rajputana, then we have probably to in- 
clude a considerable portion of the southern Punjab, if not 
the whole of the central as well as the lower Indus valley within 
the borders of the twentieth satrapy. It may no doubt be 
argued in this connection that certain words of Megasthenes 
and Arrian suggest a more restricted dominion. The former 
says that “the Indians had never engaged in foreign warfare, 
nor had ever been invaded and conquered by a foreign power, 
except by Hercules and Dionysus and lately by the Macedo- 
nians”. Arrian also makes the statement that “according to 
the Indians, no one before Alexander, with the exception of 
Dionysus and Hercules, had invaded their country.” As both 
these writers often take the Indus to be the western boundary 
of India proper, their statements may be taken to imply that 



32 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAS 


the Persian dominion in the east did not extend beyond the 
mighty Sindhu. But it has perhaps been rightly pointed out 
that ‘ 6 Alexander's historians may have been inclined to 
minimise the accomplishments** of the Persians “in order to 
bring into greater prominence the achievements of the famous 
Greek invader.” In any case we should give more weight to 
the contemporary testimony of Herodotus than to the 
observations of Megasthenes and Arrian who wrote in much 
later ages. 

The empire which Darius ruled with wisdom and vigour 
did not long survive his death. Xerxes, who succeeded his 
father in 486 B. G. and reigned till 465 B. C., had to face a 
sea of troubles. Rebellions broke out on all sides. We learn 
from a Persepolis inscription, usually assigned to the period 
between 486-480 B. C., that he destroyed the temple of the 
daivas. This, in all likelihood, has reference to India. It 
is, however, difficult to determine whether the Achaemenian 
ruler proclaimed a jihad in honour of Ahuramazda or was 
faced with a rebellion of the far-eastern province of his em- 
pire, the land of the Deva-worshippers. That the monarch 
succeeded in retaining some hold over the Indian provinces 
is amply attested by the fact that the people of Gandhara as 
well as the Indians figured in the vast host that he led against 
Hellas in 480 B. C. 

The discomfiture that the fleet and army of Persia suffer- 
ed in the fight against the Greeks at Salamis and Plataea, My- 
cale and Eurymedon, clearly indicated that her days of con- 
quest and ascendancy were over. The weak and incapable 
successors of Xerxes found more delight in the boudoirs of the 
harem than on fields of battle. The direction of state affairs 
gradually passed into the hands of ambitious women or all- 
powerful officials. Murder of princes, rebellions of satraps 
and popular outbreaks lined the path of national decline. But 
genius for intrigue and possession of gold enabled the agents 
of a corrupt and effete system to continue for sometihie to 
wield an influence which the valour and enterprise of their 
antagonists failed effectively to eradicate. 

The Achaemcnians succeeded in retaining some control 
or influence over the tribes of the Indian borderland till 330 



THE NANDAS 


33 


B. C. when their hegemony was finally extinguished by Al- 
exander. Strabo informs us, on the authority of Eratosthenes, 
that “the Indus was the boundary between India and Ariarih, 
which latter was situated next to India to the west and was in 
possession of the Persians at that time” (i. e. when Alexander 
invaded India). # 

Indian contingents fought side by side with the Persians 
against the Hellenic host at Guagamela. Arrian refers to 
three distinct groups of Indians who responded to the trumpet 
call of Darius III Codomanus (335-330 B. C.). The Indians 
who were neighbours of the Bactrians (of the Balkh region), 
possibly the inhabitants of Kapisl-Gandhara, were arrayed with 
the Bactrians themselves and the Sogdianians (of the Samar- 
kand territory) under the command of Bessus, the satrap of 
Bactria. A second group of Indians styled the “Indian hill- 
men” or “mountaineer Indians”, possibly the Sattagydians 
or people of the principality of Sambos in Sind, were placed 
with the Arachosians (of the Kandahar area) under Bersaentes, 
Satrap of Arachosia. Besides these, we have pointed reference 
to a third group, viz. Indians on this side of the Indus, appa- 
rently those of the twentieth satrapy, who came to the help of 
the Persian king with a comparatively small force of fifteen 
elephants. 

In the huge Persian army that Darius pitched against 
Alexander the Indians occupied the centre where the great 
king himself took up his position. They obviously enjoyed, 
in a special measure, the confidence of the sovereign and had 
the honour of protecting his person with his kinsmen, “the Per- 
sians whose spears were fitted with golden apples, the ‘trans- 
planted’ Carians and the Mardian bowmen.” Nor did they 
belie the trust reposed in them. When the attack began and 
the great king himself took to flight some of the Indians, 
together with the Persian cavalry, fell upon the enemy with 
great impetuosity and threatened one contingent (the army 
of Parmenio) with total annihilation. The timely help of 
Alexander saved the situation. 

It is interesting to note that two important sections of 
Indians whg joined the army of Darius III fought under the 
banner of the satraps of Bactrim and Arachosia. This possibly 



34 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


implies . that their territories were committed to the charge 
of those two satrapies. The amalgamation of two, or even 
tliree, provinces is a feature of the administrative history of the 
later Achaemenids. Like the Dandopanatasdmantas , mention- 
ed in Kautiliyan Arthasdstra , Indian lieges furnished contingents 
to the paramount power in the hour c if its need . The great 
provincial satraps had the assistance of district officials or lo- 
cal potentates of the rank of nomarch and hy parch . A number 
of these functionaries are mentioned as ruling in the 
Kabul and Indus valleys on the eve of the Macedonian inva- 
sion of 326 B. C. Alexander did not meet with any Persian 
satrap after he crossed the Indus. But hyparchs and nomarchs 
were to be found as far as the Salt range. Some of the chiefs 
assumed the full insignia of sovereignty and even styled them- 
selves Basileus or king. The hold of the Persian king and 
satraps had by this time grown very weak. Each petty princi- 
pality or chiefship cherished “with a passionate tenacity its 
individual life and. . political ambition, making wars and 
alliances as the interest of the moment might dictate.” 

C SUCCESSORS OF THE ACHAEMENIDS 

The little states in North-western India and the border- 
land that rose on the ruins of the Persian Empire may be group- 
ed under three heads : (a) kingships, mainly of a tribal charac- 
ter, in the region between the Kunar and the Ravi, with a so- 
litary hill-state apparently under oligarchical rule; (b) the 
autonomous tribes east of the Ravi and south of the junction 
of the Jhelum and the Chcnab ; and (c) monarchies and one 
state under ‘diarchy’ in the lower Indus valley below Mithan- 
kot, in parts of which Brahmanas seem to have exercised con- 
siderable political influence. 

The first group begins with the principalities in the hill 
country drained by the northern affluents of the Kabul river 
comprising the valleys of the Kunar, the Panjkora and the 
Swat, occupied by the Aspasians, the Gaureans and the As- 
sakenians respectively. The name Aspasian is derived from 
the Iranian ‘ Aspa\ horse, corresponding to the Sanskrit ‘ Asvo i y 
or c Asvaka\ They were thus identical with, or^ kindreds of, 
the Assakenians or ASvakas. The ruler of the Aspasians is 



THE NANDAS 


35 


styled a hyparch . The chief wealth of the people seems to have 
consisted in cattle, 230,000 of which were captured J>y 
Alexander. 

The territory occupied by the Assakenians lay in the Swat 
valley and was known in the Gupta Age as Suvastu and Udya- 
na. The royal seat of the country was Massaga, a great city 
well fortified both by nature and art. It was surrounded by 
a wall of 35 stadia in circumference, built of sun-baked brick 
on a foundation of stone work. Towers and engines had to 
be employed by Alexander to bring about its fall. The Assa- 
kenian king had a powerful army of 20,000 cavalry, more than 
30,000 infantry and 30 elephants. He was probably in alli- 
ance with the king of Abhisara, as his brother, when attacked 
by Alexander, took shelter with the latter. 

Somewhere in the rugged country to the west of the In- 
dus stood the small hill-state Nysa “at the foot of Mt. Meros.” 
Holdich locates it on the lower spurs and valleys of Kohi-Mor 
in the Swat country. The Nysaeans are alleged to have been 
Greek colonists, descendants of men who came to India with 
Dionysus. The presence of a Yona or Greek janapada on the 
Indian borderland in the days of the Buddha is vouched for 
by the Majjhima-nikaya. The people of Nysa lived under an 
aristocratic government and their laws received the approba- 
tion of Alexander. The members of the Governing Body 
numbered 300. Akuphis held the office of the President at 
the time of the Macedonian invasion. 

The old territory of Gandhara was in the latter part of the 
fourth century B. C. divided between two hyparchs viz., those 
of Pushkalavati and Takshasila or Taxila. Pushkalavati, or 
Peuc laotis of the Greeks, lay to the west of the Indus in the 
modern district of Peshawar. Taxila stood in the eastern part 
of ancient Gandhara. The oldest city of that name is probably 
represented by the present Bhir mound near Saraikala, 20 
miles north-west of Rawalpindi. It was a great and prosper- 
ous city in those days, “the largest of all which lay between 
the river Indus and Hydaspes (Jhelum).” Plutarch, giving an 
exaggerated estimate of the size of the realm of “Taxiles”, says 
that it was “fis large as Egypt, with good pasturage, too, and 
in the highest degree productive of beautiful fruits”. Strabo 



36 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


refers to its “most excellent laws” and speaks of it as spacious 
aijd very fertile, adding that “some say that this is larger 
than Aegypt.” The wealth of the country is testified to by 
the fact that one of its chiefs presented to Alexander 200 silver 
talents, 3,000 cattle for sacrificial offering, over 10,000 sheep 
and 30 elephants. The succeeding ruler gave Alexander and 
his friends golden crowns and 80 talents of coined silver. The 
attitude of Taxila towards its neighbours throws welcome light 
on interstate and inter-tribal relations in the later half of the 
fourth century B. C. It entertained no friendly feelings towards 
Pushkalavati and was actually at war with “Abisares” (the 
Abhisara chief) and “Porus” (the Paurava) both of whom held 
sway beyond the river Jhelum. It is difficult to determine 
the exact political status of the ruler of Taxila at the time of 
Alexander’s invasion. Arrian styles him a hyparch but Strabo 
calls him a basileus. It is possible that he was one of the sub- 
ordinate governors or vassal chiefs of the Persian empire and 
took advantage of the collapse of Achacmenian authority to 
declare his independence. The cases of several nawabs of the 
eighteenth century furnish us with close parallels 

“The hilly region above the Taxila country was occupi- 
ed by Arsakes or the chief of Urasa * Hazara district) and 
Abisares or Prince of Abhisara v Punch and Nowbhera distri- 
cts;.” It is interesting to note that like many of his brother 
chieftains on the borderland Arsakes is described as a hyparch . 

The ruler of Abhisara, on the other hand, is styled by 
Arrian as a Basileus or king. He was a very powerful prince 
and a man of shrewd political sense. He seems to have been 
a member of a powerful combination of chiefs consisting of 
Porus, Arsakes and possibly Assakenus. He was no friend of 
the king of Taxila and is known to have led an expedition against 
the Gathaeans and other self-governing tribes of the Punjab in 
alliance with Porus. He sensed the danger of the Macedonian 
invasion and tried to stop the invader at the gate of India. 
Thus he sent help to the frontier city of Ora and gave shelter 
to the brother of Assakenus. When Alexander actually arriv- 
ed at Taxila he sent envoys offering his submission and yet 
before the battle of the Hydaspes (Jhelum) he made prepa- 
rations for joining his forces with Porus. 



THE NANDAS 


37 


To the south-east of Taxila between the Jhelum and the 
Ravi lay the twin territories of the Purus or Pauravas, a peo- 
ple already famous in the Ri% Veda. The realm of the elder 
of the two chieftains roughly corresponded to parts of the mo- 
dern districts of Gujarat and Shahpur. It was an extensive 
and fertile region containing three hundred cities. The 
second Paurava or Porus, styled a hyparch by Arrian, governed 
a principality between the Chenab and the Ravi. A man of 
undaunted courage, brave as a lion, Porus the Elder towered 
like a triton among minnows. The king of Taxila on the west 
and his own nephew or cousin, styled the Younger Porus, on 
the east were both afraid of him. The Gathaeans and other 
self-governing tribes also had a wholesome respect for his pro- 
wess. Diodorus informs us that he was in alliance with Em- 
bisaros (Abisares or king of Abhisara) and in the battle of the 
Hydaspes he received help from Spitaces, a nomarch who possi- 
bly owed him allegiance. The army he marshalled against 
Alexander numbered more than 50,000 foot, about 3,000 horses 
and above 1,000 chariots and 130 elephants. 

Not far from the domains of the Pauravas stretched the 
principality of the nomarch Sophytes or Saubhuti. It included 
a mountain composed of fossil salt sufficient for the whole of 
India; Saubhuti is therefore sometimes represented as the “lord 
of the fastness of the Salt Range” stretching from the Indus 
to the Jhelum. Classical writers, however, agree in placing 
his territory to the east of the Jhelum. We have some coins 
of this potentate bearing on the obverse the royal head and 
on the reverse the figure of a cock. The issue of coins, like 
the assumption of the title of Basileus by the chief of Taxila, 
may point to the assumption of the rank of an independent 
king. Both Gurtius and Diodorus agree that the people of the 
kingdom of Saubhuti lived under good laws and customs and 
beauty was held by them in the highest estimation. “Offi- 
cers were appointed to discriminate between children with 
deformed or defective limbs and those with perfect and healthy 
constitutions and features. The former were put to death, 
and the latter were reared, not according to the will of the 
parents but^according to the wishes of the state. In contracting 
marriages they did not seek an alliance with high birth nor 



38 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

did they care whether a bride had dowry or a handsome for- 
tiyie, but made their choice by the looks and other advantages 
of the outward person. The inhabitants were therefore held in 
higher estimation than the rest of their countrymen and also 
excelled in wisdom .” 1 

With the Pauravas and Saubhuti we take leave of the 
tribal chieftains, who held sway on the borderland and the 
western Punjab under the titles of hyparch , nomarch and, more 
rarely, Basileus. We now come to the territories of the autono- 
mous clans. We have to mention first the Glauganikai or 
Glausians, whose country lay to the west of the Chenab close 
to the territory of the Pauravas. In their land were no less 
than thirty-seven cities; of these, the least populated had 
above five thousand inhabitants many of them had over ten 
thousand. There was also a large number of populous vil- 
lages . 2 We have next to mention the Kathaioi or Cathaeans, 
who are placed by some on the far side of the Chenab and the 
Ravi. The name possibly stands for the Sanskrit Katha. A 
brave and warlike race, the Cathaeans had their stronghold 
at Sangala, probably situated in the Gurudaspur district not 
far from Fathgarh, though some prefer the claims of Jandiala 
to the east of Amritsar, or that of Lahore itself. The people 
had a keen sense of beauty. Strabo, on the authority of One- 
sicritus, tells us that they chose the handsomest person as their 
king, and had customs that remind one of the realm of Sau- 
bhuti. Other observations of Onesicritus on the Cathaeans 
will be cited later. 

Not far from the Cathaeans on the eastern side of the Ravi 
lived the Adraistai. Their main stronghold was Pimprama. 
Between the Ravi and the Bcas we find mention of a chief 
named Phegeus or Phegelis. The name of the king probably 
answers to the Sanskrit Bhagala, known from the Ganapalha 
as a designation of a royal race of Kshatriyas. 

Below the junction of the Jhelum and the Chenab, ^in the 
Shorkot region of the Jhang district lay the territory of a peo- 
ple, called the Siboi. They were probably identical with the 


1. M'Crindle Invasion pp. 219, 279. 

2. Arrian (Locb) II 63, 65. 



THE NANDAS 


39 


Siva people mentioned in the Rig Veda and the Sibis of the 
later literature. They were dressed with skins like Herakj^s 
and had clubs for their weapon, and further branded their 
cattle and mules with the mark of a club. 1 The nation mus- 
tered 40,000 soldiers to oppose Alexander. This people had 
the Agalassoi as their Neighbours. Their army too numbered 
40,000, besides 3,000 horse. Curtius tells us that “three largest 
rivers in India washed the line of the fortifications of their 
stronghold. The Indus flows close up to it, and on the south 
the Akesines unites with the Hydaspes.” 2 

Below the confluence of these rivers, on the confines of 
a waterless tract and along the Ravi and the Chenab lived the 
people called Malloi. Their name, as is well known, repre- 
sents the Sanskrit Malava. Closely connected with them in 
Sanskrit and Greek literature were the Oxydrakai or Oxydra- 
cae (variously called Sydracae, Sudracae, Syrakousai) or the 
Kshudrakas. Strabo informs us that they were regarded as 
the descendants of Dionysus, judging from the vine of their 
country and their bacchanalian procession. Panini refers to 
the Malavas as living by the profession of arms. Arrian in- 
cludes them among self-governing Indians ands ays that they 
were the most numerous and the most warlike of the Indians 
in these parts. The evidence of Strabo seems to suggest that 
the Kshudrakas were ruled by petty kings ( basileus ), compar- 
able to the Rajas among the Lichchavis and the Mallas of Eas- 
tern India. Arrian in one passage refers to the mayors of the 
cities and rulers of districts ( nomarchai ) among them, who 
were entrusted with full power to negotiate with foreign po- 
tentates. Before the invasion of Alexander the Malavas and 
the Kshudrakas were often at war with one another. But at 
the approach of the common enemy they decided to join for- 
ces. According to Curtius the combined army numbered 
90,000 foot, 10,000 cavalry and 900 war chariots and they 
placed at their head a brave warrior of the nation of the Kshu- 
drakas. A somewhat different account is given by Diodorus 
who says that the two nations at first mustered a force of 80,000 


Geography of Stabo (Loeb) VII M 
M’Crindle, Invasion p 233. 



40 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


foot, 10,000 horse and 700 chariots and cemented their alliance 
b */ intermarriages, each nation taking and giving in exchange 
10,000 of their young women for wives; but subsequently a 
dispute arose among them regarding leadership and they drew 
off into adjoining towns. Arrian’s narrative seems to imply 
that Alexander reached the territory of the Malavas before 
any help could come to them from their neighbours. 

The territory on the lower Chenab, situated between the 
confluence of that river with the Ravi and the junction with 
the Indus respectively was occupied by several autonomous 
tribes, such as the Abastenoe, also called Sam- 
bastai, Sahara jae (Ambashthas), the Xathroi (Kshatri) 
and the Ossadioi (Vasati). The Ambashthas find prominent 
mention in Sanskrit and Pali literature, including the great 
epics, along with the Sibis, the Kshudrakas, the Malavas and 
the Sindhavas. Curtius and Diodorus both agree that they 
were a powerful people with a democratic government. Their 
army consisted of 60.000 foot, 6,000 cavalry and 400 chariots 
in Alexander’s time. The Xathroi and the Ossadioi possibly 
the Kshatris and Vasatis of Sanskrit texts, do not seem to, 
have shared the eminence of their famous neighbours. 

Below the confluence of the five rivers lived the Sodrai 
and the Massanoi. The river Indus seems to have separated 
the territories of the two. The Sodrai are, in all probability, 
the Sudras of the epic, a people closely associated with the 
Abhiras dwelling on the Sarasvati. 

The major part of Sind from Sukkur to the delta was divi- 
ded among a number of potentates of whom the most impor- 
tant was Mousikanos. The capital of this prince is usually plac- 
ed at or near Alor. His country was reported to be the richest 
in India and Arrian tells us that Alexander much admired it 
and its capital. Strabo gives interesting information about 
the kingdom of Mousikanos on the authority of Oncsicritus 
and this will be reproduced elsewhere. 

From the account left by Arrian it appears that the “Bra- 
chmans” or Brahamanas exercised considerable influence in 
the country. They instigated a revolt against the Macedo- 
nian invader. Nearchus informs us “that the trachamanes 
engage in affairs of state and attend the kings as councillors”. 



THE NANDAS 


41 


Not far from the territory of Mousikanos lay the princi- 
pality over which Oxykanos or Portikanos held sway. Arrian 
calls him a nomarch . The inhabitants of the region are styled 
by Gurtius Praesti, possibly the Proshthas of the epic. 

In the mountainous country adjoining the kingdom of 
Mousikanos ruled Sairfbos, called Sabus by Strabo and Sabbas 
by Plutarch. His capital was Sindimana or Sindomana, 
which has been identified, with little plausibility, with Sehwan, 
a city on the Indus. Arrian informs us that Sambos and Mou- 
sikanos were at enmity with one another. Sambos was appoin- 
ted satrap of the Indian hillmen by Alexander; but if Plutarch 
is to be believed he rose in rebellion at the instance of the gy- 
mnosophists. This hints at the fact that “naked philosophers’ 
who were either Brahmanas or followers of the Jina had con- 
siderable political influence in the country of Sambos. Con- 
ditions therefore were not unlike those in the realm of Mousi- 
kanos. Diodorus makes explicit mention of a nation and count- 
ry of the Brahamanas in the neighbourhood of the Sindian 
chiefships. He also places at the extremity of the “country 
of the Brahmanas” a city, called Harmatelia, which, as the 
evidence of Justin suggests, was ruled by a chief named Am- 
bigerus. 

In the delta of the Indus lay the territory of Patalene, re- 
ferred as Pottala and identified with Tauala of Diodorus. The 
capital probably stood near the site of Bahmanabad. Dio- 
dorus tells us Tauala had a political constitution like that of 
Sparta. The armv was commanded by two kings belonging 
to separate families, while a Council of Elders directed the 
affairs of the state with supreme authority. One of the kings 
in the time of Alexander is styled by Gurtius Moeres, a name 
that sounds like Moriya or Maurya of Indian records. 

To sum up, North-West India presented on the whole a 
picture of disunion when the Nandas held sway in the Ganges 
valley. Constant references to hyparchs and nomarchs , how- 
ever, indicate that, as in the eighteenth century, agents of a 
defunct empire were, with few exceptions, still content with 
the subordinate titles they had in the palmy days of the 
rule of thsir former imperial masters. The time was ripe 
for interference from powers that dominated the tableland 



42 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of Iran on the west and the valley of the Ganges in 
the east. 

2. The Far South 

In comparison with the North-West our information re- 
garding the Far South of India beyond the river Godavari in 
the age of the Nandas is extremely meagre. The region falls 
into three well-marked natural divisions: (1) The high land 

enclosed between the Western and the Eastern Ghats, which 
has its ‘orographical apex’ at the Nilgiri where the great moun- 
tain systems of the south merge into one another; (2) a narrow 
strip of territory on its west extending as far as the shores of the 
sea, intersected by numerous coves and creeks, but “unbroken 
by the passage of any considerable river" ; and (3) the broader 
eastern sea-board embracing the fertile deltas of the Godavari, 
the Krishna and the Kaverl as well as the “open treeless 
plains’’ of Madura and Tinnevelly. 

The two low-lying strips of territory overlooking the Ara- 
bian Sea and the Bay of Bengal respectively arc “filled with 
luxuriant vegetation, nourished by sea-borne mists and va- 
pours”, bedecked with groves of palm and cocoanut and adorn- 
ed in places by a number of backwaters, lagoons or lakes. They 
afford a most picturesque sight to the traveller. The wide expa- 
nse of the table land of the interior, “in some parts mountainous 
and wooded, in others flat and undulating, with stretches of 
rich crop-growing fields as well as sterile soil", also presents a 
beautiful and diversified scenery. The south became justly 
famous for its natural wealth. The maritime belts are in many 
places exceedingly fertile and produced abundant crops of 
cereals. Ancient ports are found scattered all along the coast- 
line through which a brisk trade was carried on with the countr- 
ies of the west and the east from bygone times. Among the 
chief articles of commerce pepper, beryl and pearls were highly 
prized in Europe. The last-mentioned articles find promi- 
nent mention in the works of the Classical authors since the 
days of Megasthenes. Kautilya, too, refers to pearl called 
Tamraparnika, “that which is produced in Tamraparnl,’* 
besides articles produced in Pandya-kapata and«the cotton 
fabrics of Madura. 



THE NANDAS 


43 


It is the wealth of the Far South, rather than the annals 
of its people, their manners and customs, religion and philo- 
sophy, that interested the earliest foreign observers. The con- 
temporaries and immediate successors of Alexander seem to 
have had some vague knowledge of the south. A place called 
Keras is mentioned by Aristotle. But its identification with 
Kerala or Ghera is not beyond doubt. Onesicritus, however, 
gives a description of the island of Taprobane (Tamraparni 
or Ceylon). Eratosthenes in his description of India in the 
days of Alexander informs us that the most southerly part of 
India was occupied by the lands of Goniaci and Taprobane 
was seven days' sail from this place. He gathered the informa- 
tion that the most southerly capes of India rose opposite to 
the region of Meroe, from treatises written by men who had 
been to that region. Nearchus speaks of the setting of the Bears 
and if Megasthenes is to be believed this was a phenomenon 
observed in the southern parts of India. Aristobulus shows 
acquaintance with the products of “the southern land of India, 
(which) like Arabia and Aethiopia bears cinnamon, nard and 
other aromatic products.” Strauo speaks of the people of the 
south as being like the Aethiopians in colour, but he does not 
specify his authority. Megasthenes speaks, in one of his doubt- 
ful fragments, of the Andrae (Andhras) who “possessed nume- 
rous villages, thirty towns defended by walls and towers, 
and supplied their king with an army of 100,000 infantry, 2,000 
cavalry and 1,000 elephants.” The tribe is referred to in cer- 
tain Brdhmana texts and is found in historical times in the re- 
gion watered by the lower courses of the Godavari and the 
Krishna. Mention is also made of a tribe called the “Modu- 
bae” who are placed beyond the “Modogalingae”. They 
are apparently identical with the Mutibas, a Dasyu tribe asso- 
ciated by the Brdhmana texts, referred to above, with the An- 
dhras. 

The extreme south of India to which the designation 
Tamilakam or Dravida (Damirike of Greek writers of the 
earliest centuries A. D.) was applied in post-vedic times con- 
sisted of four independent principalities in the third century 
B. C. These were the Cholas, the Pandyas, Keralaputra and 
Satiyaputra. Of these Satiyaputra does not seem to have 



44 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


been mentioned by any author historically or traditionally 
assignable to the Nanda period. We shall therefore content 
ourselves with a brief notice of the three remaining regions. 

The Ghola country proper comprised the districts of Tri- 
chinpoly and Tanjore and was watered by the river Kaverl. 
The fame of the country in the age of*the Nandas is vouched 
for by the celebrated grammarian Katyayana. 

The Pandya country is represented by the modern dis- 
tricts of Madura, Ramnad and Tinnevelly together with the 
southern part of the Travancore state. It was drained by the 
rivers Kntamala or the Vaigai and the Tamraparnl. Like 
th'" Cholas, the Pandyas too are mentioned by Katyayana. He 
derives the name of the country from the famous Pandu. Me- 
gasthenes also refers to the Pandaian (Pandya) country and 
repeats some confused traditions regarding the connection of 
the land with the North, with Surasena, Mathura and He- 
rakles. The Pandyan people were distributed in 365 villagee 
and on every day of the year a village brought the tribute to 
the treasury, “so that the queen (represented by the Classical 
writers as the daughter of Herakles) might always have the 
assistance ol those men whose turn it was to pay the tribute 
in coercing those who for the time being were defaulters in 
their payments.” 1 It is interesting to note that the chief or- 
naments of the Pandyas were made of sea-pearl. Arrian tells 
us that the Pandya queen received from her father 500 ele- 
phants, 4,000 horses and 130,000 cavalry. Pliny tells us that her 
descendants ruled over 3,000 cities and commanded an army 
of 150,000 foot and 500 elephants. According to the same au- 
thority Pandya ‘is the only race in India ruled by women.* 
Later writers, however, refer to more than one such territory. 

If the Mahauarhsa is to be believed the Pandya kingdom 
and its capital, were in existence even in the time of Vijaya- 
simha, the traditional conquerer of Ceylon, who is represented 
as a contemporary of Buddha. In this region we should per- 
haps place the land of the Coniaci, whose name may represent 
Kumarika of Indian writers. The identification with Dha- 
nushkoti is less plausible. 


i. M'Grindlc, Megasthtnes and Arrian , p. 159. 



THE NANDAS 


45 


Kerala, the third among the classic realms of the Far 
South, corresponds roughly to south Malabar and seems to 
have extended down to central Travancore. As already stat- 
ed, its identification with Keros of Aristotle is problematical. 

Kerala may have embraced within its boundaries a dis- 
trict styled Mushika., In a passage of Strabo, Onesicritus 
is said to have represented the “country of Mousikanos” as the 
most southerly part of India. The territory of the famous Mousi- 
kanos, the contemporary of Alexander, was, as is well known, 
located in the lower Indus valley. But it is not improbable 
that Onesicritus had heard also of the Mushikas in the Far 
South and corrupted the name into Mousikanos. It may be 
pointed out in this connection that both Baharampur in the 
Murshidabad District of Bengal and Brahmapur in Ganjam 
have been corrupted into Berhampur by British officials. 



CHAPTER II 


ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS IN INDIA 

• 

After Alexander’s conquest of Bactria and Sogdiana, the 
Indian satrapy was the only province of the Persian empire 
into which he had not carried his arms. Of this province he 
must have gained some valuable knowledge from Sisikottos 
(Sasigupta), the Indian mercenary leader who transferred 
his services from Bactria to her conqueror. Alexander also 
received an embassy in Sogdiana from Omphis (Ambhi) of 
Takshasila (Taxila) which offered him the alliance of the Indian 
prince and sought the foreigner’s aid against his powerful 
neighbour Porus, the first recorded instance of an Indian seek- 
ing foreign aid against fellow Indians. 

At the end of the spring of 326 B. C., Alexander started 
on his Indian expedition leaving Amyntas behind with 3,500 
horse and 10,000 foot to hold the land of the Bactrians. He 
crossed the Central Hindu Kush in ten days following the 
main road from Balkh to Kabul, and reached the rich and beau- 
tiful valley of Koh-i-Daman, where he had already founded 
an Alexandria, which he now strengthened with fresh rec- 
ruits from the neighbourhood and from among his war-worn 
soldiers. He placed Nicanor in charge of the city, and ap- 
pointed Tyriespes satrap of the area, dispositions intended, 
as was usual with Alexander, to secure his rear before advanc- 
ing further. 

Alexander then proceeded to Nikaia (Greek for ‘city 
of victory’), a place that lay most likely on his route to the river 
Kabul. Here he offered a sacrifice to the goddess Athena, 
and met an Indian embassy headed by the king of Takshasila 
which ‘brought him such presents as are most esteemed by the 
Indians’ and gave him also all the elephants they had with 
them, twenty-five in number. 

After leaving Nikaia and at some distance from the city 
on the way to the Kabul river, Alexander divided his army, 
and sent one part of it under Hephaestion and Perdiccas to the 



CHAPTER III 

'iNDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 

\ 

l. Introductory 

India and Greece met in the Persian empire some two 
centuries before the time of Alexander. Even earlier, Indian 
ideas seem to have travelled far into the West and influenced 
Pythagoras and his followers; true, we cannot now say by what 
channel this contact was made, but the similarities between 
Pythagorean thought and that of the Upanishads, and between 
the organisation and ceremonial of the Pythagorean fraternity 
and the ancient ascetic orders of India are too close to be treated 
as chance coincidences or the results of parallel developments. 
Aristoxenus (c. 330 B. C-), a Greek writer on harmonics and a 
pupil of Socrates, is known to have mentioned the visit of an 
Indian philosopher to Athens and the meeting between him and 
Socrates at which the scope of philosophy was discussed; and 
( the celebrated simile of the rope and the snake, which is found 
in Sextus Empiricus and nowhere else in Greek or Latin litera- 
ture, has been traced to Pyrrho, the founder of the Sceptic sys- 
tem, who accompanied Alexander to India. 1 

The accounts of any country and its people by foreign obser- 
vers are of great interest to the historian of the country; for they 
enable him to know what impression the country made upon 
the minds of such observers and to estimate with greater con- 
fidence the part played by it in the general history of the world. 
And where, as in the case of ancient India, the native sources 
of history fail him partly or altogether at some points, the writ- 
ings of foreigners gain great value in his eyes. Yet it is easy 


i. Richard Garbe, The Philosophy of Ancient India , pp. 39 — 46, seems 
to lhe to give a much more balanced criticism of earlier writers, particularly 
of Leopold von Schrocder, than A. B. Keith, Pythagoras and the Doctrine 
of Transmigration, JRAS, 1909, pp. 569 — 606. Sec also Radhakrishnan, 
Eastern Relief ions and Western Thought , pp. 140 — 42. Like Garbe, I would re- 
strict the scope of my observations to Pythagoras and his school. For Aris- 
toxenus cited by Eusebius, see Rawlinson, India and Greece in Ind. Art and 
A Letters, X (1936), £p. 57 — 8. For Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus, S. J. Warren, 
Het Slang en Truw voorbecld bij Sextus Empiricus en in Indie, VersL en Med. 
der kon. Akad. van Wetenschappen , Amsterdam , IV, ix, pp. 230 — 24^. 



82 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


to exaggerate the value of the Greek writings on India. The 
Greek writers did evince a commendable interest in observing 
and recording facts; but they were also credulous purveyors 
of all the fable and gossip that came their way. The few who 
wrote before the invasion of Alexander did so mostly from hear- 
say and had little direct knowledge of India. The scientists 
and men of action who accompanied Alexander must have 
found most of their time taken up with planning, marching 
and fighting in a hostile and unknown country, and the 
wonder is that they succeeded in doing what they did to make 
India known to their countrymen; and the lands they traversed 
were but the fringe of Hindusthan far from the genuine cen- 
tres of Hindu culture in the heart of the country. The am- 
bassadors of the Hellenistic kings who came after Alexander, 
in particular Megasthenes, had better opportunities of study- 
ing the country and its people as their missions took them into 
their midst. But being ignorant of the language of the people, 
they must have depended on interpreters of sorts and expe- 
rienced considerable difficulty in comprehending correctly 
what they saw and heard. The Chinese pilgrims of a later age 
who had command of the Sanskrit idiom were much better 
placed in this respect; but their interests were not so wide. 
Lastly, with very few exceptions, Herodotus being the most 
notable of them, all the original writings have perished, and 
we now depend on excerpts preserved by later writers and 
compilers, who, in turn, had access only at second hand to the 
matter they quoted. We lack the me. ms of forming an inde- 
pendent integral judgment of most of our ultimate authori- 
ties. Nevertheless it is useful to study these excerpts with care, 
for much can be learnt thus of the geography, physical and 
human, of India as it was understood by contemporary Greek 
writers, of its fauna and flora, of its society, religious condition, 
and economic activity. 


2. Scylax 

The first Greek to write a book on India was the sea-cap- 
tain Scylax of Caryanda whom Darius sent out c. 509 B.C. on 
a voyage of exploration to find out where thc # Indus emptied i 
itself into the sea. He is said to have started from the city of 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 


83 


Kaspatyrus in the Paktyikan district, sailed down the stream 
to the sea, and after a voyage of thirty months, reached the 
place whence the Egyptian king Necho sent the Phoenicians 
to sail round Libya. ‘After this voyage was completed’, says 
Herodotus, ‘Darius conquered the Indians, and made use of the 
sea in those parts’. Scylax’s voyage might have taken him 
through the lower Kabul valley, parts of Kashmir and the 
bulk of the Indus country. We know little of Scylax’s book; 
we do not hear of it as being a guide to Alexander in his voyage. 
It is certain however that Scylax started some of the fables 
about Indian peoples which coloured Greek traditional beliefs 
about India for many centuries ; there is a reference in Philos- 
tratus’ Life of Apollonius of Tyana, to ‘men that are shadow- 
footed or have long heads’ and ‘the other poetical fancies which 
the treatise of Scylax recounts’ about peoples who ‘didn’t live 
anywhere on the earth, and least of all in India.’ Aristotle 
cites Scylax’s statement that in India kings had a marked 
superiority over those they governed. 1 

The antiquarian and geographer, Hecataeus of Miletus 
(B. G. 549-486) 2 , might have used Scylax; he opens one of his 
works, Inquiries , with the admirable statement: ‘What I write 
here is what I consider true; for the tales of the Greeks appear 
to me to be many and ridiculous.’ From his other work, the 
Geography , some Indian names have survived: they are those 
of the river Indus ; of two cities, Kaspapyros, a city of Gandhara, 
Multan according to another view, probably the same as Hero- 
dotus’ Kaspatyrus, and Argante, a city in the valley of the 
Indus; and of some peoples, viz., the Opiai, the Kalatiai, the 
Sciapodes (the shadow-footed people of Scylax) and perhaps 
also the Pygmies. Beyond the Indus was a sandy waste, a 
statement in which Hecataeus is followed by Herodotus, their 
knowledge of India being mostly limited to the Persian part 
of it. 


1. The chief reference to Scylax is Herodotus, IV 44. See Philos- 
tratus, The Life of Apollonius of Tyana , III, 47 and Aristotle, Politics, VII, 

3- 

2. For Hecataeus of Miletus see Cambridge Ancient History . IV, pp. 
518 — 19: Lasseft, Tnd. Alt., ii, pp. 635 — 36. Foucher, Ancient Multan, in 
Woolner Commendation volume (Lahore 1940) pp. 89 — 105 argues that Kai- 
papyros must be identified with Multan. 



84 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


3. Herodotus 

• The references to India and Indians in Herodotus (B. C. 
484-425) 1 place them in a clear light, and the monstrous 
races that formed the stock in trade of Greek writers on India 
before and after him do not make theira ppearance in his 
pages. India is to him the furthest region of the inhabited 
world towards the east, and Indians dwell nearest the rising 
of the sun. Of the Indians within the empire of Darius he 
observed that they were more numerous than any other nation 
known to him, and paid a tribute exceeding that of every other 
people, three hundred and sixty talents of gold-dust. But he 
knows that there were many other tribes of Indians, all of them 
dark-skinned, living a long way from Persia towards the south 
over whom King Darius had no authority. There were many 
tribes among Indians and they did not all speak the same lang- 
uage. Some were nomads, others not. Among the nomads 
were the Padaeans, who lived on raw flesh, including that of 
sick or old members of the tribe, who were offered in sacrifice 
to their gods — a practice attested by modern observers to have 
obtained till recently among some savage hill tribes. The same 
custom prevailed among the Kallatiai within the Persian em- 
pire. There was another tribe of marsh-dwellers who ate raw 
fish and wore garments of sedge. Herodotus’ knowledge of the 
people across the Persian border was by no means confined to 
savages. ‘There is another set of Indians whose customs are 
very different. They refuse to put any living animal to death, 
they sow no corn, and have no dwelling houses. Vegetables 
are their only food. There is a plant which grows wild in 
their country, bearing seed, about the size of millet seed, in a 
calyx: their wont is to gather this seed and having boiled it, 
calyx and all, to use it for food. If one of them is attacked 
with sickness, he goes forth into the wilderness, and lies down 
to die ; no one has the least concern either for the sick or for the 
dead.’ This is a very good account of the life of the forest- 
dwelling sages of India who used wild rice ( nivara ) for their 
staple food. 


i. Herodotus, III, 38, 94, 98—106: VII, 65, 86: McCrindle, Anc. Ind . 
Sec. 1. The citations in the text are from Rawlinson’s version, Everyman*! 
Library Edn. Strabo, XV, 1, 56 (p. 59) for Megasthenes" on cannibalism. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 85 


Within the Persian empire, the Indian tribes of Paktiyika 
(Pashtu country), who dwelt northward of all the rest ofljie 
Indians and resembled the Bactrians in their mode of life, 
were the most warlike, and from among them were selected 
the men who were sent to procure gold from the sandy-desert. 
Herodotus gives a full •account of gold-digging ants of the size 
of dogs, which threw up mounds of the gold-dust that was col- 
lected and brought away by the Indians in camel loads during 
the hottest part of the day when the ants hid themselves to es- 
cape the heat; this story in some form became a permanent 
feature of all later Greek accounts of India; Nearchus averred 
that he saw the skins of these ants and that these resembled 
the skins of leopards Megasthenes connects the Derdai (Skt. 
Daradas, mod. Dards) with the gathering of ant-gold, and 
states that they diverted the attention of the ants by depositing 
the flesh of wild beasts in different places before beginning to 
remove the gold. Some ingenious scholars explain away the 
ants of the size of dogs by supposing that the ants are dervied 
from the name of gold pipilikd , and that the native miners did 
keep formidable dogs which chased away the people who came 
to take the gold; such explanations raise more questions than 
they answer and are of no value. Herodotus adds that India 
got a small part of its gold supply from mining and both he and 
Megasthenes mention that some of it came from river beds . 1 2 

Herodotus notes that the beasts and birds of India were 
much bigger than those found elsewhere, except the horses, 
which were surpassed by the Median breed. He tells us of a 


1. Strabo, XV, 44, in McCrindle, Anc. Ind ., p 51 where he gives refe- 
rences to several ancient authors mentioning the gold-digging ants: also his 
Meg . and Arrian , pp. 94 — 7. The Mahdbharata , (Gal. ed.), VII, i860 also 
mentions them. 

tadvai pipilikam nama uddhritam yat-piplhkaih 
jdtaruparh drona-rneyam aharshuh puhjaso n{ipah 

The Kumbakonam edition (II, 78, 80) reads wrongly kuhjafo for punjaio. 
The remarkable identity in the expressions employed by Herodotus and in 
this verse should be noted. Modern scholars arc generally inclined to trace 
to Indian sources most of the fabulous things narrated of India in the Greek 
books. Tarn, after Laufer, traces the ant-legend to Mongolian sources 
(The Greeks in Bactria and India y pp. 106 — 7). The Son river was called Era- 
noboas, Hiranyavaha, gold-carrier. 

2. Frag. tXXIX, pp. 78 — 9 — Strabo, XV 1 : 57. pp. 63 — 4. (The page 
references are, unless otherwise stated, to McCrindle’s translations). Also 
Curtius, VIII, 9 — Alexander's Invasion , p. 187. 



86 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Persian governor of Babylon who ‘kept so great a number of 
Indian hounds, that four large villages of the plain were exemp- 
ted from all other charges on condition of finding them in food*. 
The Indus was for him the only river, besides the Nile, that pro- 
duced crocodiles. 1 Most interesting to the Greeks must have 
been his discovery that there were trees in India ‘the fruit 
whereof is a wool exceeding in beauty and goodness that of 
sheep. The natives make their clothes of this tree wool*. 
‘The Indians in the army of Xerxes wore cotton dresses, and 
carried bows of cane, and arrows also of cane with iron at the 
point’. Some Indians with similar equipment rode on horses 
while others used chariots drawn by horses or wild asses. 

4. Ctesias. 

Ctesias the Cnidian, who wrote a book on India 2 was 
just one generation later than Herodotus. Ctesias spent seven- 
teen years in the Persian court (r. 416-398 B. G.) as physician 
to the Emperor Artaxerxes Mnemon. He must have had 
numerous opportunities of hearing reports of India from Per- 
sian officials who visited the country and of meeting Indian 
merchants and ambassadors who came to the Persian court; 
and he obtained permission besides from the Persian king to 
consult the state archives. But his work has not survived ex- 
cept in an abridgement of Photius, a Patriarch of Constanti- 
nople in the ninth century A.D. (858-886), and a number of 
citations by earlier writers particularly Aelian and Pliny. In 
no respect does Ctesias mark an advance upon Herodotus, and 
almost all his statements can with perfect justice be charac- 
terised as tall lies. Even the few facts to be gathered from him — 
such as that all Indians were not black, that he had seen some 
white ones among them, and that Indians were noted for their 
sense of justice, their devotion to their king and their contempt 
of death — are too vague to be accepted with confidence, parti- 
cularly from such a writer. He cannot be excused on the ground 
that Photius had a predilection for the fabulous and abridged 
his work laying stress unduly on the fabulous races and wonder- 

1. I, 192 (hounds): IV, 44 (crocodiles). # 

2. McCrindle-ilndtfrt* India as described by Ctesias the Cnidian , Calcutta, 
1882. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 87 


ful products of India that Ctesias had mentioned, and passing 
over the more valuable portions of his narrative ; for no other 
writer found anything of value in him. The case is not much 
improved by our seeking to explain his dog-headed and dog- 
faced men, pygmies and such others by a reference to like mon- 
strosities known to old Indian books. In fact Ctesias wrote him- 
self down as a fibster when he described the Martikhora (man- 
eater), a creature of the size of a lion, with the face of a man, 
capable of shooting its poisonous stings from its tail to a great 
distance and thus killing every animal except an elephant, and 
added that he saw in Persia one of these monsters sent from 
India as gift to the Persian King ! 

In truth the period between Herodotus and Alexander is 
marked by a decided setback in the Greek knowledge of India. 
The Persians lost their Indian Satrapy after some time and 
Alexander did not come across Persian officials cast of the Hindu 
Kush. Even Herodotus was perhaps not much read, and 
there is no evidence that Alexander knew of his account of 
Scylax’s voyage. On the banks of the Indus he thought that 
he had reached he sources of the Nile, and on the banks of the 
Beas lie told his soldiers that they were at no great distance 
from the Eastern Sea, i. e., the end of the earth in that direc- 
tion . 1 It has been doubted if Alexander ever really heard 
of the Ganges or suspected the real extent of the contemporary 
empire of Magadha; the intention attributed to him of con- 
quering the Prasii on the Ganges may well be a later legend; 
and possibly he knew of only the Sutlej and just one kingdom 
beyond, that of the Gandaridae, the conquest of which would 
bring him to the shore of the Eastern Ocean . 2 

5. Historians of Alexander 

But the expedition of Alexander was the first occasion 
when the West began to hear a good deal about India that was 
based on the direct personal observation of the reporters. By 
that time the Greeks had begun to take an active interest in 
scientific pursuits, and Alexander was himself a disciple of one 


1. Arrisfli, Anabasis , VI, i and V, 26: Strabo, XV, 1,25. 

2. Cf. Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History , VI, pp. 410 — 11. 



88 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of the greatest masters of human knowledge. Though in his 
wars and campaigns the first place was given to military con- 
siderations, other interests of a wider character were by no 
means forgotten, and among his lieutenants and companions 
there were many scientists and literary men who later employed 
their pens in describing what they had se^n and heard wherever 
they went no less than in celebrating the martial successes 
of Alexander. They were the first to communicate to the out- 
side world more or less accurate knowledge of India, its physi- 
cal features and products, its inhabitants and their social and 
political institutions. Three or four writers stand out among 
the contemporaries of Alexander because of the frequent refe- 
rences made to them by later writers. First is Nearchus, who 
in his account of his voyage in the Persian Gulf gave generally 
dependable information on many topics he happened to touch 
on. A Cretan by birth, he had been brought up at the Macedo- 
nian court and educated along with Alexander. His memoirs 
are no longer extant, but the works of Strabo and Arrian 
contain copious extracts from them. Then comes Onesicritus, 
the chief pilot of Nearchus’ fleet, who wrote a life of Alexander 
which is now lost. He was a follower of the Cynic philosopher 
Diogenes, and was on this account chosen by Alexander as 
best fitted to initiate contact with the Indian sages of Taksha- 
sila. His love of the marvellous often led him into exaggera- 
tions and Strabo says tartly that ‘he may as well be called the 
master fabulist as the master pilot of Alexander ’. 1 Modern 
writers also differ in their estimates of his credibility. Aris- 
tobulus was another writer who accompanied Alexander and 
wrote a history of his wars which was one of the principal sour- 
ces used by Arrian in his Anabasis and by Plutarch in his life 
of Alexander. His interest seems to have been mainly geo- 
graphical ; he is said to have begun writing his work very late 
in life when he was over eighty years of age, and the historical 
parts of his work seem to have suffered from the influence of 
a new rhetorical mode, and the Alexander myth that was 
already beginning to take shape. Among the contemporary 
historians of Alexander there was none to beat Kleitarchus; 


i. XV, 129: Anc. Itid.y pp. 34 — 5: Breloer, KS , ii, p. 26. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 89 

he was the son of Deinon, a historian of Rhodes, and he accom- 
panied the expedition of Alexander. His history of the ex- 
pedition was full of invention and romance and was held in 
little esteem by those who came after him. One of Kleitarchus* 
stories preserved by Aelian (and Strabo) is to the effect that 
Alexander and his army were once, while marching through 
a jungle, thrown in to a panic by mistaking a group of big-sized 
apes for a hostile army. 1 

6. Greek Ambassadors 

Subsequent to these writers came the ambassadors from 
the Hellenistic kingdoms to the Mauryan court, whose obser- 
vations on India were based on a wider and somewhat closer 
knowledge of the country. Among them the most celebrated 
was, of course, Megasthenes. But there were also Deimachus, 
who resided for a long time in Pataliputra, whither he was 
sent on an embassy by Seleucus to Amitraghata (Bindusara), 
the successor of Chandragupta; Patrocles, the admiral of 
Seleucus, who was sent out to explore the less known regions 
of Asia and whom Strabo described as the least mendacious 
of all writers on India whom he had consulted ; Timosthenes, 
admiral of the fleet of Ptolemy Philadelphus, and Dionysius 
who, according to Pliny, was sent by the same ruler to the Indian 
King. But none of them seems to have added anything of 
real importance to what Megasthenes had stated about India. 
Megasthenes, in fact, marks the culmination of the knowledge 
which ancient Europe ever had of India. Writers who came 
after Megasthenes improved their knowledge of India’s geo- 
graphy, but their account of Indian civilisation was accurate 
only in the measure in which they followed Megasthenes. 

Megasthenes lived for some time with Sybyrtius, the Sat- 
rap of Arachosia, and from there Seleucus sent him out as am- 
bassador to the court of Chandragupta, and he visited Chandra- 
gupta often during his stay at the capital ; this was of course 
after the conclusion of the treaty of alliance between Chandra- 
gupta and Seleucus (305 B.C.). 2 Megasthenes evidently 

i. Anc. Ind. in Class . Lit., pp. 148 — 49. 

. 2. Arrian ( Indica , V) seems to say that Megasthenes visited Poms: 
but this has been rightly traced to a spribal error in the text of Arrian who 



90 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


knew Kabul and the Panjab very well and travelled along ^ 
the royal road from the frontier to the capital of the Mauryan 
empire. For his knowledge of the rest of India he depended 
on report. He wrote the Indika , a comprehensive work on 
India, apparently divided into four books describing the country, 
its soil, climate, animals and plants, its government and reli- 
gion, the manners of the people and their arts. He sought 
to describe many things from the King’s Court down to the 
remotest tribes. Many writers copied him assiduously in later 
times even as they cast aspersions on his veracity, as did Era- 
tosthenes and Strabo. 

Of the education and training of Megasthenes we know 
Httle. We may guess that he was an administrator and dip- 
lomat with a sober vision that sought to penetrate behind 
appearances and give a faithful report to his monarch of the 
strength and weakness of the neighbouring empire on the east. 

We do not know if he wrote out his work when he was in India 
or after his return to the West. I n a ny event his statements 
on the Indian State, Law and Administration must be inter- 
preted with care in the light of his natural prepossessions as an /-y 
official of a large Hellenistic State and it is probable that some 
of them included an argument, criticism, or correction due to 
what other Greek writers before him had stated on particular 
topics. Megasthenes has often been denounced as untrust- 
worthy both by ancient and modern writers, but this charge 
applies, properly speaking, only to what he writes from hear- ^ 
say, particularly on the fabulous races of India and on Herakles 
and the Indian Dionysus. Of the former th- learned Brahmins 
of the country had a great deal to tell him, but he says that he 
did not set down everything he heard, which may be readily 
accepted in the light of the Puranic accounts of such races. 
Quite probably he fell into some errors, but as we ca n be cer- 
tain in no instance that we have his very words before us, it is 
always doubtful if the mistake was made by Megasthenes or 
the writers who used his work. Let us also remember that these 

might have said only that Chandragupta was greater than Porus, implying 
a comparison, quite natural to him, to the advantage of Megasthenes as against 
the earlier group ot writers who accompanied Alexander. _Scc McCrindle, 
Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 15. Lassen (ii, p. 668) accepts the interpretation of v. 
Arnan, Anab. V, 612, that Megasthenes visited India more than once. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 91 

writers extracted from Megasthenes just those data on India 
which they considered would be of interest to their readers 
or which lent themselves to attractive literary treatment cal- 
culated to amuse them. Of the manner in which the Indika of 
Megasthenes was used by these authors, Schwanbeck remarks : 
‘Since Strabo, Arrianus, and Diodorus have directed their 
attention to relate nearly the same things, it has resulted that 
the greatest part of the Indika has been completely lost, and 
that of many passages, singularly enough, three epitomes are 
extant, to which occasionally a fourth is added by Plinius.’ 1 

7. India : Size 

The statements of all ancient writers on the size of India 
and the length of its boundaries are but random guesses, and 
Strabo who has collected most of them, comments on their 
discrepancies and on the difficulty of being confident or pre- 
cise in treating of Indian matters. Patrocles said that it was 
15,000 stadia (1,724 miles) from the southernmost point of 
India to the most northerly, and this happy guess — it could 
not have been anything more — comes very near the truth, the 
real distance being 1800 miles. Other guesses are not so happy 
and need not be mentioned, though it may be noted that Megas- 
thenes puts the length of the royal road he travelled by from the 
north-west to Pataliputra at 10,000 stadia, and adds 6,000 
stadia to it to arrive at the total breadth of the country, mak- 
ing a computation from the time taken in voyages from the 
sea up the Ganges to Pataliputra. Eratosthenes, the President 
of the Alexandrian Library from 240 to 196 B.C., was the first 


i. McCrindlc, Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 19. Diodorus, native of Sicily,, 
was a contemporary of Julius Caesar: his Bibliotheke comprised 40 books, some 
of them no longer extant: book II., chh. 35 — 42 epitomise Megasthenes: bk. 
XVII gives an account of Alexander’s invasion, and XVIII and XIX con- 
tain short notices of India: — all translated by McCrindle in his works. Arrian 
(A. D. 132) wrote the Anabasis and Indika , using the contemporary account 
of Alexander and the work of Megasthenes. Strabo came from Amasia in 
Asia Minor, c. 64 B.G. — 19 A.D., His Geography is a very comprehensive 
work: Bk. XV, chh, 1 and 2 arc devoted to India and Ariana respectively, and 
arc translated by McCrindle in his Ancient India as described in Classical Litera- 
ture. Strabo drew his material mostly from the contemporaries of Alexander 
and from Megasthenes. Pliny he Elder, 23 — 79 A.D., wrote a cyclopaedic 
'Natural History i<| thirty-seven books: the sixth book contains his geography 
of India, based mainly on the Indika of Megasthenes, translated by McCrindle, 
ibid. 



92 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


real geographer of the Hellenistic age, who studied and ar- 
ranged systematically all the geographical knowledge avail- 
able in his day; but his conclusions on the position and con- 
figuration of India were far from correct. He thought that 
the country was of the shape of an irregular rhomboid with the 
Indus and the Himalayas for its shorter Western and Northern 
sides, measuring respectively 13,000 and 16,000 stadia; the 
longer sides each exceeded its opposite by 3,000 stadia. His 
orientation was completely wrong and he put the southern ex- 
tremity of the peninsula farther east than the mouth of the 
Ganges. Some idea of the exaggerated notions entertained 
of the size of India may be had from Ctesias’ opinion that 
India was not less than the rest of Asia ; he was excelled by One- 
sicritus who regarded it as the third part of the habitable world, 
while Nearchus gathered that to traverse the plains only occu- 
pied a journey of four months. 1 The existence of Ceylon 
was vaguely known to Onesicritus. 

Megasthenes greatly exaggerated the length of India from 
north to south, and put it at 22,300 stadia at its shortest. 2 But 
he is right in noting that India well nigh embraced the whole 
•of the northern Tropic zone of the earth and in the extreme south 
the gnomon of the sundial may frequently be observed to cast 
no shadow or cast it to the southward (in summer) while the 
constellation of the Bear is by night invisible. 3 

8. Climate 

In India’s climate, the rains attracted their attention 
most, as they had not seen anything like them before. Aristo- 
bulus noted that rain fell for the first time after Alexander 
reached Taxila, and continued incessantly all the time he march- 
ed eastward to the Beas and back to the Jhelum ; he knew that 
the monsoon (the Etesian winds as he calls them) brought the 
rain. The relatively very scanty rainfall of the lower Indus 


1. Patrocles in Strabo, II, i.2 (Falconer, i, p. 106): other writers in 
XV, i. io — 2 ( Anc . Ind. in Class. Lit. pp. 15 — 19). See also Megasthenes and 
Arrian. Frags IV ff. Strabo, XV, 1, 15 (pp. 20 — 21) for Onesicritus on 
Ceylon (Taprobane). 

2. Frag. VIII (p. 52). 

3. Frag. I (Diod. II, 35), p. 30. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 9J 


valley, which gets little benefit from either monsoon, did not 
escape him, and he notes that in the spring and summer of 32% 
B.C., Alexander spent nearly ten months on the voyage down 
the river ‘without ever seeing rain even when the Etesian winds 
were at their height’. Eratosthenes speaks of the rains falling 
regularly every year bcfth in summer and in winter. 1 He 
thought that the evaporation from the vast rivers was another 
cause of rain, besides the monsoons. 

9. Rivers 

The immensity of the Indian rivers, of the Indus and Gan- 
ges systems, is noted and commented on by Megasthenes. The 
Ganges ‘which at its source is 30 stadia broad, flows from north 
to south, and empties its waters into the ocean forming the 

eastern boundary of the Gangaridai Another river, 

about the same size as the Ganges, called the Indus, has its 
sources, like its rival, in the north, and falling into the ocean 
forms on its way the boundary of India’. Besides these two great 
rivers and their tributaries, there were ‘a great many others 
of every description’, 2 and many of them were navigable. 
Arrian recognised, following Nearchus that the larger portion 
of India is a plain formed of alluvial deposits of the large rivers 
particularly the Indus and the Ganges.’ 3 The erratic changes 
in the courses of the rivers of the Indus system were noticed by 
Aristobulus; once when he went on some business into the 
country he saw a tract of land deserted on account of the Indus 
having shifted its course into a new channel; there were the 
ruins of a thousand towns and villages once full of life. 4 
During floods the rivers rose to considerable heights and in- 
undated vast areas, the cities located on eminences being turned 
into islands for a time. When the water subsided and the 


1. Strabo, XV, i, 17 and 20 (pp. 21 — 3, 25). 

2. Frag. I (pp. 33 — 4): Arrian, Indika, ch. 4 (pp. 186 — 94). Megas- 
thenes records the fable of river Silas in which nothing would float and which 
petrified everything plunged in it. Fr. XXI-XXIV, pp. 65 — 6: 196 — 7. 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 16 (p. 21): Arrian’s Anabasis Bk. V, ch. vi, pp. 
88 — 90 of Anciertt India, Its Invasion by Alexander. 

4. Strabo, XV, 1, 19 (p. 25). 



94 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


land but half dried, it was sown and planted with little labour 
^nd perfectly satisfactory results. 1 

10. Fertility of Soil 

The soil was fertile and the greater part of it was under 
irrigation and bore two crops in the ye&r both of fruit and grain. 
Rice, millet and sesamum were sown in summer; wheat, bar- 
ley and pulse, in winter. Aristobulus noted that rice stood 
in water-logged fields and was sown in beds. Megasthenes 
traces the superior stature and the proud bearing of the peo- 
ple to the abundant means of subsistence at their command; 
he says that famine and scarcity were unknown in India. 
Sugar-cane is described as a reed yielding honey without bees, 
and the cotton plant continues to attract attention, Nearchus 
recording that fine webs were made from tree wool which was 
also used in a raw state by the Macedonians for stuffing matt- 
resses and the padding of saddles. 2 Strabo preserves a des- 
cription of the banyan tree by Onesicritus which is worth re- 
producing : ‘there are some large trees from which branches 
grow out to the length even of twelve cubits. These branches 
then grow downwards as if they had been bent until they touch 
the ground. They next penetrate into the soil and take root 
like shoots that have been planted. Then they spring upwards 
and form a trunk, whence again, in the manner described, 
branches bend themselves downward and plant the ground 
with one layer after another, and so on in this order, so that 
from a single tree there is formed a long shady canopy like a 
tent supported by numerous pillars.’ As regards the size of 
the trees, he states that ‘their trunks could scarcely be clasped 
by five men 5 . Aristobulus stated that the shade of a single 
tree could shelter fifty horsemen from the noon tide heat, while 
Onesicritus put the number at four hundred; Nearchus said 
that even ten thousand men could rest under the shade of a 
single tree. 3 * Many medicinal plants and roots, both salutary 

1. Ibid., 1 8 (pp. 23 — 24). 

2. Meg. Frags. I, XI (pp. 31, 54 — 5). Strabo XV, 1,18 and 20. 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 21 (pp. 26 — 7). Arrian, Indika , xi (p. 210). ASoka 

planted banyan trees on the roads : and there is an old TLmil verse which 

contrasts the tiny seed of the tree with its vast size capable of sheltering a 
whole army. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 95 


and noxious, were grown in India, and plants which yielded 
a great variety of dyes; Aristobulus noted that under the la\^ 
any person who discovered a deadly substance without announc- 
ing its antidote at the same time rendered himself liable to the 
penalty of death, but one who discovered both got a reward 
from the king. India, dike Arabia and Ethiopia, produced 
cinnamon, spikenard and other aromatics. 1 

1 1 . Minerals 

The mineral wealth of India is noted by Megasthenes. 
There was much gold and silver, and copper and iron in no 
small quantity, and tin and other metals employed in making 
articles of use and ornament, as well as the implements and 
accoutrements of war. 2 His observations on ant-gold and 
river-gold have been noticed already. Ceylon (Taprobane), 
he said, was more productive of gold and large pearls than India. 
He gave a good account of pearl-fishing, and stated that each 
shoal of oysters had a leader, to capture whom was to get the 
whole group. ‘The fishermen allow the fleshy parts of such 
as they catch to rot away, and keep the bone, which forms the 
ornament; for the pearl in India is worth thrice its weight in 
refined gold.’ 


12 . Animals 

Among Indian animals the Elephant easily got the first 
place in the attention of almost every Greek observer. 3 The 
Indian elephants were seen to be larger and stronger than the 
African elephants, and Megasthenes thought that this was 
due to the Indian soil supplying food in unsparing profusion. 
The elephants of Ceylon were larger still. The longevity of 
an elephant’s life was well known, though Onesicritus put it 
too high when he stated that they lived three hundred years, 
sometimes five hundred, and that they were very vigorous when 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 22 (p. 28). 

2. Frag. I (Diod. II, 36) p. 31: pearls, Frags. XVIII, L. B., (pp. 62, 
1 14) and Arrian Indika> viii (p. 202). 

3. Frag. I (Diod. II, 38) p. 35: Ibid. (Diod. II, 37) pp. 33— 4: Strabo 
XV 1, 42 and .>3 (pp. 49 — 50) — for one phrase here Bevan’s translation is 
‘to sew beautifully* for McCrindle’s ‘to swim most admirablyVArrian, Indika , 
XIII, XIV, pp. (213-4). 



96 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


about two hundred. Arrian, obviously following Megasthenes, 
jays more correctly that the longest lived animals attained an 
age of two hundred years, but many died prematurely of dis- 
ease. The manner of hunting the elephant, described briefly 
by Nearchus and in greater detail by Megasthenes, was much 
the same then as the Keddah operations of today. The ele- 
phants were easily tamed and were naturally of a mild and 
gentle disposition, so as to approximate to rational beings. 
‘Some of them have taken up their drivers who have fallen 
in battle, and carried them off in safety from the field. Others 
have fought in defence of their masters who had sought refuge 
by creeping between their forelegs and have thus saved their 
liyes. If in a fit of anger they kill either the man who feeds 
them or the man who trains them, they are so overpowered 
with regret that they refuse food and sometimes die of hunger 5 . 
‘They even learn to throw stones at a mark, to use weapons 
of war, and to swim most admirably . 5 Nearchus spoke of 
chariots drawn by elephants as a most valued possession, and 
made the curious statement that a woman who won the pre- 
sent of an elephant from her lover was highly honoured and 
no one thought of blaming her for sacrificing her virtue for such 
a prize . 1 And Strabo remarks that this contradicts Megas- 
thenes 5 statement that private persons were not allowed to keep 
a horse or an elephant, as they were the property of kings only- 
The elephant corps was a great asset in war and the possession 
of a vast force of the largest sized elephants by the Gangaridai 2 
made them the most dreaded of all the Indian states. 

Next to the elephants, we find monkeys and snakes figur- 
ing prominently in the Greek accounts. In the forests on the 
banks of the upper Jhelum long-tailed apes of an uncommon 
size were found in vast numbers, and Kleitarchus 5 famous 
story of Alexander’s strange encounter with a troop of them 
has been noticed above. They were quick to imitate every- 
thing they saw and were therefore easily caught by hunters 
washing their eyes with water in their presence and then leav- 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 43 (p. 50) : Arrian, Indika , XVII, p. 222. 

2. The Gangaridai and the Prasii (Prachyas) are oken mentioned 
together by the Greek writers and must be taken to apply to the people of the 
valley of Lower Ganges. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 97 


in g pots of bird-lime behind which sealed the eyes of the apes 
when they came and smeared their eyes with it; an alternative* 
method was the use of baggy trousers smeared inside with bird* 
lime. Different varieties of monkeys were known to Megas- 
thcnes and described in detail by him as may be seen from 
extracts preserved by Aelfan. One of these varieties so resemb- 
led men in appearance that they could easily be mistaken for 
ascetics, and in an Indian city called Latage they were pro- 
vided every day with a regular meal under the King’s orders 
after which they quietly withdrew to the forests without caus- 
ing any damage or injury. Of another type in the eastern 
Himalayas we read: ‘If these creatures are left unmolested, they 
keep within the coppices, living on wild fruit; but should they 
hear the hunter’s halloo and the baying of the hounds they 
dart up the precipices with incredible speed, for they are habi- 
tuated to climbing the mountains. They defend themselves 
by rolling down stones on their assailants, which often kill 
those they hit. The most difficult to catch are those which 
roll the stones. Some are said to have been brought, though 
1 with difficulty and after long intervals, to the Prasii, but these 
were either suffering from diseases or were females heavy with 
young . 1 Arrian remarked that the knowledge of the apes 
of the Indian forests was so common in his time that he did 
not think it necessary to say much regarding their size or the 
beauty which distinguishes them or the mode in which they 
are hunted . 2 * * * 

The smaller poisonous varieties of the snakes, spotted and 
nimble in their movements, were noticed by Nearchus who ex- 
pressed his surprise at the multitude and malignancy of their 
tribe . 8 When the rivers rose in flood and filled the plaii s 
with water, they invaded the dwelling houses in villages, and 
on this account the people had to raise their beds to a great 
height from the ground, or even to abandon their homes 
through the presence of these pests in very large numbers. ‘In 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 29 (p. 36): Meg. Frags. XIII, XIII B (21), (pp. 
57—8. 60—61). 

2. Indika, *XV (p. 218). 

m 3* . Strabo, -iV, 1, 4o(pp. 5 1 — 2) : Arrian, Indika , XV <pp. 218 — 19). 

‘T'he device of raised beds as protection against reptiles was noted by Marco 

Pt 1 1 in South India in the 13th century A. D. 



98 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAs 


fact, were it not that a great proportion of the tribe suffered 
•destruction by the waters, the country would be reduced to a 
desert. The minute size of some and the immense size of others- 
are sources of danger; the former, because it is difficult to guard 
against their attacks, the latter by reason of their strength, for 
snakes are to be seen of sixteen cubifSin length*. There were 
snake-charmers moving about the country and they were able 
to cure snake-bites, and Alexander collected round him for 
the benefit of his army a group of the most skilful among the 
snake-charmers. The longest snake seen by Aristobulus was 
nine cubits and a span in length, but Onesicritus 1 stated that 
Abisares, King of the mountain country, kept two serpents 
t>ne of which was 80 cubits in length and the other 140. Me- 
gasthenes knew of pythons that could swallow stags and bulla 
whole. He also speaks of flying serpents, two cubits in length* 
which flew by night and dropped a poisonous secretion which 
blistered the skins of persons on whom it fell. There were also 
winged scorpions of an extraordinary size.* 

Hunting dogs of astonishing strength and courage were 
noticed by the companions of Alexander in the country off 
Sophy tes, and Alexander received one hundred and fifty of them 
as a present from him. A curious incident in Sophytes* court 
is related at some length by almost all the writers and here is 
Strabo’s version of it : ‘To prove their mettle, two of these dogs, 
were set on to attack a lion, and w hen these were overpowered, 
two others were set on. When the contest was about equal,. 
Sophytes ordered a man to seize one of the dogs by the leg and 
to drag him way, or if he still held on, to cut off the limb.. 
Alexander at first refused to let the dog be so mangled, 
as he wished to save its life, but when Sophytes said, “I will give 
you four instead of it”, he consented, and saw the dog allow its leg 
to be cut off by slow incision rather than let go its hold 3 *. It 
was believed that tiger blood ran in the veins of these dogs l 

% * 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 28(p. 34). It is this statement of Onesicritus for 
which Strabo characterises him as a ‘master fabulist* as well as the master 
pilot of Alexander. 

2. Frogl. XII and XVI (pp. 56 — 61). ** 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 31 and 37, (pp. 38—39, 46). Note I on p. 3<fr 
gives references to other accounts. Meg. Frag. XII (p. 56). 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 99 


The tiger itself the Greeks naturally had little chance of 
coming across. Nearchus saw the skin of a tiger, but not a live 
animal. He heard, however, that it equalled in size the largest 
horse, but for swiftness and strength no other animal could be 
compared to it ; that the tiger when it encountered the elephant, 
leapt upon the head of the elephant and strangled it with ease 
and that the animals usually seen and designated tigers were but 
jackals with spotted skins and larger than other jackals — which, 
of course, is a quaint description of leopards. According to 
Megasthenes the largest tigers were found in the country of the 
Prasii, almost twice the size of lions. He once saw a tame tiger 
led by four men, seizing a mule, overpowering it and dragging 
it to him, ail by its hindleg; such was the strength of the 
animal 1 . 

Megasthenes noted that some animals known only in a tame 
state in Greece were found also in the wild state in India, such as 
sheep, dogs, goats and oxen. The one-horned horse or kartazon 
of which a somewhat minute account is preserved by Aelian is 
generally taken to be the rhinoceros 2 3 . Nearchus came across 
whales of enormous size in his voyage before he entered the 
Persian Gulf, and Aelian probably follows Megasthenes in his 
interesting description of these monsters ‘five times larger than 
the largest elephant’. The rib of a whale was as much as twenty 
cubits and its lip fifteen cubits*. 

Among the birds, parrots and peacocks attracted particular 
notice. Arrian criticises Nearchus for writing at length about 
parrots as if they were a curiosity and saying that they were 
indigenous to India ; but Aelian’s account, doubtless based on 
Nearchus and other writers, is not devoid of interest : ‘There are, 
I am informed, three species of them, and all these, if taught 
to speak, as children are taught, become as talkative as children, 
and speak with a human voice ; but in the words they utter a 
bird-like scream, and neither send out any distinct or musical 
notes, nor being wild and untaught are able to talk’. The same 

1. Arrian, Indika , XV (p. 217): Strabo, XV, 1, 37, (p. 45) — Meg, 
Frag. XII, (p. ^6). 

2. Meg. tfrag. XV, XVB (pp. 58—60): Strabo, XV, I, 56 (p. 59 
and n. 3) 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 11 — 12 (p. 91): Meg. Frag. LIX (pp. 164 — 65)- 



100 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


writer observes that the peacocks of India were the largest any- 
where met, and Alexander was so charmed with their beauty 
that he threatened the severest penalties against any one who 
should kill a peacock 1 . 

Having gained some idea of what the Greeks knew of India’s 
natural phenomena, we may now turn to their accounts of its 
humanity, social institutions and polity, and here Mcgasthenes 
is our leading authority, the attention of earlier writers having 
been confined to the North-west and to local customs and insti- 
tutions in that part of the country. India, being of enormous 
size when taken as a whole, was, according to Mcgasthenes* 
information, peopled by races both diverse and numerous, not 
dne of which was originally of foreign descent, all being evidently 
indigenous. Moreover, India neither received a colony from 
abroad, nor sent out a colony to any other nation 2 . These are 
statements of some historical value ; the memory of the incom- 
ing of Aryans had completely faded out, and quite probably, 
the movement of colonisation to the Eastern lands, Indo-china 
and Malaysia, had not yet begun. But the contact with the 
Hellenistic kingdom was already established, and the time was 
not distant when Asoka’s zeal for Dhamma would carry the name 
of India far and wide to the West certainly, and possibly to the 
North and East as well. 


13. Legends . 

Though Mcgasthenes seems to have introduced his account 
of the legends centring round Dionysus and Herakles with the 
observation that he heard them from ‘the men of greatest learn- 
ing among the Indians’, it is obvious that all the versions of these 
stories now accessible to us have been thoroughly edited from the 
Greek point of view. We may be sure that no Indian scholars 
ever spoke of Dionysus and Herakles under those names, and 
that, if anything, Megasthenes took some things that he heard 
to be the same as some other things known to him better, and made 
his own identifications before setting down his thoughts." Let 
us remember also that the vainglorious credulity of Alexander 

1. Arrian, Indiha , XV (p. 218): Meg. Frag. LIX (p. 159): Aelian, ^ 

V, 21 ( Anc . hid. m Class. Lit., p. 139, and n. 1). ' 

2. Frag. I (Diod. II, 38), xlvi (Strabo, XV, 1, 6), Meg. pp. 35, 107 — 8. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 101 


had given a good start to these legends with the earlier writers, 
with whose works Megasthenes was very well acquainted, 
Dionysus figures in these legends as the conqueror and civiliser 
of India and its first ruler, the founder of cities, the teacher of 
industrial arts, and the establisher of religion and polity. The 
Oxydrakoi claimed to he descended from Dionysus, the vine 
grew in their country and they displayed great pomp in their 
processions, and their kings set out on their military expeditions 
in the Bacchic manner ; from these facts, modern scholars have 
inferred that Dionysus of these narratives was a Creek repre- 
sentation of the Indian god Siva. It is difficult either to 
confirm or contradict this opinion, but it is clearly wrong to think 
that Heraklci represents Krishna. There can be no doubt 
that some elements of Krishnaism are mixed up here, for Arrian 
remarks : ‘This Herakles is held in especial honour by the 
Sourasenoi (Surasenas) who possess two large cities, Methoia 
(Mathura) and Cleisobora (Krishnapura ?), and through whose 
country flows a navigable river called Iobanes (Yamuna).’ But 
the mention by Megasthenes of his daughter Pandaia and of the 
Pandya kingdom in the south over which she was set to rule, 
and some other traits, particularly the Sibai (Sivas) claiming 
descent from Herakles, bring him once more into the cycle of 
Saiva legends. Arrian gives the curious information, which 
doubtless he owes to Megasthenes, that from Dionysus to Sandra- 
kottos the Indians counted 153 kin^s and a period of 6042 years 
broken by three periods of republican rule, and that Herakles 
came fifteen generations after Dionysus — figures which do not 
tally with any known Puranic reckonings which they resemble 
so much. Herakles is also said to have founded ‘no small number 
of cities, the most renowned and greatest of which he called 
Palibothra’ 1 . 


14. People 

The Indians, says Arrian, are slender and tall in person, 
and of much lighter build than other men. 2 Though some of 

1. Meg. Frag, i (Diod. II, 38 — 9). pp. 36 — 40: Fr. XLVI (pp. 107 — 
xii)— S trabo, XV, 1, 6—8 (pp. 11 — 14): Fr. LVIII (pp. 158— 9) : Arrian 

Jndika, VII ix, (pg. 198 — 204). 

2. Indika , xvii (p 221) : also lnv. of India by Alexander t p. 85 on the sta- 
ture of men in the Indus Valley. 



102 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


them are dark in complexion, they neither have wooly hair, 
nor complexions so intensely dark as the Ethiopians, and the 
reason for this is found in the humid atmosphere of India. 1 
Indians seldom suffered from disease and enjoyed long lives 
(Onesicritus gives 130 years, and even more) as they lived 
frugally and abstained from wine though they drank rice- beer 
commonly enough. 2 In the dominions of King Sophytes every 
new born baby was inspected when it was two months old by 
State officials and if any defect or deformation in its limbs was 
discovered it was ordered to be killed. ‘In contracting 
marriages they do not seek an alliance with high birth, but 
make their choice by the looks, for beauty in children is a quality 
highly appreciated.’ Curtius and Diodorus both give subs- 
stantially the same account of this matter, obviously derived 
from a common source; we see from Strabo, 3 who says the same 
things of Kathaians, that Onesicritus is the authority for these 
statements. But we cannot be sure whether he wrote down 
exactly what he saw in India, or idealised it in the light of very 
similar Spartan institutions known to him. He also stated that 
the handsomest man was chosen as king among these peoples, 
and that they sought to embellish the beauty of their persons by 
dyeing their beards and their garments with the colours of 
surprising beauty which the country produced. Megasthenes 
attributed the great artistic skill of the Indians to the pure air 
they inhaled and the very finest water they drank. 4 


1. Strabo, XV, i, 24 (pp. 29 — 30): Arrian, Indika, vi (pp. 197 — 8). 

2. Strabo, XV, 1, 43 (p. 52) — Meg. Frat j. XXVIII (p. 69): also 
Strabo, XV, 1, 34 (p. 41), Arrian, Indika, XV. (p. 219). 

3. Curtius, IX, i (p. 219): Diod. XVII, 91 (pp. 279 — 80): Strabo, 
XV, 1,30 (p. 38). Here is Curtius* description of Sophytes and his sons as 
they came out of their capital city to meet Alexander; ‘He was distinguished 
above all the other Indians by his tall and handsome figure. His royal robe, 
which flowed down to his very feet, was all inwrought with gold and purple. 
His sandals were of gold and studded with precious stones, and even his 
arms and wrists were curiously adorned with pearls. At his ears he wore 
pendents of precious stones which from their lustre and magnitude were of 
an inestimable value. His sceptre too was made of gold and set with' beryls* 
(IX, 1, p. 220). Arrian, Indika , XVI (p. 220) cites Nearchus on Indians 
dyeing their beards. Some other writer cited by Strabo, XV, 1, 71 (pp. 
76 — 7) asserts that Indians always wore white, contrary to what is said by 
ethers: he adds that they wore long hair and beards, and plated the hair and 
bound it with a fillet. 

4. Diod. II, 36 (p. 31). 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 103 


15. Taxila 

Taxila (Takshasila) was the first large city seen by Alexander 
and his companions after they had crossed the Indus into India 
proper, and in this friendly city they spent some days somewhat 
free from the warlike atmosphere of a military camp. It is worth 
our while, therefore, to g^in some idea of the impression produced 
by this very populous and wealthy city and its institutions on 
the minds of the Greeks before we proceed to consider the more 
systematic account of Megasthcnes, or rather what has survived 
of it. We may also review the details relating to other states 
and peoples in the North-west of India. 

Taxila was a large city governed by good laws. The surr- 
ounding country was thickly peopled and extremely fertile, and 
the wealth of the city and its ruler might be judged fiom the 
presents offered to Alexander and his friends by Taxiles. Some 
strange and unusual customs of Taxila are noticed by Aristo- 
bulus. Those who, from poverty, were unable to marry off 
their daughters, exposed them in the flower of their youth for 
sale in the market place, advertising them by the sound of war- 
drums and conches ; a prospective husband was allowed to 
inspect the back of the girl first, then her front, and if there was 
mutual agreement, the alliance followed. Another custom 
was to throw out the dead to be devoured by vultures, doubtless 
a trace of Iranian influence. Polygamy was not unknown 
here as elsewhere, and Satl was practised among Taxilans, and 
the widow who refused to burn was held in contempt. 1 Sati 
was observed among the Kathaians also, and Strabo is frankly 
sceptical of Diodorus’ reason for the practice, namely that it 
was meant to check women seeking to dispose of their husbands 
by poison when they happened to fall in love with younger men. 2 
From Diodorus, however, we get one of the earliest and most 
vivid descriptions of the actual scenes that marked such occa- 
sions. An Indian commander in the Army of Eumenes was 
killed in battle in Iran in 316 B.G. ; he had two wives and both 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 28 (pp. 33—4) : «’*•» 62 (p.69). 

2. Strabo, XV, 1, 30 (p. 38): Diodorus XIX, 33 — 4 (pp. 202 — 4),. 
McCrindle’s tmnslation of the extract from Diodorus has been slightly altered 
in the light of Bevan’s version at C///, I p. 413. See also Diod. XVII, 
■ch 91 (p. 279 of Invasion and n. I — i) " 



104 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


offered to burn themselves on his pyre ; the matter was taken 
to the Greek generals who decided in favour of the younger wife 
burning, as the elder one was with child. ‘Whereupon the one 
who lost her cause went away weeping and wailing y rent the 
veil from her head, and tore her hair as if some terrible news 
had been told her. The other, overjoyed at her victory, set 
forth for the funeral pile, crowned with fillets by the women 
who belonged to her, and decked out splendidly as for a wedding. 
She was escorted by her kindred setting forth in song the praises 
of her virtues. When she came near to the pyre, she took off 
her adornments and distributed them to her servants and friends 
leaving them as memorials of her, as it were, to those who had 
loved her. Her adornments consisted of a multitude of finger- 
rings, set with precious stones of divers colours ; upon her head 
there was no small number of little golden stars, between which 
were placed sparkling stones of all sorts ; about her neck she 
wore several necklaces each a little larger than the one above it. 
At length she took farewell of her domestics, and was assisted by 
her brother to mount the pyre, and, to the great admiration 
of the crowd which had gathered together to see the spectacle, 
she made her exit from life in heroic style. For the whole army 
under arms marched thrice round the pile before fire was set to 
it, and the victim, having meanwhile laid herself by her husband’s 
side, scorned to demean herself by uttering shrieks even when 
the flames were raging round her. The spectators were moved, 
some to pity and some to exuberant praise, while there were not 
wanting Greeks who condemned the custom as savage and 
inhumane. 5 


16. Sages. 

The Greeks first met Indian sages in the neighbourhood of 
Taxila, and there arc many versions of their meetings with 
tangible variations that puzzled even Strabo and still continue 
to vex scholars who study accuracy in such far off things. 
Nearchus, Onesicritus and Aristobulus all gave their 6wn 
accounts, and Megasthencs worked them up with the aid per- 
haps of yet other accounts of which we know nothing ; all this is 
clear from Strabo. Arrian and Plutarch give an-^account of 
Alexander’s interview with the sages which took place more 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 105 


likely in Taxila rather than in the country of Sambos and after 
his revolt . 1 Nearchus’ account of the sages is brief, but illumi- 
nating as explaining the basis of some of Megasthenes’ statements 
on Indian social organisation. ‘Some of the Brahmanes take 
part in political life, and attend the kings as counsellors. The 
others are engaged in the # study of nature. Kalanos belongs to 
the latter class. Women study philosophy along with them, and 
all lead an austere life.’ Kalanos (Kalyana ?) of Taxila was the 
one who allowed himself, as Plutarch narrates, to be persuaded 
by Taxiles to visit Alexander, accompanied him to Persia, and 
there, disregarding the entreaties of Alexander, burnt himself 
alive when he fell ill for the first time in his seventy- third year. 
There was unanimity among the philosophers regarding the 
propriety of self-immolation, and Megasthenes noticed this. 
Aristobulus appears to have noticed the difference between 
sanyasins and vanaprasthas as he says that of the two Brahmana 
sages the saw, the elder had his head shaved, but 
the other wore his hair. Both of them were followed by their 
disciples. He may be right in saying that they spent 
j their spare time in the market place, and got theic 
food free, but that this was a privilege they enjoyed in 
return for their being public counsellors can hardly be accep- 
ted as a correct statement. They came to Alexander’s table, 
took their meal standing, and exhibited feats of endurance like 
lying in the sun or standing on one leg for a whole day. One- 
sicritus states that Alexander sent him to the sages in the first 
instance as he heard they went about naked and did not accept 
invitations from other persons. He found at a distance of less 


i. Nearchus in Strabo, XV, i, 66 (p. 72): Onesicritus ib. 63 — 5 (pp. 
69 — 72). Aristobulus, ib. 61 (pp. 68 — 9) : Megasthenes, ib. 58 — 60 (pp. 64 — 
67) — Frag. XLI (pp. 97—103). Plutarch, chh. 64 — 5 of his Life of Alexan- 
der for which see McCrindle, Ivasion , pp. 313 — 15. Also a short account 
of Curtius, VIII, ch. ix (p. 190). Diodorus, XVII, ch. 107 (p. 301) on self- 
immolation of Kalanos; also Strabo, XV, 1, 68 (pp. 73 — 4). Lastly, Mc- 
Crindle, Invasion, pp. 386 — 92 on Kalanos. For a recent criticism, somewhat 
too subjective, of these accounts, see Tam, The Giteks in Bactria and India y 
pp. 428 — 31, who discounts Onesicritus completely and says ; ‘Onesikritos 
indeed put out a story that Alexander had not talked to the men himself but 
had sent him to do it : but he could do no better than make one of his Indians 
give the ordinal Greek account of the Golden Age and the other talk a few 
cynical commoitolaces, and his version never exercised any influence*. Plu- 
tarch (ch. 65, owning sentences ) believed that Alexander met the sages 
himself and also sent Onesicritus to therfi. 



106 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


than three miles from Taxila, fifteen men standing in different 
postures, and among them Kalanos and Mandanis (or Dandamis 
as in other texts). Kalanos gave a general account of the golden 
• age in the past, but would not proceed further unless the Greek 
visitor stripped and lay down naked on the same stones with 
himself. The older and wiser Mapdanis rebuked Kalanos 
for his insolence, and was more accommodating to the guest’s 
curiosity and they compared notes on the ideas of Greek and 
Indian philosophers. Mandanis approved much that he heard 
from Onesicritus of Greek philosophy as taught by Pythagoras, 
Socrates and Diogenes, but criticised the Greeks for preferring 
custom to nature and refusing to give up clothing. Conversa- 
tion was not easy as it had to be conducted through three inter- 
preters who understood nothing of what they were asked to 
translate. ‘One might as well expect water to flow pure through 
mud’ said Mandanis. Alexander is said to have met no fewer 
than ten of these philosophers and propounded hard questions 
-to them ; they answered them to his satisfaction and he re- 
warded them duly. 

17. Philosophers 

Megasthenes has much to say on Indian philosophers ; he 
must have gained his knowledge from previous writers as well as 
-from personal observation. His distinction between those who 
inhabited the mountains and worshipped Dionysus, and those 
who lived in the plains and worshipped Heraklcs is not easily 
understood, and Strabo himself remarked : ‘These accounts are 
-fabulous, and are contradicted by many writers.’ His account 
of the Brahmanas and Sramanasis much more valuable, though 
there is room for doubt about what exactly he meant by these 
terms. The Brahmanas, he says, were held in higher esteem 
and had a more consistent dogmatic system. The pre-natal 
ceremonials ( samskdras ) , the stages of life ( asramas ) and the rules 
and practices governing them, the relative freedom from res- 
traint enjoyed by the grihastha (house-holder) were all lenown 
to Megasthenes, though on some matters he seems to portray 
theory rather than actual fact, as when he says that the Brahmanas 
-marry as many wives as possible to secure good^progeny ; or 
“when he gives the period of study as thirty-seven years. Their 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 107 

philosophy and cosmogony which had some things in common 
with Greek teaching on the subjects are also briefly expounded 
by him. He says that women were kept out of philosophical 
studies for fear of the bad women divulging the secret lore to 
unworthy people, and the good ones deserting their husbands 
for a life of asceticism#; but here he is contradicted by 
Nearchus, though on this matter quite possibly both theory and 
practice differed in different localities. This account of the 
Brahmanas then is reasonably accurate and interesting as a 
record of the impression produced by them in the mind of an 
observant foreigner. But the description of the Sramanas is 
not a little puzzling, because while the name generally indicates 
Buddhist ascetics, there is little in the description itself which 
will not apply to Brahmanical ascetics. Here is the account as 
reproduced by Strabo : ‘Of the Sarmanes the most highly 
honoured are the Hylobioi. They live in forests, subsist on 
Jeaves and wild fruits, wear garments made from the bark of 
trees, and abstain from wine and commerce with women. The 
Icings consult them by messengers regarding the causes of events, 
and use their mediation in worshipping a»d supplicating the 
gods. Next in honour to the Hylobioi arc the physicians, for 
they apply philosophy to the study of the nature of man. They 
are frugal in their habits, but do not live in the fields. Their 
food consists of rice and barley-meal which every one gives who 
is asked, as well as every one who receives them as a guest. By 
their knowledge of medicine they know how to make marriages 
fertile and how to procure male or female children as may be 
desired. They effect cures rather by regulating diet than by the 
xise of medicines. The remedies in most repute are ointments 
and plasters. All others they suppose to partake largely of a 
noxious nature. Both this class and the other class of persons 
practise fortitude as well by undergoing active toil as by enduring 
suffering, so that they will remain motionless for a whole day in 
one fixed posture. Besides these there are divines and sorcerers 
and those who are conversant with the rites and customs relat- 
ing to the dead, who go about villages and towns begging. 
Those who are more cultured than these, even they allow them- 
selves to make use of popular ideas about hell which seem to 
make for godliness and purity of life. Women study philosophy 



108 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with some of the Sarmanes, on the condition of observing sex- 
ual continence like the men.’ The name ‘forest-dwelled 
(Hylobioi) does create a doubt if Megasthenes had the vdna - 
prasthas in mind ; but the Buddhist monks also shunned cities 
and villages and dwelt in forests ; and the term Sarmanes 
(Sramanas) as well as the social servicer- described, such as heal- 
ing the sick and preaching to the people seem more appropriate 
to the Buddhist monks than to Brahman ascetics ; again 
women were admitted more readily into the order of bhikkunis 
than among Brahmanical ascetics. If this reasoning is correct, 
we have here one of the earliest accounts of the Buddhist order 
of monks, and it is to be noted that when Megasthenes wrote, 
they did not yet command as much esteem in Society as the 
Brahmanas. Asoka’s labours for the cause of Buddhism lay 
still in the future ; but the bhikkus were already making a name 
for themselves by their zeal in the practice of Dhamma. 

18. North-Western India . 

To return to the notices of the North-west by Alexander’s 
contemporaries. Nearchus noted that the laws of Indians 
differed from those of other nations and were not committed to 
writing, a statement obviously inspired by the name smriti 
(memory) for the law codes, and repeated by Megasthenes also* 
Among certain tribes, Nearchus observed, a girl was given away 
as the prize to the victor in a boxing match. Among others 
land was cultivated in common by a number of families who 
shared the produce in harvest time according to needs for the 
ensuing year, and then destroyed the remainder so as to encour- 
age industrious habits and discourage idleness 1 . The dress worn 
by the Indians was made of cotton of a brighter white colour 
than any cotton found elsewhere, or appeared so in contrast 
to their dark complexion. ‘They wear an under-garment of 
cotton which reaches below their knee half-way down to the 
ankles, and also two upper garments of which they throw >one 
over their shoulders, and twist the other in folds round their 
head. The Indians wear also ear-rings of ivory, but only the 

I. Strabo, XV, i, 66 (p. 72). Ib. 53 (pp. 55—6) for J^egasthenes on 
absence of written laws. Both Nearchus and Megasthenes knew that writing 
was well known in India and used for other purposes. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 109 


rich ones.... Such Indians as are thought anything of use 
parasols as a screen from the heat. They wear shoes made of 
white leather, and these are elaborately trimmed, while the 
soles are variegated, and high healed to make the wearer seem 
so much the taller 1 .’ 

• 19 . Arms 

Arrian give a fairly detailed account of the arms and outfit 
of the Indian soldiers, based on the authority of Nearchus 2 ; 
“The foot soldiers carry a bow made of equal length with the 
man who bears it. This they rest upon the ground, and pressing 
against it with their left foot, thus discharge the arrow, having 
drawn the string far backwards far the shaft they use is little 
short of being three yards long, and there is nothing which can 
resist an Indian archer’s shot, — neither shield nor breast-plate, 
nor any stronger defence if such there be. In their left hand they 
carry bucklers made of undressed ox-hide, which are not so 
broad as those who carry them, but are about as long. Some 
are equipped with javelins instead of bows, but all wear a 
sword, which is broad in the blade, but not longer than 
three cubits ; and this, when they engage in close fight (which 
they do with reluctance), they wield with both hands, 
to fetch down a lustier blow. The horsemen are equipped 
with two lances like the lances called saunia , and with a shorter 
buckler than that carried by the foot-soldiers. But they do not 
put saddles on their horses, nor do they curb them with bits 
like the bits in use among the Greeks or the Kelts, but they fit 
on round the extremity of the horse’s mouth a circular piece of 
stitched raw hide studded with pricks of iron or brass pointing in- 


1. Arrian, Indika , XVI (pp. 219 — 20). McCrindle’s translation 

modified in the light of Bevan’s version in CHI, I, p. 412. Curtius, Bk, viii, 
ch. 9 has the following : ‘The character of the people is here, as elsewhere, 
formed by the position of their country and its climate. They coyer 
their persons down to the feet with fine muslin, are shod with 
sandals, and coil round their heads cloths of linen (cotton). They hang 
precious stones as pendants from their ears, and persons of high social rank, 
or of great wealth, deck their wrist and upper arm with bracelets of gold. 
They frequently comb, but seldom cut, the hair of their head. The beard 
of the chin they never cut at all, but they shave off the hair from the rest of 
the face, so that it looks polished.* Also Strabo, XV, 1, 54 (p. 57) — Meg. 
Fr. XXVII (\7o). 

2. Arrian, Indika, XVI (pp. 2dfo — 1): cf. Strabo, XV, 1, 66 (pp. 
72 — 73], much briefer? 



110 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


wards, but not very sharp ; if a man is rich he uses pricks made- J 
of ivory. Within the horse’s mouth is put an iron prong like a 
skewer to which the reins are attached. When the rider, then,, 
pulls the reins, the prong controls the horse, and the pricks 
which are attached to this prong goad the mouth, so that it 
cannot but obey the reins.’ , 

The chariot and the elephant played an important part in 
Indian waifare. The chariot was drawn by four horses and 
carried six men — one archer and shield bearer on each side 
besides two charioteers who were also men-at-arms ; when the 
fighting was at close quarters, they dropped the reins and took 
part in the combat 1 . Aelian says, however, that the chariot 
carried only two men beside the charioteer ; this may have 
reference to chariots of smaller size. The same writer says 
that each elephant carried three archers besides the driver 2 - 
According to Curtius, an image of Hercules was borne in fiont 
of the line of the Paurava’s infantry in the battle of Jhelum,. 
and this acted as the strongest of all incentives to make the 
soldiers fight well 3 . 


20. Skill in arts . 

Nearchus testifies to the ingenuity of Indians in works of art 
by citing their facility in the imitation of the sponges, curry- 
combs, oil-flasks and such other articles which they saw the- 
Greeks using. Cloth was used for writing on. Copper 
was used fused but not wrought, with the result that vessels 
broke like earthenware if they fell to the ground. Prostration 
before kings and noblemen was unknown ; only hands were- 
raised in salutation 4 . According to one of Strabo’s sources, it 
was a great occasion when the king washed his hair, and the 
courtiers vied with each other in sending costly presents ; this 
seems to be a reference to the abihsheka of the king soon after his 
accession. In the processions at festivals many elephants. 


1. Curtius, viii, 14, ( Invasion , p. 207). 

2. Meg. Frag. XXXV, p. 90. 

3. Curtius, Ibid (p. 208). 

4. Strabo, XV, 1, 67 (p. 73). Curtius, viii, ch. 9, dl \ s that the ten- 
der hide of the barks of trees received written characters like paper — Invasion > 4 ' 
p. i8f>. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE lit 


acbrned with gold and silver were in the train, as well as four— 
horsed chariots and ox-waggons. There followed hosts of attend- 
ants in holiday attire carrying basins, goblets and other vessels 
of silver and gold some of them set with precious gems. Ani- 
mals and birds also formed a feature. Kleitrachus mentioned 
four wheeled carriages carrying whole trees from which were 
suspended cages with tame birds of bright plumage and fine 
song. 1 


Peculiar usages 

Onesicritus noted a number of usages peculiar to the king- 
dom of Musikanos in Sindh. They had a common meal which, 
they ate in public as did the Lacedemonians, their food consist- 
ing of the produce of the chase. They used neither gold nor 
silver though they had mines of these metals. They had no 
slaves, and employed instead young men in the flower of their 
age, as the Cretans employed Aphamiotai and the Lacedemonians 
the Helots. They studied no science but medicine with any 
care, for they regarded the excessive pursuit of any art, as war 
* for instance, to be a wicked thing. They had no actions at law 
but for murder and outrage ; in contracts and other matters of' 
mutual trust, if one of the parties broke faith the other must 
endure it and blame himself for trusting the wrong man and not 
engross the attention of the citizens with his law-suits 2 . 

2 1 . Slaves 

Some of these statements particularly those relating to> 
slavery and law-suits, were repeated by Megasthenes with a 
much wider application. His statement on slavery has been 
extracted by Diodorus, Arrian, and Strabo 3 ; we may reproduce- 
Arrian’s as being the clearest and most complete of them 
‘All the Indians are free, and not one of them is a slave. The 
Lakedaemonians and the Indians are so far in agreement. The 
Lakedaeraonians, however, hold the Helots as slaves, and these 

1. Strabo Ibid. 69 (pp. 75 — 6) King’s washing his hair is interpreted. 
abhisheka by Jayaswal, JBORS, II, p. 99. 

2. Straw Ibid , 34 (p. 41). 

3. Diod. II, 39 (p. 40) : Arrian, Indika, X — Frag . xxvi (pp. 68 — 9 and 
206— 8): Strabo, XV; 1, 54 (p. 58). 



112 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


do servile labour ; but the Indians do not even use aliens as 
slaves, and much less a countryman of their own.’ To under- 
stand this statement in its proper sense, we should remember 
that Megasthenes had Onesicritus before him ; and we find 
him deliberately extending to all India a statement that his 
predecessor made particularly of one country visited by him, 
and equally deliberately correcting or contradicting him in 
regard to Helotry. Megasthenes says in effect, that there are 
no slaves in India as Onesicritus knew, but his comparison 
of the Indian servants to Helots is wrong, for the Helots were 
put to servile labour and were in fact slaves. Obviously 
Megasthenes is here thinking of slavery in its full legal and poli- 
tical implications according to which the slave was the chattel 
of his master with no rights of any kind whatsover. And by a 
close study of the rules of the Arthasastra on ddsas and karmakaras , 
serfs and hired labourers, Breloer has shown that ddsas were not 
slaves in this sense ; for they could not be employed in unclean 
work — servile labour as Megasthenes would call it, and they 
could hold and transmit property and regain their freedom by 
right under certain conditions. And this appears to be the 
correct meaning of the text before us. Megasthenes was neither 
misled by the mildness of Indian slavery into denying its exis- 
tence, nor was he idealising Indian conditions for the edifica- 
tion of the Greeks, but simply stating and interpreting a fact 
as he saw and understood it, incidentally commenting on the 
view of another writer known to him 1 . 

22. Deposits 

Regarding law-suits, Strabo is our only source of ascertain- 
ing what Megasthenes said, and he is known often to abridge 
his original very considerably. Strabo writes : ‘The simplicity 
of their laws and their contracts is proved by the fact that they 
seldom go to law. .They have no suits about pledges or 
deposits, nor do they require either seals or witnesses, but^nake 

i. Breloer, Kautalya Studien , II, Pt. i, pp. u — 69. Contra. Stein, 

Megasthenes und Kauttlya f pp. 109 ff. where the argument is built on the assump- 
tion dasa-(G k.) doulos — slave. J. J. Meyer has found faylt with Breloer 
for assumig too much knowledge of Greek law on the part*of Megasthenes, 
but his criticism carries no conviction to me. ZTI, 7,pp. 194-204 and Bre- 
loer’s rejoinder, pp. 205 — 32. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 1 13 


^ their deposits and confide in each other 1 .’ This statement, 
which again follows the account of Nearchus, has been ex- 
plained by Breloer on the assumption that the Greek writers 
were thinking of the elaborate Greek procedure regarding 
deposits which invariably needed a written document, six 
witnesses and a seal, and*of the form of private suit (dike) in 
connection with such pledges and deposits. Witnesses and 
seals are, of cpurse, known to Indian law, and the Arthasdstra 
is no exception here. But when there is a proper meaning 
that wc can find for the statements we get at second hand, it 
would . be well to accept it and acquit the Greek writers 
of misunderstanding Indian conditions or of idealising 
them 2 3 * * * * . 


23. i Seven classes of the people 

Perhaps the best known section of Megasthenes is his 
account of the seven ‘tribes’ or classes of India. They are : 
(1) The philosophers, (2) cultivators, (3) herdsmen and hunters, 
(4) artisans and traders, (5) fighters, (6) overseers (Ephors or 
JpEpiscopoi) and (7) councillors and assessors 8 . Megasthenes, 
like Nearchus, mentions two types of Brahmins — those engaged 
in the study of nature and practice of religion, and those who 
took part in political life and advised the king as counsellors. 
Both these classes were numerically small, but highly respected 
for their learning and character. The class of philosophers 
included two types ; first the officiating priests ( purohitas ) who 
conducted religious ceremonials, public and private, in return 
for dakshina , were exempt from labour and taxation, and pre- 
dicted the fortunes of every year at its commencement ; then 
there were the ascetics ( sanydsins ) who have been mentioned 
already. The seventh class provided the mantrins , the judges, 
treasurers and generals for the army. The second class of culti- 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 53 (P- 56 )=Meg. Frag, xxvii (p. 70 ) Also Frig* 
xxvii B and G (p. 73 ). 

2. Breloer, op, cit ., pt. ii , pp. 70 — 158 . Contra . Stein, ep. eii 
pp. 204 — 5. 

3. Diodorus, II, 40—41 (MegJpp. 40— 44) ; Arrian, Indika , XI— XII 

(pp. 208—13)5 Strabo, XV, 1, 39—41 and 4^—49 (PP- 47—8 and 53 ). 

ijdso Diod. II, 3tnlp. 33 ) for immunity of cultivators fiom ravages of war* 

^Monahan, Early History of Bengal, p. 153, refutes Stein’s doubt* over this ques- 

tion. 



114 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


vators formed the bulk of the population ; they were exempt ( 
from fighting and other services, devoted the whole of their 
time to tillage, and were of a mild and gentle disposition. They 
lived in the country and avoided towns as much as possible. 

In times of war, they were allowed to go about their occupy 
tion undisturbed by the surrounding conflict. In the words 
of Arrian : Tn times of civil war the soldiers are not allowed to 
molest the husbandmen or ravage their lands : hence, while the 
former are fighting and killing each other as they can, the latter 
may be seen close at hand tranquilly pursuing their work, — 
perhaps ploughing, or gathering in their crops, pruning the 
trees, or reaping the harvest.’ This does not seem to be an 
.idealised picture, but a matter of general practice and common 
knowledge in ancient India ; witness the telling simile in an old 
Buddhist commentary which says that philosophers while des- 
troying the opinions of their adversaries must carefully respect 
the principles of logic which are useful to all, just as kings, while 
destroying the soldiers of their enemies, respect the field labouier 
who is the common help of both armies 1 . The cultivators paid a 
determinate share of the produce to the state by way of ren\^ 
for the land they cultivated but did not own. On this important 
subject 2 , we may set down the actual words of the Greek authors. 
Arrian says simply : ‘they cultivate the soil and pay tribute 
to the kings and the independent cities’. Diodorus is more 
elaborate, but by no means more helpful ; he says : ‘They pay a 
land-tribute to the king, because all India is the property of the 
Crown, and no private person is permitted to own land. Besides 
the land-tribute, they pay into the royal treasury a fourth part 
of the produce of the soil’. Lastly, Strabo has this : ‘The 
whole of the land .belongs to the Crown, and the husbandmen 
till it on condition of receiving as wages one-fourth of the pro- 
duce.’ We notice marked differences in these extracts from 
Megasthenes by the three writers. Arrian is silent on state 
ownership and says that the payment for land was of the same 
order in monarchies and in free cities (republics), which should 

1. The citation is from Abhidharmakofavyakhyd — see Breloer, i. p. 118, 

n. Also IHQ, ii, (1926), p. 656. ( 

2. U. N. Ghosal, Ownership of Land in Ancient India, IHQ, ii (1926)/. 
pp. 198 — 203. Also post chapter on Mauryan Polity. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE lli 


be deemed enough to silence all attempts to restrict the applica- 
tion of our texts to the royal domain ; Diodorus mentions the; 
payment of a quarter share of the produce to the state in addition 
to the tribute, while Strabo says that three-fourths were given 
up to the state, only a quarter going to the cultivator as wages. 
It may well be doubtecL whether these differences in the rate 
of land tax or rent may be properly explained as due to differen- 
ces in the conditions under which cultivation was carried on 
under a sharing system, the landlord contributing only the land 
in some cases, but cattle, plough, manure and so on in different 
degrees in other instances. The Arthasdstra , however, knows 
these differences, and Breloer has argued that the Mauryan 
polity was based on a close supervision and regulation of all 
agriculture and industry in the land by government agency 1 . 
In Taxila alone soldiers outnumbered husbandmen, as the 
king was at war with two of his neighbours, as he told 
Alexander 2 . 

The third class, shepherds and hunters, lived a nomadic 
life in forests, cleared the land of wild beasts, birds that devour 
\ seeds sown, and other pests, received an allowance of corn from 
the king for the service, and paid him tribute in cattle. The 
fourth class of artisans and traders paid taxes from their earn- 
ings, except armourers and shipwrights who received subsidies. 
The fifth class, warriors, less numerous only than the cultivators 
lived a life of ease and enjoyment in peace ; they received a 
handsome pay out of which they maintained all the servants they 
required for cleaning their arms, keeping their horses, driving 
their elephants and chariots and attending on them at home 
and in camp. The sixth class evidently includes both officials 
openly employed for the supervision of the work of the different 
departments, the Mahamatras and Adhyakshas , and the numerous 
spies (assisted by the courtesans) who were engaged in the con- 
stant communication of secret information about all men and 
things to the king and, in republics, to the magistrates. 


1. Breloer, KS, i, pp. 77 — 93 ; contra. Stein, op. cit., pp. 126 — 9. 

2. ‘When .^exander asked him whether he had more husbandmen or 
soldiers, he replied that as he was at War with two kings he required more 
soldiers than field labourers.’ Gurtius, viii, ch. 12 ( Invasion , p. 202.). 



J 16 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAUYRAS 


24. Marriage and occupation rules . 

iDiodorus concludes his summary of this class-organisation 
with the following observations : ‘Such, then, are about the 
parts into which the body politic of India is divided. No one 
is allowed to marry out of his own class, or to exercise any 
calling or art except his own : for instance, a soldier cannot 
become a husbandman or an artisan a philosopher.* Arrian 
has also similar remarks at the end with this addition : ‘It is 
permitted that the sophist only be from any class ; for the life 
of the sophist is not an easy one, but the hardest of all.’ By 
sophist of course an ascetic is meant here. Strabo also gives 
these restrictions regarding marriage and occupation, but adds 
t.hat the philosophers are exempt from them on account of their 
superior merit. The stress laid on endogamy and the adherence 
to one’s own occupation ( svadharma ), the only exception being 
in favour of the Brahmin, clearly indicate that Megasthenes 
did mean to describe the caste-system as we should now call it ; 
but these restrictions obviously had no meaning with reference 
to some of his classes, particularly the sixth and seventh 1 . Either 
he did not hear of the theory of the four varnas , or was carried y 
away by a desire, natural in a Hellenistic Greek, to establish 
a similarity between Egypt and India in social organisation 2 . 
Allowing for all its inaccuracies, there is still much in Megas- 
thenes’ picture that is true to reality and is borne out 
by Indian literary works including the Arthasastra . 

25. Food and drink. 

The Indians, says Megasthenes, lived frugally, and, being 
simple in their manners, led happy lives. Their staple food 
was rice, and there was no common meal hour, each one taking 

1. Breloer has argued that Megasthenes must have applied the term 
mesos to the classes, and used g°nos only in the statement on endogamy, that 
Diodorus and Strabo kept up this distinction, while Arrian has caused confu- 
sion by applying the term ‘genos’ to the Seven classes. In other words, the 
rule regarding endogamy is a piece of family law that stands apart frey^n the 
division of the population into seven classes. ZDMG, 1934, p. 137. But I 
hesitate to accept this ingenious argument. Breloer has also sought to show 
on the strength of Pliny, VI, 19 (22) sec 66 and Solinus 52, () that Megasthenes 
made up his seven classes from the five of Taxila polity mentioned by an earlier 
writer, most probably Onesicritus, and that Herodotus* classes of Egypt had 
little to do with it. Ibid pp. 147 — 64. 

2. ‘The Egyptians are divided into seven distinct classes — these are the 
priests, the warriors, the cowherds, the swineherds, the tradesmen, the inter* 
preters, and the boatmen*. Herodotus, II, 164. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 117 


his food by himself when he felt inclined ; ‘the contrary custom 
would be better for the ends of social and civil life* 1 . At supper 
a table was placed before each person and a golden bowl on it ; 
into this they first put boiled rice and then they added many 
dainties prepared in the Indian way 2 . They drank wine only at 
sacrifices, at which they Vlid not stab the victim, but strangled 
it in order that only what is entire may be offered to the deity. 

26. Crime and Punishment . 

Theft was of rare occurrence, and in Chandragupta’s camp 
of 400,000 men, the thefts reported on any day did not exceed 
200 drachmae (about Rs. 1 00) 3 . Love of finery and ornament 
was indulged in by those who could afford it. They had their 
bodies massaged by means of smooth rollers of ebony ; they wore 
robes worked in gold, ornaments set with precious stones, and 
flowered garments of the finest muslin. They married a number 
of wives, some for children and others for pleasure 4 . The code 
of punishments was severe, and threatened mutilation for bear- 
ing false witness, and death for causing the loss of the hand or 
eye of the artisan. In other cases of bodily injury, the offender 
not only paid the penalty according to lex talionis but had his 
hand cut off as well. Indians were peculiarly distinguished 
among the nations as lovers of dance and song ; they reared no 
costly monuments for the commemoration of the dead, but 
celebrated their virtues in song 5 . 

27. Pataliputra 

India was a land of many towns, and Megasthenes was aware 
of the difference in administrative organisation between town 

1. Frag. XXVII (pp. 69— 7o)=Strabo, XV, 1, 53—4 (pp. 55—8). 

2. Frag. XXVIII (p. 74). 

3. One sentence of strabo is usually translated : ‘Their houses and 
property arc for the most part unguarded’. But Breloer questions the 
correctness of the text and holds that the last word should properly read 
‘guarded*, implying a contrast between the stronger closed part of a house and 
its more open portions — a plan of house building imposed by the climate and 
prevailing even now. KS t ii, p. 9. 

4. Purchase of wives from their parents in exchange for a yoke of oxen 
is mentioned in this context as a universal rule ; but this is surely due to some 
misunderstanding on the part of Megasthenes or Strabo. The prescription 
is known to Indian law-books and applies only to the drsha form of marriage. 

5. Arrian, Anabasis , vi, 3, ( Invasion , p. 136) , Indika , X (p. 204)=Meg. 
Frag. XXVI (pp. 67—8). 



118 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and country. Cities situated on the banks of rivers or on the 
sea coast were built of wood as they were liable to frequent damage 
from rain and flood, while those standing on commanding situa- 
tions or lofty eminences were built of brick and mud. Patali- 
putra at the confluence of the Ganges and the Son was the largest 
Indian city 1 . The palace of Chandra^upta, ‘the greatest of all 
the kings of the country’, far surpassed those of Susa an 
Ekbatana in its splendour and magnificence. In its parks were 
kept tame peacocks and pheasants. There were shady groves and 
meadows planted with trees the branches of which were cun- 
ningly interwoven by the art of the horticulturist. And the 
trees were kept ever green and never seemed to grow old or 
shed their leaves. Some were native to the soil, others brought 
from other lands with great care for their beauty, but the olive 
was not among them. Birds were there, not confined, but 
coming of their own accord and making their nests and forming 
lairs on the branches of the trees. Parrots were native to the 
land and were maintained in large numbers, as they were valued 
for their capacity to imitate human speech ; they often hovered 
in groups round about the king. In the palace grounds there 
were artificial ponds of great beauty filled with fish of enormous 
size but quite tame. No one had permission to catch them ; 
but the king’s sons, when they were children, learned to fish and 
to swim at the same time in these tranquil ponds, learning also 
how to sail their boats 2 . 


1. Meg. Frag. XXV (pp. 66 — 7)=Strabo, XV, i, 35 — 6 (pp. 42 — 4) : 
Frag , XXVI (pp. 68 — 9)= Arrian Indika , X (pp. 204 — 6). Also Pliny at 
Meg. p. 139. Details reproduced in Chapter on Chandragupta. 

2. Aelian, XIII, Ch. 18 ( Anc . Ind. in Class. Lit., pp. 141 — 2). Curtius, 
viii, 9 on the King and the palace may be cited here for comparison : ‘The luxury 
of their kings, or as they call it, their magnificent e, is cariied to a vicious excess 
without a parallel in the world. When the king condescends to show himself 
in public his attendants carry in their hands silver censers, and perfume with 
incense all the road by which it is his pleasure to be conveyed. He lolls in a 
golden palanquin, garnished with pearls, which dangle all round it, and he is 
robed in fine muslin embroidered with purple and gold. Behind his palanquin 
follow men-at-arms and his body-guards, of whom some carry Roughs 
of trees, on which birds are perched trained to interrupt business with their 
cries. The palace is adorned with gilded pillars clasped all round by a vine 
embossed in gold, while silver images of those birds which most charm the eye 
diversify the workmanship. The palace is open to all comers even when the 
king is having his hair combed and dressed. It is then that ly gives audience 
to ambassadors, and administers justice to his subjects. His slippers being t 
after this taken off, his feet are rubbed with scented ointments. His principal 
exercise is hunting ; amid the vows and songs of his courtesans he shoots the 



INDIA IN UiAKLY CrRfcfch> AND LAllN LUKKAiUKE lltf 


28. Women in the Palace 

The king’s personal wants were attended to by women. 
The bodyguards and soldiery were posted outside the palace 
gates. The statements that a woman who killed the king when 
drunk became the wife of his successor, and that the king might 
not sleep during day, and was obliged to change his couch often 
by night with a view to defeat plots against his life, must be treated 
as curious gossip rather than be accepted for facts as some writers 
do. On the other hand, the role of women in the personal ser- 
vice of the king is well attested in Indian literature, and 
Kautilya lays down many precautions to be observed as a routine 
for ensuring the personal comfort and safety of the king ( atmara - 
kshitakam ) . The king spent much time outside his palace hearing 
and judging cases, and he did this even while he was being 
massaged. He went out for offering sacrifice, and for the chase. 
The hunting procession was a somewhat Bacchanalian display. 
‘Crowds of women surround him, and outside of this circle spear- 
men are ranged. The road is marked off with ropes, and it is 
death, for man and woman alike, to pass within the ropes. Men 
with drums and gongs lead the procession. The king hunts 
in the enclosures and shoots arrows from a platform. At his 
side stand two or three armed women. If he hunts in the open 
grounds he shoots from the back of an elephant. Of the women, 
some are in chariots, some on horses, and some even on elephants, 
and they are equipped with weapons of every kind as if they 
were going on a campaign 1 *. Curtius gives a. more rhetorical 
account of the king and his doings. 


game enclosed within the royal park. The arrows, which are two cubits long, 
are discharged with more effort than effect, for though the force of these missiles 
depends on their lightness they are loaded with an obnoxious weight. He 
rides on horse-back when making short journeys, but when bound on a dis- 
tant expedition he rides in a chariot (howdah) mounted on elephants and, 
huge as these animals are, their bodies are covered completely over with trap- 
pings of gold. That no form of shameless profligacy may be wanting, he 
is accompanied by a long train of courtesans carried in golden palanquins and 
this troop holds a separate place in the procession from the queen’s retinue, 
and is as sumptuously appointed. His food is prepared by women, who also 
serve him with wine, which is much used by all Indians. When the king 
falls into a drunken sleep his courtesans carry him away to his bedchamber, 
invoking the gc%is of the night in their native hymns” (Invasion, pp. 188 — 

i. Meg. Frag. XXVI (pp. 71— 2)=Strabo, XV, i, 53 (p. 58). 



120 


AGE OF^HE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


29. Administration 

The administrative organisation of the Mauryan state is 
described by Megasthenes under three heads : (1) rural adminis- 
tration, (2) city administration and (3) military administration 1 . 
The distinction between town and country for administrative 
purposes was well established in Indian polity, as is clear from 
the constant references to paur a and janapada in literature ; and as 
the Mauryan empire was the nearest approach to a war-state 
ever attained in India, army administration attracted the special 
attention of an observer of the type of Megasthenes. The 
picture he presents is that of a highly organised and efficient 
bureaucracy engaged in regulating activities in almost every 
important sphere of national life. 

The officials of the rural branch so to say, to whom Megas- 
thenes applied the general designation agronomoi , supervised 
irrigation and land-measurement, hunting and enforcement of 
forest laws and all the occupations connected with agriculture 
mining, carpentry and metal industries. They also collected 
taxes and maintained the roads, setting up mile-stones indicat- 
ing distances at every ten stades (a little over a mile). This 
seems to be a summary account of the duties of a large number 
of officials rather than of the activities of a single board 2 . 

Those in charge of the city (the astynomoi) were divided into 
six bodies of five each. Their functions were respectively 
(1) supervision of industrial establishments ; (2) care of foreigners 
including provision of lodging and assistants who would watch 
their doings, attention to sick persons and burying the dead 3 ; 
(3) census of population and property ; (4) control of trade 


1. Meg. Frag. XXXIV (pp. 86 — 9)=Strabo XV, i, 50—2 (pp. 53 — 5). 
McCrindle’s translation saying that the first class of ofhcers ‘have charge of the 
market 1 is now seen to be a mistake due to the word aqroronomoi having somehow 
crept into Strabo’s text in the place of agronomoi which is obviously required 
by the context. Cf. Stein, Op. eit., pp. 233 — 4. Monahan Early History of 
Bengal , pp. 160 — 61, traces analogies in detail between Megasthenes and 
Kaufilya in the administrative organisation of town and country. 

2. Contra Stein, Op. cit., p. 235. 

3. Cf. Meg. Frag. I — Diod. II, 42 (pp. 44 — 5). ‘Among the Indians 
officers are appointed even for foreigners, whose duty is to see that no foreigner 
is wronged. Should any of them lose his health, they send physicians to attend 
him, and take care of him otherwise, and if he dies they bury him, and deliver 
over such property as he leaves to his relatives. The judges afco decide cases 
in which foreigners are concerned, with the greatest care, and come down 
sharply on those who take unfair advantage of them.* 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 121 


and commerce, regulation of weights and measures, and marking 
with the official stamp articles passed for sale 1 , no one being 
allowed to deal in more than one commodity except on payment 
of a double-tax ; (5) similar duties regarding manufactured 
goods, the traders being required strictly not to mix new goods 
with old ; (6) collection pf the tax of ten per cent on sales, the 
penalty for evasion being death. The six bodies acted together 
in general matters like the maintenance of public buildings* 
regulaion of prices, and care of markets, harbours and temples. 

This account of city-government does not correspond prima 
facie to anything known from Indian sources. It has been 
pointed out 2 rightly that while in the pages of the Arthasastra 
we come across individual officials in charge of more or less the 
same duties as are discharged by some of the boards of Megas- 
thenes’ account, there is no trace whatever of a body of thirty 
dividing into six pentads ; and as the same arrangement recurs 
in his description of military administration, it has been suggested 
that Megasthenes gave a schematic and idealised aqjpunt far 
removed from realities. On the other hand, urban adminis- 
tration has always been different from rural, and there is evi- 
dence that at the time of Alexander’s invasion some of the larger 
cities had an administrative system very like what Megasthenes 
has detailed. Thirty deputies from Nysa accompanied Akouphis 
on his visit to Alexander; and, ‘from the Oxydrakaicame the lead- 
ing men of their cities, and their provincial governors, besides 
1*50 of their most eminent men, entrusted with full powers to 
conclude a treaty 3 *. It is possible that in these republican cities, 
the entire aristocracy had a voice in government and the execu- 
tive work was carried on by groups of five ; for the panchayat 
is after all a very widespread Indo-Aryan institution 4 . The 
rise of the Mauryan empire did bring about a considerable 
change, and it is possible that Megasthenes was either not fully 
abreast of the new situation, or probably his account is coloured 
by his knowledge of the historians of Alexander. 

1. I follow here Smith’s correction of McCrindle — See Aioka (3rd edn.) 
p. 88, n . x. 

2. Stein, Op. cit., pp. 248 — 66). 

3. Arrian , % Anabasis f V, 1 ( Invasion , p. 79) : ib. vi, 14 (p. 154). 

4. Breloer, ZDMG, 1935, pp. 61 — 7. 



122 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Lastly the war office comprised a board of thirty, functioning 
in six divisions of five members each. The first division was 
the admiralty ; the second, transport and commissariat pro- 
viding, among other things, servants to beat the drum, and groom 
the horses, and mechanists to tend the machines; the remaining 
four were respectively in charge of infaitry, cavalry, war-chariots 
and the elephants There were royal stables for the horses and 
elephants and an arsenal for the arms, ‘because the soldier lias 
to return his arms to the magazine, and his horse and his elephant 
to the stables’. Horses were broken in by professional trainers 
forcing them to gallop round and round in a ring, especially when 
they saw them refractory ; the Arthasastra devotes whole sections 
to a description of the movements to which the war horses and 
elephants should be trained, besides describing their proper care 
in considerable detail 1 . 

i. Meg. Frag. XXXV (p. 89). AS. ii, 30—31. 





Key to Plate I 


First Row : 

1. Gold daric 

2. Silver shekel 

3. Gold double daric ( p. 124 ) 

4. Coin of Philip Arideaus from Taxila ( p. 125 ) 

Second Row : 

5. Silver decadrachm ( pp. 125-6 ) 

6. Coin of Alexander from Taxila ( p. 125 ) 

7. Attic tetradrachm, silver, imitation ( p. 128) 


Third Row : 

8. Seleucus I, silver Attic tetradrachm Zeus/ Athene 

( P- 129 ) 

9. Sophy tes, silver ( p. 126-7 ) 

10. Diodotus II, silver, Attic tetradrachm (P.130) 

Fourth Row : 

11. Enthydcmus I, silver Attic tetradrachm (p.130) 

12. Seleucus I, silver, Horse /Elephant ( p .129) 




APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III 

EARLY FOREIGN COINS IN INDIA 

( Nandfl-Maurya Period ) 

The coins current in India before her contact with the 
Greeks were of the variety usually described as punch-marked 
and cast 1 . Their manufacturing technique widely differed from 
that of the Greek coins, and it has been almost unanimously 
accepted that it was invented by the early Indian moneyers, 
without the aid of any outside influence 2 . Though numismatists 
differ about the earliest date of the circulation of these indi-* 
genous coins, there is no doubt now that many of them passed 
current during the Nanda-Maurya period, being introduced 
in India at a much earlier time. Other types of coins which 
also passed as currency in the extreme north of India during 
this period were those issued by the Achaemenid Persian rulers 
of this region. The Persian emperors from Darius I onwards 
usually struck two types of coins, viz., the darics and the sigloi, 
the former being of gold and the latter of silver. The name 
‘daric’ is evidently derived from that of Darius Hystaspes whose 
Indian conquests included the whole of the Indus valley while 

i. The name ‘punch-marked’ is given to a large mass of early Indian 
coins, mostly in silver and comparatively infrequently in copper, on account 
of the various symbols being punched on metal blanks ofdifferent shapes, sizes 
and weights. It was at first suggested by numismatists that these coins were 
private issues, various moneyers or shroffs being held responsible for their 
manufacture: according to this view the symbols un their surface were noth- 
ing more than the hall-marks of the different individuals through whose hands 
the coins passed in the course of trade and commerce. But this view has 
given place to the more probable one of their having been issued by a centra 
authority. Uninscribed cast copper pieces bearing such symbols as elephant, 
tree in railing, mountain &c., are some of the commonest coins of ancient 
India, and belong probably to the same period in which the punch-marked 
coins are to be dated. For a full treatment of these varieties of the earliest 
indigenous coins of India, the reader is referred to J. Allan’s Catalogue of the 
Coins of Ancient India , Introduction, parts ii-iv. 

2. M. Decourdemanche, however, was of opinion that most, if not all, 
of the punch-marked coins belong to the Achaemenid monetary system, these 
being nothing but a variety of the Indian issues of the Achaemenid Persian 
emperors: Journal Asiatique, 1912, pp. 1 17—132. D.R. Bhandarkar opposes 
this view/cf. Carmichael Lectures , 1921, pp. 1 18 — 22. J. Allan thinks that 
the thick silver bent bars with devices^on their concave side, found in some 
parts of north-western India, ‘are struck on a Persian standard and repre- 
sent double sigloi or ’staters, half and quarter sigloi, CAL p. xvi, x — 3. 



124 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


‘siglos* is based on ‘shekel’, a kind of weight standard adopted 
by the Persians from the ancient Babylonians. On the obverse 
of the former, the Persian emperor armed with a bow and a 
spear is shown in a running posture, while the reverse contains 
an irregular oblong incuse. The Persian silver coins bear almost 
identical devices, but several of thcln have peculiar counter- 
marks both on the obverse and the reverse, which according 
to some scholars emphasise their definite Indian association 1 . 
The darics are about 130 grains (8.42 grammes) in weight, 
while the maximum weight of the sigloi, twenty of which were 
equal in value to a daric, was 86.45 grains (5.6 grammes). 
It was previously held that both these varieties of silver and gold 
Persian coins were actually minted in India, and passed current 
there side by side. But a more acceptable suggestion has been 
made not very long ago that the relative cheapness of gold in 
this country would make it uneconomical for the Persians to 
mint any gold coins here for circulation ; in fact, it would tend 
to draw outside the country any darics which might have been 
brought there in course of trade and commerce 2 . This view has 
been supported by the non-discovery of the darics here in any 
quantity, and the comparative frequency of sigloi in the Indian 
soil. 

No coins of any Greek prince, however, could have been in 
circulation in India before Alexander invaded the country. It 
is presumed that even during the period of his short stay there 
in the course of his conquests in the north-western regions, he 
could hardly have found any time to issue coins in his newly 
acquired territories. A copper coin of squarish shape bearing the 
name of Alexander, which was supposed at first to be his Indian 
issue, has been long since declared to have no connection with 


1. Rapson held this view; he recognised some symbols thus counter- 
marked as similar to those found on Indian punch-marked coins, and other 
marks he explained as resembling several Brahmi and Kharoshthi letters: 
JRAS. 1895, pp. 865. ff. E. Babelon attributed these countermarks to*other 
countries of Asia, such as, Lycia, Pamphylia, Cilicia and Cyprus; Les Perses 
Achemenides p. xi. G. Macdonald says ‘that the results of the most recent in 
vestigation (Hill, JHS. 1919, pp. 125 ff.) rather tend to bear out his opinion* 
though he does not ignore the noteworthy similarity between them and the 
Indian punchmarks; CHI. I, 344. 

2. CHI. I, 342 — 43. The ratio between gold and silver in India as 
we know from Herodotus, ‘was not higher than 1 :8’ as compared with the 
form of 1: 13. 3 maintained by he Imperial mint*. 



FOREIGN COINS 


125 


India 1 . But two silver coins (tetradrachms) bearing the name 
of Alexander and one silver coin, that of Philip Aridaeus, were 
discovered by Marshall in the course of his excavations at the 
Bhir Mound site Taxila 2 . These coins ‘bear on the obverse 
head of Alexander wearing the lion skin, and on the reverse 
Zeus seated on a throne wi^h the eagle on his right hand and the 
sceptre in left*. Though they have different legends and mono- 
grams, they are closely similar to one another. On one of the 
coins of Alexander, the legend BA2 1 A E f \ 2 A A E E AN A POY 
can be distinctly read. Their freshly-minted condition and the 
fact that they were recovered from a stratum, assigned by Marshall 
to the 3rd or 4th Century B.C., may lead one to suppose that 
they were actually minted in India. But this first recorded 
find of such coins in India is still unique and the coins could have 
been brought here from outside. 

The troubles which Alexander’s officers left in charge of his 
Indian conquests had to encounter in mainiaining their transi- 
tory hold on these regions did not allow them to issue coins 
in any number in the name of their master 3 . But a few interest- 
ing coins of Greek technique belonging to the latter half of the 
4th century B.C. have been discovered, which, though all of them 
were not found in India, seem to have Indian association. 
Among them mention may be made first of the few unique 
silver decadrachms issued by Alexander himself from his Baby- 
lonian mint, which were distinctly of a commemorative 
character. The obverse shows an elephant with two riders 
followed by a warrior on a prancing horse, while the reverse 


1 . P. Gardner thought that there were a few such pieces of Alexander’s 
Indian money: BMC. xviii. But realy the piece, now in the collection of 
the Berlin Museum, is unique. The shape which is the only reason for associa- 
ting it with India might have been an accidental freak, ‘the result of awkward 
handling by some workman at a western mint’. Macdonald refers to a group 
of tetradrehms with Zeus’ head on the obverse and the eagle on a thunder- 
bolt accompanied by the legend AaE = AN A POY on the reverse, as having 
some connection with the east, if not actually with India : CHI. I 388 — 89. 
The presence of a satrapal tiara on the right field of the reverse sides of these 
coins proves that they were satrapal issues. 

2. ASR. 1924 — 25, pp 47 — 8, pi. ix. These coins were found in a 
small earthen jar which also contained as many as 1167 silver punch-marked 
and bent-bar-type of Indian coins, and one Persian siglos. 

s 3* Macdonald’s description of a few such imitations of the Athenian 
‘owls* which might have been minted in ..the extreme north-west of India, 
may be noted in this connection : CHI. I, 388. They are the same as 
referred to in the previous foot note. 



126 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


contains the standing figure of Alexander shown as the god 
Zeus. The obverse device has been explained by numismatists 
as the artist’s version of Alexander’s battle with Porus, the Mace- 
donian emperor on horseback attacking with his lance Porus 
riding on the elephant, while a second person, the driver of the 
elephant, turns to throw a javelin at Jthe pursuer. The reverse 
depicts Alexander dressed in a Macedonian cloak with a com- 
posite helmet on his head, his right hand holding a thunderbolt 
and his left a spear ; Nike is shown in the top left field, about 
to place a wreath on his head. The monogram on the lower, 
left field of the reverse is AB which may either stand for 
BA2IAE/T2 AAEE ANAPOY, or may more probably be 
a contraction for Babylon, one of the mint cities of Alexander. 
The other class of silver coins which are usually supposed to have 
been minted in India, were the issues of one Sophytes, as we 
know from their legend on the reverse. This Sophytes has so long 
been identified with Sopeithes of Arrian (vi, 2, 2) and Strabo 
(xv. 699), who ruled over terroitories in the Salt Range region, 
Punjab, at the time of Alexander’s invasion. Sopeithes 
appears to have been the Greek form of the Indian name Sau- 
bhuti who according to most scholars was an Indian 1 . But R.B. 
Whitehead questioned the identity of Sophytes and Sopeithes 
not very long ago. He further suggested that Sophytes was an 
eastern satrap in the last quarter of the fourth Century B.C. 
ruling somewhere in the Oxus region, where his coins were 

originally minted ( Numismatic Chronicle , 1943). It is true 

that there is no record of an actual discovery of any of these 
coins in Indian soil, but there is also no clear proof of 
Sophytes’ connection with the Oxus region. Arrian and Strabo 
are explicit about the existence of one Sopeithes (most probably 
the Greek transliteration of some such Indian name as Saubhuti) 
and it is tempting to connect it with the name Sophytes, the 
issuer of the coins in question (JNSI VII, pp. 23 — 6). The 
obverse of these coins shows the head of the king to right within 
dotted border, wearing close-fitting helmet and cheek-plate, 
the former adorned with a wreath of olive leaves ; on the reverse 


i. D. R. Bhanclarkar attempts to prove that Sophytes was really a 
Hinduised Greek; for his arguments, cf. CX. 1921, pp. 30 — 1. 



FOREIGN GOINS 


127 


is shown a cock to right with a caduceus on the left field 
and the Greek legend 2fl</>YTOY on the right, all inside a 
border of dots. The coins are struck from regularly adjusted 
dies and usually bear a monogram consisting of the 

Greek letter M or MN ; their approximate weight is 58 grains. 
These coins are of great interest as they are without doubt based 
on the imitations of the Athenian ‘owls’ which seem to have been 
somewhat familiar in or just outside the north-western border 
of India at that time. The discovery of a unique tri-hemiobol, 
now in the Berlin Museum, bearing the helmeted head of Athena 
in place of that of Sophytes, apart from most other numismatic 
features, definitely proves the connection between the two sets 
of coins. The weight of Sophytes’ coins, which according to 
earlier numismatists was derived from the Indian dharana or 
purana (silver punch-marked coins weighing 32 ratis, roughly 
58 grains) has now been shown by Macdonald and others to be 
the same as that of the imitations ; it has been described as a 
lighter Attic standard sometimes adopted by moneyers in their 
issue of such coins in the east 1 . As Sophytes does not use any 
j royal title on his coins, it has been presumed that his coins were 
issued not long after Alexander’s invasion, when, though for all 
intents and purposes enjoying sovereign rights, he might have 
acknowledged temporarily the authority of the Greek invader 2 . 
An earlier view regarding the prototype of Sophytes’ coins, not 
even completely abandoned now, is that they were imitated from 
a certain type of Seleucus’ coins ; in fact such was the close 
similarity between the obverse of this issue of Seleucus I and 
that of the coins of Sophytes, that some numismatists were 
tempted to connect the two sets of coins in this manner. It is 
more correct to accept the view suggested by Rapson long 
ago that both were derived from the imitations of the Athenian 


X. But this so-called lighter Attic weight might have been influenced 
by the Indian dharana or purana standard after all. It is the smaller denomi- 
nations of the imitations of the Athenian ‘owls’ procured in the regions near 
the extreme north-west border of India, which are usually based on the 58 
grains standard which is also the weight of a large mass of silver punch- 
marked coins. 

2. D. R. Bhandarkar is of opinion that these coins of Sophytes could 
have been issued neither during the period of Alexander’s stay in India, nor 
at a time subsequent to his departure from there ; according to him, they 
were issued before Alexander invaded India, CL, 1921, p. 30. 



128 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


fowls’ 1 . But if Whitehead’s suggestion that Sophytes was an ' 
eastern Satrap ruling somewhere in the Oxus region in c. 320 
B.G. is correct, then these coins had no Indian connection. 

It will be of interest now to study in brief the special features 
of these imitations of owls, some of which according to most 
numismatists were actually minted in the extreme north-west 
of India or just outside. The original ‘owls’ of Athens were 
beautifullyexecuted silver coins of various denominations usually 
tetradrachms, which bore on the obverse the head of Pallas 
Athene, the tutelary deity of the city, and on the reverse the 
figure of an owl, the bird sacred to the goddess, with the legend 
AQE usually in the right field. These coins were so much in 
demand among the people of the Aegean world and among 
those of the middle and near east, that Athens had to supply 
the specie from her own mint. When Athens lost her political 
importance as a result of her debacle in the Peloponnesian War 
and the subsequent Macedonian hegemony, her mint was closed, 
and imitations of the above type of the Athenian coins were made 
in large numbers in the countries which once used to import 
the Athenian originals. These imitations can be divided into 
two well-defined classes, the first closely approximating to its 
prototype. The second class softer in style usually bear the 
monogram M behind the head of Athene on the obverse and a 
bunch of grapes over the back of the bird on the reverse. 
The most characteristic feature which, however, distingui- 
shes the second class from the first is that the obverse and 
reverse devices of the former are finely adjusted ( ^ f ), where- 
as in the case of the latter no such adjustment seems to have 
been made ; this nice fixity of position of one die in relation to 
that of the other may point ‘to the employment of a hinge or of 
some equally effective contrivance’ (Macdonald). Moreover, the 
first class usually consists of tetradrachms, while the second also 
contains drachms and didrachms. These smaller denominations, 
again, are not based like the higher ones on the Attic 
standard of weight, a drachm according to which weighed 67.2 

i. P. Gardner {BMC. p. rx) and several other older numismatists 
held the view; it has also been supported by C. Seltman in his Greek Coins , 
pp. 228 — 29, pi. LII. 3, and pi. LV.6. But Rapson correctly suggested long » 
ago that ‘both of these classes may have been derived from the same originals 
— the imitations of the Athenian coins made in India ; 7 C. p. 4. 



FOREIGN GOINS 


129 


grains (4.37 grammes), but on one in which the same would 
weigh no more than 58 grains (3.75 grammes). These numis- 
matic peculiarities of the second class of the imitations place 
them alongside ‘anoLher set of drachms and diobols which are 
struckfrom regularly adjusted dies (^ ^ ), but in which the place 
of the Athenian owl is talien by an eagle, looking backwards* 
(Macdonald) . On this latter class of coins, the bunch of grapes 
behind the owl’s back is in one case accompanied by a caduceus. 
These latter sets of the imitation of the Athenian ‘owls’ were 
undoubtedly the prototype of Sophytes’ coin discussed above, 
and this is one of the principal reasons which have led numis- 
matists to infer that c at least the smaller Athenian imitations 
were not unfamiliar in the north of India’ 1 . 

Several Greek coins* issued in Syria and in the adjacent 
countries to its east, some bearing the name of Seleucus I and 
others those of Seleucus I and his son Antiochus I jointly require 
a brief notice here on account of their Indian association of a 
somewhat remote character. The first group of these have on 
the obverse the head of a horned horse to right inside a dotted 
t border, while their reverse shows an Indian elephant. 
Another class of coins in the same series bear a laureate 
head of Zeus on the obverse and Pallas Athene driving in a 
chariot drawn by four elephants on the reverse. The 
Greek legend BA2 IAEr 2 2EAEYKOY on the reverse 
side of both the classes proves that they were issued after 306 
B.G. when Seleucus I assumed the royal title for the first time. 

. „A few of the latter class of coins, coarser in style and execution, 
are usually collected from the extreme north and north-west of 
India, showing thereby that though they were not actually minted 
in India, they might have been in circulation in this region. 
The other group of Greek coins, more or less similar in typo 
to the second class of such coins just noticed, — on the reverse 
is shown a fighting Athena riding in a car drawn by either 
two or four elephants, bear the Greek legend BA2IAER2 
. 2EAEYKOY KAI ANTIOXOY. The elephant device in all 
the above types of coins seerm to have some remote connection 

1. CHI . I, 387—88. 

2. These are usually tetradrachms ; coins of lesser denominations, 
however, are not unknown. 



130 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with one of the terms of the treaty concluded by Seleucus I with 
Chandragupta Maurya ; according to it the former bartered 
away the provinces of Paropanisus, Aria, Arachosia and Ged- 
rosia along with his claims to the Punjab and other Greek con- 
quests in northern India for five hundred war elephants. This 
particular war arm proved so decisive a factor at the battle of 
Ipsus where Antigonus the formidable rival of Seleucus was 
overthrown, that it became one of the favourite dynastic devices 
of the Seleucidae. The head of a horned horse, another favour- 
ite device of the same, was perhaps commemorative of Buce- 
phalus, the famous charger of Alexander the Great, in whose 
honour the Macdonian emperor founded a city named 
Bucephala on the bank of the Jhelum in the Punjab. 

Most of the Greek coins discussed above are extra-Indian 
in character, from the point of view of their provenance ; but 
almost all of them have some association, near or remote, with 
the country. The hoards of Greek coins, however, that were 
actually minted here and which passed as currency in the 
extreme north and north-west were the ones issued by the Gieek 
rulers of Bactria and India. These Bactrian Greeks at first owed 
allegiance to Seleucus I and his successors, and it was under 
Antiochus Theos (Antiochus II), the grandson of Seleucus I, 
that one Diodotus, the Greek satrap of Bactria, threw off the 
Syrian yoke sometime in the middle of the third century B.C. 
Justin says that this Diodotus died shortly after the assumption 
of independence and was succeeded by his son of the same name. 
The second Diodotus issued coins bearing his name and 
the device of Antiochus II. But these coins as well as 
those of Euthydemus I who dispossessed him of the throne of 
Bactria, were all issued outside India. The coins of the 
immediate successors of Euthydemus I, viz., Demetrius 
and others were mostly non-Indian issues ; a few of them were, 
however, actually minted in this country, when Demetrius 
carried the Bactrian Greek arms into India and conquered some 
parts of it. Eucratides who was a supplanter of Demetrius in 
Bactria and the head of a rival branch of the Greek prinedings 
contending with Demetrius’ successors for possessions in the 
extreme north and north-west of India, issued a large number k 
of coins many of which were of Indian origin. The coins of the 



FOREIGN COINS 


I31> 

host of the Indo-Greek rulers, mostly belonging either to the 
house of Euthydemus I or to that of Eucratides, were all minted 
here, because these Greek princes who had long been driven 
outofBactriabytheSakashad made their home in India. The 
story, however, of these Bactrian and Indo-Greek princes and 
their coins, though beginitig in the latter part of the Maurya 
age, really falls within the Suhga and Kanva periods. 



CHAPTER IV 

GHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


In a previous chapter we traced the expansion and consolida- 
tion of the Magadhan empire under the Nandas. The New 
Monarchy was exposed to a two-fold danger. On the one hand 
there were symptoms of popular disaffection with the regime 
which did not augur well for the future. Besides this there 
appeared on the north-western horizon the spectre of foreign 
dominion. Alexander, it is true, had to retire from the Beas 
' but his “successors 55 inherited his ambition and some of his plans. 
The lament was no doubt heard that the pursuit of Alexander’s 
policy and retention of his conquests required “royal troops 
under the command of some distinguished general 551 . Neither 
of these conditions could be fulfilled for some time after Alexan- 
der’s death. The Macedonian Regents* from 323 to 317 B.C. 
had to be content with a sort of condominium on the Indian 
borderland. It did not, however, take long to consolidate 
the Tavana forces in Western Asia under a new leader so 
that Indians had once more to prepare themselves for their 
fiery onset. 

Many of the prominent figures that strutted on the Indian 
stage in the twenties of the fourth century B.C. — Agrammes, 
Amblii, Porus, to name only a few — did not show any proper 
realisation of the problems that faced their country, or the de^ 
tiny that awaited her. To preserve and augment the nascent 
empire of Magadha, to deal effectively with the foreign menace, 
to “unify the innumerable fragments of distracted India 55 and 
bring the ideal of the Chakravartain into the realm of practical 
politics, to inspire Indians with a zeal for mighty endeavour in 


i. McCrindle, Ancient India as described in Classical Literature , pp. 301 — 2 . 

2. It is an interesting question whether Macedon, the home of Alexander 
and many of his “successors**, was known to Indians. The Adina-punydvaddna 
(J\o. 52) of the Avaddna-kalpalata of Kshemcndra refers to a city styled Madhuk& 
in the published Sanskrit text. The name is however given as Mashudann 
i»i the Bengali version by Mr. S. C. Das. The second name, if authen- 
tic, may be reminiscent of Macedon. 



CHANDR AGU PTA AND BINDUSARA 


133 


various fields of activity and bring her politically and socially 
into close touch with the outer world -all this required a man 
of heoric proportions. Such a man did not take long in 
coming. If Plutarch and Justin are to be believed there appeared 
before Alexander in the Punjab (326 — 25 B.C.) a ‘stripling’ 1 2 * of 
humble birth about whom tradition records signs and portents 
significant of an august destiny 8 . He conceived the grand 
design of reversing the condition of things that must have 
filled the mass of his countrymen with despair. For nearly a 
quarter of a century he did bestride the Indian world like a 
colossus. For generations the country had to follow in the lines 
laid down for her by Chandragupta. 

The success of the new Indian leader has been immortalised 
by a grateful posterity. Fragments of the cycle of legends o’f 
which he is the hero survive even in the works of Latin histo- 
rians. In our own country we have lauds, tales, plays, even 
philosophical dissertations in Sanskrit, Pali, and Prakritin which 
writers eulogise the hero in whose arms the earth harassed by 
barbarians found a refuge, who nearly succeeded in brirging 
about the unification of “Jambudvipa”. Unfortunately very 
little is recorded about the life and career of this remaikable 
man, which bears the stamp of unassailable authenticity. One 
searches in vain for his very name in the inscriptions of his 
grandson. The Mahabhashya of Patanjali has interesting refe- 
rences to Chandraguptasabha* and to Amitraghata 4 , possibly the 
son of Chandragupta, but records nothing about the deeds of 
the earliest of the Mauryas. Much that is known about him 
Belongs to the domain of folklore. A Chandra gup takatha — the 
nucleus of Chanakya-Chandragupta-katha of mediaeval times — 
must have come into existence before the beginning of the 
Christian era, as is apparent from the marvellous episodes 
that have found their way into the narrative of Justin who 
abridged the Latin history of Pompeius Trogus, a contem- 


1. Plutarch's Lives (Loeb), Vol. VII, Life of Alexander, Chap. 62 ; p. 403 ; 
McCrindle, Invasion of Alexander , p. 31 1 for Plutarch ; p. 327 for Justin. 

2. _ Cf. bah eva hi lokena iambhdvitamahodqyah J in Mudrdrdkshasa (ed. by 
Haridas SIddhantabagis-Bhattacharya), p. 452 ; Pariiishta Parvan (e.d. by 
Jacobi, 2nd Ed. ), VIII. 243 ; also Justin McCrindle Invasion . p. 327. 

3- L 1.9. 

4 . HI. 2 . 2 . 



134 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


porary of Augustus. Fiaguients of the story have also been 
preserved by the Buddhists in the Milinda-Pdfiho and the 
Theragathd Commentary 1 and by the Jains in certain mediaeval 
epigraphs of Mysore besides other documents. Curiously 
enough Chandragupta is ignored in the Asokavaddna though we 
have notice of his son Bindusara. The Tamilian reference to 
<c Vamba Moriyar” may also have been connected with the 
Chandragupta saga. Fuller details are given in Hemachandra’s 
Parisishtaparvan , the Mahavamsa J ika , Burmese legends 2 and the 
Kashmirian versions of the Brihat-Katha. There is a dramatic 
rendering of one form of the legend by Visakhadatta. The 
central theme of the story is hinted at in the Chandakauslka 8 . 
Certain additional details are found in the commentary on the 
Vishnu Purana and that of Dhundiraja on the Mudrarakshasa of 
Visakhadatta. 

To narrate the true story of Chandragupta one cannot rely 
entirely on the Katha but has to piece together scraps of informa- 
tion obtainable from inscriptions, classical sources, genealo- 
logical lists preserved in Indian and Cylonese chronicles and 
certain incidental notices. 

The epigraphic records of Asoka and DaSaratha, while of 
value as a source ofinformation regarding spiritual ideals, state 
of religion, internal organisation and social life in the early 
Maurya epoch, do not mention specific events that may be 
referred with precision to the reign of either Chandragupta or 
his son Bindusara. Far different in character is the Junagadh 
Rock inscription of Rudradaman which not only specifically 
names the first Maurya but affords an interesting glimpse of the 
extent of his conquests and methods of administration. For 
fuller notices of Chandragupta’s career we have, however, to 
turn to Greek and Latin writers of the Hellenistic period and the 
early centuries of Imperial Rome. Among classical sources 
an important place should be given to notices of friendly inter- 
course between the first twoMauryas and their Syrian contem- 
poraries for which we are indebted to Athenaeus who quqtes 
from Phylarchus and Hegesander 4 . There was an exchange of 

1. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names , I, 846. 

2. Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama II, 12 ff. 

3. Quoted in the Kavyamxmdmid (3rd ed.), p. XIII. 

4. McCrindle, Invasion , pp. 405, 409 n. 



GHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


135 


embassies as well as correspondence between the Indian and 
certain Hellenistic courts. The names of three of the Hellenic 
envoys have survived, namely, Megasthenes, Daimachus and 
Dionysius. As is well known the Indika of Magasthenes consti- 
tutes in some respects the most valuable source of information 
regarding Chandragupta # and his times. But the fragments 
that survive in the books of Diodorus, Strabo, Arrian, Pliny and 
others throw more light on internal government and manners 
and customs of the people than on the political transactions of 
the age. For the events that followed the death of Alexander 
and led up to the rise and expansion of the Maurya empire 
reliance has to be placed mainly on the XVIII and XIX 
Books of the Universal History ( Bibliotheke ) of Diodorus Siculus, 
the Life of Alexander by Plutarch, Justin’s Epitome of the Histona 
Philifipicae of PompeiusTrogus (Book XV), the Syriake of Appian 
(Book XI. 9.55) and certain passages from the Geography of 
Strabo and the Natural History of Pliny. The Puranic and 
Ceylonese chronicles have nothing to say regarding Chandra- 
gupta’s relation with the Hellenic powers. But they notice the 
dynastic change in Magadha and give information regarding 
the king’s lineage not known from classical sources. The Chroni- 
clers whose extant works cannot be dated earlier than the Gupta 
Age could not escape from the influence of the Chanakya-Chandra - 
gupta-Kathd which must have reached a highly developed form 
in their days. In their accounts the figure of Kautilya, unknown 
to earlier texts, makes its appearance as that of the leading actor 
in t he drama of events that leads to the supersession of the Nandas 
by Chandragupta. This is in striking contrast with the facts 
recorded by Justin, following Trogus, according to which 
Chandragupta plays the leading role in the dynasiic revolution 
among Indians and Kautilya is not even alluded to. 

Among the sources of the Maurya period mention is often 
made of the Kautiliya-Arthafdstra. The copious information 
obtainable from this work relates more to ideals and methods 
of administration, social life etc., than to external political facts ; 
it is also a matter of controversy how far the famous treatise can 
be regarded as a genuine product of the Maurya Age. 

Before we proceed to sketch the life and career of Chandra- 
gupta on the basis of the sources indicated above, it may not 



136 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


be out of place to say a few words about the vexed question of 
chronology. 

Attempts have been made to determine the chronology of 
the Mauryas in general, and Chandragupta in particular, with 
the help of Jain and Buddhist tradition. Hemachandra informs 
us in the Parisishtaparvan 1 2 that the accession of Chandragupta 
took place 155 years after the liberation of Mahavira. This 
statement is confirmed by Bhadresvara in his KahdvaU? Meru- 
turiga, however, in his Vicharasreni 3 refers to other sources which 
place the event 60 years later in 215 A.V. Apart from the lack 
of unanimity among these Jain writers, the date of Mahavira’s 
liberation is itself a matter of controversy, and it is not safe to 
to build a chronological edifice on such foundations. The 
'memorial verses quoted by Merutnga give other details v hich 
put the interval between the accession of Chandragupta and the 
end of &aka rule and the foundation of Vikrama era at 255 
years 4 This would place the accession of the first Maurya in 
313 B. C. — a result that closely approximates the epoch of the 
Seleucidan era, and has, therefore, found favour with seme 
scholars. It should, however, be noted that the Jain writers are 
apparently referring to Chandragupta’s rule in Avanti, and not 
Magadha or the Punjab, and that part of the chrolonological 
tradition embodied in the memorial verses is contradicted by 
Bhadresvara and Hemachandra. Moreover, the date 313 B.C. 
for Chandragupta does not accord with Buddhist tradition 
which puts his accession 162 years after the Parinirvana of the 
&akya Sage, that is, 382 B.C., if we accept the Ceylonese epoch 
(544 B.C.) of the Great Decease, and 324 B.C., if we prefer the 
Cantonese tradition (486 B.C.) for the passing away of the 
Enlightened One. The earlier date is no doubt opposed to 
classical evidence, but the date 324 B.C. is not irreconcilable 
with the testimony of Greek and Latin writers. The figures 
given by Buddhist chroniclers are, however, as much open to 
comment as the data of Bhadresvara, Hemachandra and Meru- 
turiga. We have, therefore, to turn to the clues furnished by 

1. Ed. Jacobi p. xx ; Text, VIII. 339. 

2. Ibid. p. xx. 

3. Ibid. p. xx. 

4. Ind. Ant. 1914 pp- n8f. Jacobi, Kalpasutra of Bhcdrabahu, Leipzig, 
1879, P- 7 : 



GHANDR AGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 1 37 

classical accounts supplemented by the testimony of Agokan 
inscriptions. 

The classical writers refer to several famous episodes in the 
career of Chandragupta with hints as to their chronological 
sequence. He met Alexander while yet a ‘stripling* and not 
yet ‘called to royalty* (32(*— 25 B.C.) 1 and mounted the throne 
of India ‘not long afterwards’ 2 by instigating the Indians to over- 
throw the existing government, or according to another inter- 
pretation, soliciting the Indians to support his new sovereignty 3 ; 
thereafter* he prepared to attack Alexander’s prefects ; the latter 
were put to death and the yoke of servitude was shaken off from 
the neck of India ‘after Alexander’s death* (i.e., after 323 B.C.) . 6 
Chandragupta was reigning over India when Seleucus -was 
laying the foundation of his future greatness. 6 (The famous 
Macedonian general acquired the satrapy of Babylon for the 
first time in 321 B.C., regained control of the city and founded an 
era in 312 B.C., and assumed the title of king in 306-5 B.C.)* 
After subduing the Bactrians he passed over into India, concluded 
a treaty with Chandragupta and then returned home to prose- 
cute the war with Antigonus (before 301 B.C). 7 Appian, who 
also refers to the war which Seleucus waged with Chandragupta, 
besides other events, mentions the understanding with the Indian 

1. Plutarch, Op. cit Ch. LXII. (Loeb Classical Library), translated 
by Perrin ; Justin, I n v. Akx. p. 327. 

2. Plutarch} op. cit. LXII, p 401. 

3. Just in, Inv. AUx., p. 328; Watson’s translation of Justin, p. 142. 

4. Justin uses the words “having thus won the throne” once again after 
mentioning the fight with the prefects. This has led scholars including Tarn 

in Bactria and India , p. 47 n2) to surmise that the acquisition of 
his kingdom by Chandragupta followed the war with Alexander’s satraps, 
the last of whom, Pithon did not leave India till 316 B. G. But the 
words “having thus won the throne” are not to be construed merely with 
the preceding sentence describing incidents in connection with the war 
with the prefects. They refer also to the events that preceded the clash 
of arms with the Macedonian commanders, and in fact, sum up the whole 
episode relating to the rise of Chandragupta. For a similar summing up 
of the exploits of Seleucus, see Appian, Syrian Affairs , XI 9.55 referred to 
above. In the detailed account given by Justin we are expressly told that 
Chandragupta was stimulated to aspire to royalty by an incident that 
happend immediately after his flight from Alexander’s camp in 326/25 B.C. 
The use of the. term deinde (thereafter) after “new sovereignty” suggests 
that the Macedonia War came sometime after the change of government among 
Indians. In the Mudrdrakshasa too the total destruction of Mlechchha chieftains 
and troops follows the dynastic revolution in Magadha ( Indian Culture , H.. 

p. 561 f.) 

. Justin. Inv,AUi c., 327. 

. ibid., 328 



138 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


king about the marriage relationship and adds that “some of 
the exploits were performed before the death of Antigonus and 
some afterwards” 1 i.e., after 301 B.C. That these operations 
cannot have reference merely to dealings with Chandragupta 
but include also events outside this country, that find mention 
earlier in Appian’s narrative, e.g. the war with Syrian clans, is 
clear from other sources, such as the narrative of Justin who 
dates the treaty between the Syrian and Indian monarchs before 
thz clash of arms of Seleucus with Antigonus. In fact Appian 
here sums up the career of Seleucus as a Nicator. 

How long Chandragupta lived after the war with Seleucus 
cannot be precisely determined from Greek sources. His grand- 
son Asoka is known to have been a contemporary of Magas of 
Cyrene who died not later than 259 — 58 B. C. according to the 
evidence of Porphyry, which seems to be confirmed by the testi- 
mony of Callimachus, a contemporary poet, of Polybius (X. 22) 
and of coins. 2 The acceptance of this date implies that the 
XIII Rock Edict of Asoka cannot be dated later than 259 
— 58 B.C . as it speaks of Magas as alive. As rescripts of 
morality began to be written when Asoka was anointed twelve 
years, his coronation could not have taken place after 270 — 69 
B.C. The death of Chandragupta and the reign of his son 
Bindusara must, according to the evidence we have cited, fall 
between the Seleucidan war and 270 — 69 B.C. Tradition 
assigns a period of 24 years to the reign of the first Maurya, 
25, 27 or 28 years to Bindusara, and 4 to the interval between 
the accession and the coronation of ASoka. If we accept* 
the mean figure 27 for Bindusara, a period of 55 years must have 
intervened between the accession of Chandragupta and the 
coronation of his grandson. The former event took place 
according to this calculation not later than 270-69+55=325 
-24 B.C. An early date for the rise of Chandragupta is suggested 
by the fact that at the time of the partition of Triparadeisos 
(321 B.C.) Antipater had to give the kingdoms that lay along 
the Indus and the Hydaspes (Jhelum) to Indian Rajas “for it 
was impossible to remove these kings without royal troops under 

1. Roman History , Vol. II., Book XI. 9.55, p. 204. (Locb Classical Lib. , 
translation by White. 

2. Tarn, Antigonos Gonatas , pp. 449 ff. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


139 


" the command of some distinguished general. 1 ” The inadequacy 
of “royal troops” and the absence of “distinguished general” 
are inexplicable unless the more important among the prefects 
of Alexander had already been put to death or expelled. That 
achievement is ascribed by the Latin historians solely to 
Chandragupta who, and jjot Ambhi or the Paurava, “was the 
leader who achieved their (i.e., Indians’) freedom” 2 . It is true 
that the great liberator is not mentioned in connection with the 
partitions of Babylon and Triparadeisos. But we have similar 
reticence in regard to Eudemos who had been directed along 
WJth Taxiles to assume the administration of the province 
governed by Philippus as early as 324 B.C. 3 He survived Porus, 
and clung to some part of India till about 317 B.C. 

Greek and Latin writers frequently corrupt the name of 
Chandragupta. It was Sir William Jones who solved the puzzle 
and found in the appellations used by the classical historians 
and geographers variant forms of the name of the first Maurya 
as known from Indian sources. Writers of our own country, too, 
sometimes use epithets which require a few words of comment. 
As is well known the name of Chandragupta does not 
find a place in the epigraphs of his descendants. It, however, 
is distinctly referred to in the Junagadh Rock Inscription of 
Rudradaman I. It is also known to Patanjali and a host of 
Indian bards and chroniclers, playwrights, poets and even 
philosophers. Among classical writers the nearest approxi- 
mation to the correct name ( Sandrokoptos ) is made by Phylarchus, 
who is quoted by Athenaeus 4 . Strabo, Arrian and Justin have 
^androcottus. Appian and Plutarch corrupt it into Androco- 
ttus. In the Mudrarakshasa we have the cognomens Chanda- 
Siri (Chandrairi), Piadamsana (Priyadariana) and Vrishala 5 . 
Chandrasri is of course the shortened form of the name Chandra- 
gupta with the addition of the honorific Sri 6 . The attribution 

1. Dio. XVIII. 3 q; MeCrindle Ancient India in Classical Lit. p. 21 1 — 12. 

2. Inv. Alex. p. 327. 

3. Inv. Alex ., p. 177 Smith, Aioka, (3rd ed.) p. 12. 

4. Strabo says that Sandrokottus adopted the surname Palibothros 
(Pdtaliputraka ?), Megasthenes and Arrian , p. 66. 

5. Haridas Siddhantaba gis edition, pp. 42, 374. 

0 6. The usual practice is to put the honorific before the name. For a 

contrary usage, of. Aiokairl in ParUishlaparvan } Kharavelairi, Veda or Skandairi, 
Skandairi, Saktiiri, Balaian in inscriptions, and Yajhairi in the Puragas etc. 



140 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


to Chandragupta of the appellation Piadamsana, if based on 
correct tradition, is of great interest as it is generally known as 
an epithet of his famous grandson, ASoka, and his common 
designation in inscriptions. As a title of royalty it finds mention 
in the Vishnudharmottara as quoted in the Rajadharmakaustubha 
of Anantadeva 1 . But its use does npt appear to have been so 
common in early times as that of Devanampiya. Vrishala is 
taken by some to hint at Ghandragupta’s extraction from the 
Sudra line of the Nandas. But the cognomen is used in the 
epic and law books also of Kshatriyas and others who deviated 
from orthodoxy. An ingenious suggestion has been made in 
recent times that the expression really stands for basileus 2 , the 
Greek word for king. There is, however, no suggestion in 
Indian literature that Vrishala is a royal epithet. The word 
has a social and no political significance, and is often applied 
to non-royal personages, particularly wandering teachers and 
ascetics like the Buddha 3 . ^ 

Regarding the ancestry of Chandragupta Indian writers have 
not preserved any unanimous tradition* There is no doubt 
agreement in regard to the name of the the family to which he 
belonged, which is invariably given as Maurya. But the origin 
and derivation of the word present a problem which requires 
elucidation. The Brahmanical commentators like Dhundiraja 
and the annotator of the Vishnu Purana derived the expression 
from Mura, supposed to be the wife of a Nanda king, and grand- 
mother or mother of the first Maurya. There is, however, no 
warrant for this view in early texts. The Puranas make no 
mention of Mura and do not refer to any dynastic connection 
between the Nandas, who were of Sudra extraction, and the 
Mauryas. No doubt they say that after the extermination 
of all Kshatriyas by Mahapadma Nanda, kings will be of Sudra 
origin. This cannot however be taken to imply that all the 
post-Mahapadman kings were Sudras as some of them, e.g.* 
the Kanvas, are distinctly styled dvija. In some Puranic texts 


i. Kamal Krishna smritirtha’s ed. p. 43 

a. I.H.Q, XIII (1937), p.651. 

3. Kaufiliya Arthasdstra (Text), p. 199 R. K. Mookerjee, Hindu . * 
Civilisation , p. 264. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


141 


the reading is Sudra-prayastv adharmikah l . SudraAfke and irre- 
ligious are not an inapposite description of several members 
of the Maurya family who showed predilection for Jainism and 
Buddhism. One text, the Markandeya Pur ana, goes so far as to 
brand the Mauryas as asuras 2 * . Suradvish , it may be remembered, 
is used by the Bhagavata P % urana in reference to people beguiled 
by the Buddha 8 . The earliest authorities to claim a Nanda 
origin for the first Maurya are the Mudrarakshasa and the media- 
eval versions of the Brihat-katha . It is, however, to be noted 
that the Greek accounts do not suggest any blood relationship 
between Chandragupta and Agrammes, the Nanda contemporary 
of Alexander. The former is mentioned by Justin as 
“born in humble life 4 . 59 The reference, to our mind, 
points to the fact that Chandragupta was not born in the purple 
and was not a scion of the royal line which he overthrew. It 
is significant that Plutarch includes “Androkottos” among the 
persons who, according to several historians, disclosed to 
Alexander the meanness of the origin of the contemporary ruler 
of the Prasii, apparently the last Nanda king. It does not seem 
probable that people who sneered at the “barber” line of 
Magadha could themselves claim no higher status in society. 

Buddhist writers do not regard Maurya as a metronymic. 
They invariably represent it as the name of a clan 5 6 the members 
of which ranked as Kshatriyas since the days of the Buddha. 
Even Kshemendra who speaks Chahdiagupta as purvanati - 
dasuta in his version of the Brihat-katha , distinctly mentions 
Asoka as born in the Solar Race in the Avandanakalpalata* . The 
latter view accords with the testimony of several mediaeval 
inscriptions 7 . The antiquity of Moriya or Maurya as a clan 
name is clear from the Mahaparinibbana Sutta which represents 
the people in question as Kshatriyas and rulers of the little 

1. Pargiter, Dynasties of the Kali Age , p. 25. 

2. 88. 5. 

3 - I- 3 - 24. 

4. Inv. Alex. p. 327. 

5. For traditional Buddhist accounts of the origin of the name, see 
Malalasekera, D.P.P.N.> II. 673. 

6. Story No. 59, v. 2. ‘Saurya’ Kula may be regarded by some as 
a mistake for Maurya Kula, (ii. p. 209). but the supposition loses its force 
when later on in the same story we find Saurya and Maurya together in the 
passage — Sphila Saurya-Maurya-Mahaiamsavanapa Hrhdnana Srimad-Ahkadevab. 

7. Ep . Ind t II, p 222 



142 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


republic of Pipphalivana, probably lying between Rummindei 
in the Nepalese Tarai and Kasia in the Gorakhpur District 1 * 
Some recent writers seek to connect the first Maurya with 
Gandhara and its neighbourhood on the basis of evidence which 
does not bear scrutiny 2 . The suggested identi fication of Chandra- 
gupta with Sisikottos is not borne ou/ by Greek evidence. The 
treatment of the two eminent men by Alexander is different, 
and there is nothing to show that Sisikottos was a mere stripling 
when he met the Macedonian king for the first time. Equally 
implausible is theattempt to connect Sakuni,whom the Kashmir 
Chronicle represents as the great-grand-father of Asoka, with 
Sakuni of Gandhara, famed in the Mahdbharata 3 . Sakuni is by 
no means an exclusive desigation of Gandharian princes as it 
occurs in the Puranic list of Videhan kings 4 . In Mudrdrakshasa y 
Act V, the Gandharas are actually found arrayed against 
Chandragupta. 

History does not record when the founder of the 
Maurya dynasty was born. As he was a mere stripling when 
he saw Alexander in 326 — 25 B.C. his birth could not have 
taken place before the middle of the fourth century B.C. 
Certain writers, as has already been noted above, record tradi- 
tions that he was of royal extraction. The Brihaikatha and the 
Mudrarakshasa connect him with the Imperial Nanda dynasty 
of Magadha, and Buddhist commentators with the ruling family 

1. P. H. A. /., 4th ed., pp. 160, 217. 

The names Morieis, Meroes and Moeres are known to classical writers 
(C.H.I. I. p. 470 ; McCrindle Inv. Alex. pp. 108, 236). But their connection, 
if any, with Sandrocottus is not clear. If Morieis is a tribal name it may**rciP 
stand for Moriya or Maurya. 

Mauryaputra of Mudrdtakshasa (II, 6, p. 99) may simply mean, ‘be- 
longing to the Maurya clan\ Cf. Sakyaputra, Nataputta. It is by no means 
an exclusive designation of Chandragupta. The Kalpasutra of Bhadrabdhu 
ed. by Jacobi (p. 28) refers to a Mauryaputra Kasyapa as one of the eleven 
ganadharas. Cf. also Abhidhdnachindmani I. 32. 

2. Gandhara Origin of the Maurya Dynasty and Indentification of 
Chandragupta with Sasigupta, by H. C. Seth. In Indian Culture , X. pp. 32n, 
34, it is said that “Chandragupta was a man of the Uttarapatha ” and that 
“Hwen Thsang narrates a legend (Beal, Buddhist Records , I., p. 126 Sic.,) which 
connects the Sakya-Mauryas with the country of Udyana”. The passage on 
which the last statement is based is not quoted. The pilgrim’s story (Beal, 
I. 128) simply mentions Udyana as a place of refuge of a S&kya fugitive. The 
evidence hardly suffices to represent either the Sakyas or Chandragupta as 
“men of the Uttarapatha.” Is it suggested that Mayura-raja (king of pea- 
cocks) on p. 126 is to be taken to refer to Chandragupta ? 

3. Seth, op. cit. 9 p. 15. 

4. Vdyu Pur ana, 89, 29. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


143 


^ of Moriyanagara, perhaps identical with Pipphalivana of early 
Pali texts, members of which had to take shelter in Pupphapura 
(Pataliputra) when the last monarch of the line had been put 
to death by a certain powerful Raja. The queen consort of 
Moriyanagara, we are told, gave birth to Char.dragupta, and 
the child is said to have been reared by a herdsman and a hunter 1 * 
A variant form of the story is given by the Burmese 2 . The 
foundation of the Maurya city (Moriyanagara) is there attri- 
buted to princes of VaiSali that had escaped ficm the massacre 
of Adzatathat (AjataSatru) . According to Jain tradition recorded 
in the ParUishtaparvan 3 , however, Chandragupta was born of the 
daughter of a peacock- tamer (Mayuraposhaka) who lived in 
an obscure village. The sources of Trogus and Justin knew 
Chandragupta as a novus homo , a man “born in humble life”. 
This does not accord with the tradition regarding his imperial 
pedigree, though it may well be reconciled with the story that 
his family, though sprung from a ruling Kshatriya clan, had 
fallen on evil days. Justin’s reference to the hero’s encounter 
with “a lion of enormous size” and “a wild elephant” of 
monstrous shape further shows that the Chandraguptakathd 
known to the Latin historians of the early century of the 
Christian era, might not have been altogether ignorant of 
Chandra gupta’s traditional associaticn with hunters and tameis 
of the wild denizens of the forest. Little that is historical can, 
it has to be conceded, be extracted from these legends. 

It should, however, be noted that all our authorities agree 
that the Mauryas hailed from Eastern India, the land of the 
Prasii. Young Chandragupta’s detestation of the Prasian 
contemporary of Alexander, to which Plutarch bears witness, 
is in conformity with the tradition that the poor plight in which 
the Maurya family found itself in the twenties of the fourth 
century B.C. was due, in large measure, to the agressive 
policy of neighbouring rulers, particularly the imperialists of 
Magadha. 

1. Mahawanso (Tumour) I. p. xl. 

2 . Bigandet, Life or Legend of Gaudama , II. p. 126. 

3. ( Text ) VIII. 231 ; cf the Buddhist tradition connecting the 
uame Moriya with mora (peacock), MaJalasakara, Dictionary of Pali Proper 
Names II. 673. 



144 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chandragupta’s first emergence from obscurity into the full 
view of history occurs in 326 — 25 B.C. when he met Alexander. 
The fact is recorded by two of the classical writers, viz., Justin, 
who draw upon the history of Trogus, and Plutarch. The 
young Maurya might have acquainted the Macedonian invader 
with conditions in Eastern India. “Alexander”, he is reported to 
have said in later times, “narrowly missed making himself 
master of the country, since its king was hated and despised 
by his subjects for the weakness of his disposition and the mean- 
ness of his origin. 1 ” Details of the original speech and the manner 
in which it was delivered are not recorded. But we are told by 
Justin that its tone gave offence to the Macedonian king who 
gave orders to kill the Indian lad. The latter sought safety by 
a speedy flight 2 3 . Curiously enough some modern editors emend 
the text of Justin and propose to read Nandrum in place of 
Alexandrum. The name Nanda, however, is not known from any 
other classical source, and Plutarch, who also refers to the meeting 
between Alexander and “Androcottos”, makes separate mention 
of the king or kings of the Prasii. Classical writers record other 
instances of Alexander’s impatience with boldness of language. 
The cases of Cleitus and Callisthenes may be recalled in this 
connection 8 . 

The narrative of Justin leaves the impression that after his 
departure from Alexander’s camp Chandragupta retired to a 
forest tract, drew together a body of armed men and ‘solicited 
the Indians to overthrow the existing government.’ and support 
a new sovereignty 4 * * . Modern translators of Justin’s text charac- 
terise the warriors who gathered round the Maurya as a band 
of robbers. But the original expression used by the Latin 
historian has the sense of mercenary soldier, hunter, as well as 
robber. The former senses are in consonance with Indian 
tradition. According to the story told in the ParHishfaparvan. 
troops were levied for Chandragupta with wealth procured by 


1. Plutarch, (Locb.) p. 403 5 McCrindle, Inv. Altx ., p. 31 i$ cf. also 
Curtius and Diodorus in Inv . Alex. pp. 222, 282. 

2. Inv. Alex., p. 327. 

3. Cf. Grote, History of Greece , (E.L.S.), XII., pp. i4off, I47ff. 

4. Justin, Inv. Alex., p. 328 : Watson’s translation, p. 142. “The new 

sovereignty” of Justin reminds us of the words Maurye nave rdjani of the Mudriti 

rakshasa , Act. IV., p. 278. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


145 


metallurgy or mineralogy (Dhdtuvada) for the purpose of uproot- 
ing Nanda 1 . The purpose of the levy stated in the Jainta text it 
important. In the light of this evidence ‘the overthrow of the 
existing government* alluded to by Justin, can well be taken 
to refer to the subversion of the rule of the Nandas. As a matter 
of fact Justin in the earlier part of his narrative apparently draws 
a distinction between this event and the war with the prefects 
of Alexander, preparations for which were made thereafter 
( deinde ). According to a subsequent passage, however, the 
winning of the throne and reigning over India seem to follow 
and result from the fight with the Macedonian commanders. 
The problem is not free from difficulties and our views have been 
stated in connection with the chronology of Ghandragupta. 

If the “overthrow of the existing government** does not 
refer to the fall of the Nandas, but only to the destruction of 
the Macedonian domination in the Indus valley, we shall have 
to assume that the classical writers, who recounted the story of 
the rise of Ghandragupta, knew nothing regarding the fate of 
Agrammes, about whom they speak so much, and were ignor- 
ant of the dynastic revolution that gave Ghandragupta the throne 
of Pataliputra and the crown of Prasii. It is not very probable 
that the Chandragupta Katha on which they must have drawn 
for some of their thrilling episodes, had no reference to the tragic 
end of Alexander’s Magadhan contemporary who was “detested 
and held cheap by his subjects.” 

Be that as it may, for details of the momentous events that 
Ifcd t£ the supersession of the Nandas by the Mauryas we must 
turn to Indian chroniclers and story-tellers. No contemporary 
account has survived. The traditional story is told differently 
by different writers. In some cases only fragments have sur- 
vived. One of the earliest of these, which lies embedded in the 
Milinda Pahho , 2 preserves its heroic character as a tale of war 
between the contending forces of the Nandas and the Mauryas. 
The lustre of Chandragupta is, as in the narrative of Justin, 
yet undimmed by that of an all powerful chancellor. His 

i. Jacobi’s edition, 2nd. ed., p. lxxiv : Text. VIII. 253-54. 
g 2. S.B.E. XXXVI., p. 147. It is interesting to note that the Ceylo- 
JEneie commentator turns Nanda into “Nandagutta of Brahmana caste” (Hid 

n- 3)- 



146 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


opponent Bhaddasala is a brave soldier, a general of the Nandas, 
not an astute minister. The accounts of the Puranic 
genealogists, the chroniclers of Ceylon and the Nltisara of 
Kamandaka are still marked by comparative simplicity. They 
relate how the Nandas were uprooted and the “earth passed to 
the Mauryas 1 2 3 ”. But the credit for thte achievement, for “anoint- 
ing the glorious youth Chandragupta as king” over the earth 
(or Jambudvipa) is given to a minister, the Brdhmana Kautilya, 
Chanakya or Vishnugupta. The treatise on statecraft ascribed 
to the latter goes so far as to omit in this connection all explicit 
reference to Chandragupta 1 . 

We have further embellishment in the Mudrarakshasa which 
competent critics are inclined to assign to the ninth century 
A.D*. Kautilya is now definitely the leading actor in the drama. 
The Nanda king who falls a victim to his wrath is named Sarva- 
rthasiddhi, and the family is referred to as of noble birth (abhi- 
jana 4 ) . Mlechchha chieftains, Parvata, Parvataka, Parvatesvara 
or Sailesvara, his brother Vairodhaka, son Malayaketu and 
Meghaksha or Meghanada, king of the Persians, take part in 
the dynastic quarrel along with hordes of Sakas, Yavanas, 
Kiratas, Kambojas, Balhikas, Khasas, Hunas and others. The 
barbarians appear at first as allies of Chandragupta. But when 
promises made to them are evaded, and Parvata and his brother 
fall victims to Chanakya’s cunning, Malayaketu turns against 
the Maurya and joins the Nanda minister Rakshasa. The 
storm that threatened to burst upon Chandragupta was averted 
by jealousies and quarrels among his enemies. The MleJichha 
forces dispersed and the discomfiture of Malayaketu as 
well as Rakshasa was complete. In the play the battle of 
intrigue proves more efficacious than the arbitrament of the 
sword. None of the Mlechchha chieftains have names which 
can be regarded as standing for genuine Greek or Persian 


1. The reference to the Arattas equated with the “band o i robbers” 
of Justin, that some recent writers find in the Puranic texts is due to a misread 
ing (Pargiter, DKA , p. 2G n 35.). 

2. Arthaidslra, , Bk. XV., concluding verse. 

3. Keith, Samkril Drama , p. 204. 

4. Mudiarakshaw p. 386. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


147 


originals and the appearance of the Hunas in connection with: 
the Magadhan conflict of the fourth century B.C. exposes the 
true character of several incidents narrated in the play. The 
identification of Parvataka with Porus, proposed by some 
writers , 1 has little to support it. Parvataka and his family are 
clearly branded as Mlechchba in the play, and their forces as 
Mlechchha - bala ; on the other hand the Purus or Pauravas could 
claim an illustrious Vedic and epic ancestry. The territory 
over which Parvataka ruled is described by Jain writers as 
Himavatkuta , 2 while Porus ruled at first the country between 
the Jhelum and the Chenab to which were added territories 
stretching as far as the Hyphasis or Beas and the Indus. In the 
Mudrarakshasa one Sindhusena or Sushena appears as the prince, 
of the Indus region. Lastly, Parvataka is slain by a poison 
maiden ( Vishakanya) as a result of Kautilya’s intrigue, while 
Porus is killed by Eudamus, according to one reading of the text 
of Diodorus, and by Alexander himself according to Pscudo- 
Callisthencs . 3 

The Kashmirian redactors of the Brihatkathd show their 
independence of the tradition followed by the play by introduc- 
ing a Yogananda, a Nanda produced by magic, that is, by the 
entry of an adept in that art into the body of the genuine ( purva ) 
Nanda. They also attribute to Sakatala, the minister cf the 
real Nanda, the destruction of the son of the supposititious king, 
and the bestowal of the royal dignity upon Chandragupta, 
child of the genuine monarch. Chanakya, according to this 
verson, is simply a protege and an instrument of Sakatala . 4 The 
real Nanda king is now definitely described as a Sudra. 

Fresh accretions to the tale are met with in the Parisishta- 
parvan , the Mahavamsa Jlka> and the legend of the Burmese 

1. C.H.I.y I., 471 : “Identification of Parvataka and Porus.” H. G. Seth. 

2. ParUishtaparvan (Op. cit. , VIII. 297 — 98 (p. 222). Jacobi has the ’ 
following note on Parvataka : ‘ In the list of the kings of Nepal, according to 
the Bauddha Paivatiya Vamsavali ( Ind . Ant., Vol. XIII., p.412) the nth 
king of the 3rd dynasty, that of the Kiratas, is Farba, apparently our Parvata; 
for, in the reign of the 7th king, Jitedasti, is placed Buddha’s visit to Nepal , 
and in that of the 14th, Sthunka, Asoka visited the country.” (Ibid. p« 
lxxv, ni.) 

3. Smith, Aioka, (3rd cd.), p. 12 n ; McCrindle, Ancient India in 
f Classical Ligature, p. 178. 

4. Text, Nirnaya Sahara Press, Kathdpithalambakali Tarangas IV and V J 
Penzer’s edition of Tawney’s translation, Vol. I., p. 40—57. 



148 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


Buddha . 1 We have different versions of the story of the initial 
failure of Chanakya and Chandragupta in their attack on the 
Nanda dominions, and their ultimate success due to experience 
gathered on the spot. According to the Buddhist version the 
last of the Nandas is put to death. But in the narrative of 
Hemachandra he is permitted to leave his kindgom . 2 There 
is lack of agreement in regard to another important matter. 
The Mahavamsa Jikd definitely assigns Chanakya to the city of 
Taxila . 3 On the other hand, Hemachandra seems to suggest in 
the Abhidhanachintamani 4 * “that Kautilya, son of Chanaka was a 
Dramila” i.e. an inhabitant of South India. But as the lexical 
verse indentifies him with Vatsyayana, Mallanaga, Paksliilas- 
vamin as well as Vishnugupta, little importance attaches to its 
testimony. Curiously enough the Parisishtaparvan 6 mentions 
Go\\<\-vishaya as the home-land of the famous minister. The 
identity of the place is not known. 

The overthrow of the Nandas rid the Magadhan empire of a 
dynasty that, in spite of its great services, had failed either to 
secure the good will of the subjects, or to show any intelligent 
grasp of the policy to be pursued towards the invaders in the 
North-West. The new regime had to justify itself by efficient 
administration, by promotion of the welfare of the people, and 
securing their protection against the Tavana menace. Regarding 
some of the methods adopted by Chandragupta opinions may 
differ. According to Justin “he oppressed with servitude the 
very people whom he had emancipated from. foreign thraldom ” 6 
We do not know how far the remark applies to the Magadhan 
provinces. The judgment is of too sweeping a character to be 
supported by all other available evidence. We shall not enter 
here into the details of the Mauryan polity which will be dealt 
with in a later chapter. The emancipation of the Indians 
from foreign thraldom, to which the Latin historian refers, was 


i. PariSishtaparvan Canto VIII J Mahdwanso (Tumour) pp. xlff. Bigandct, 
op* cit. II. y 126 ff. 

*. ParUishfaparoan , VIII 315 f., p. Ixxvi. 

3. Mahdwanso (Tumour) p. xxxixf 

4. III. 5i7. 

5- VIII. 194. 

6. McCrindlc, Invasion f p. 327 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


149 


in itself no mean achievement. We now turn to this famous 
episode in the career of Chandragupta. ^ 

The liberation of the land of the five rivers and the border 
country from the Macedonians was a long process. It required 
two wars to expel the prefects of Alexander and hurl back the 
battalions of one of the most ambitious and capable of his succes- 
sors. The great Macedonian king and conqueror wanted to 
incorporate the territories he had conquered in India perma- 
nently into his empire. He made elaborate arrangements 
or their defence and administration. Garrisons were posted 
in several places, colonies planted, cities fortified at important 
stategic points and dock-yards constructed. Satraps recruited 
from Indians as well as Macedonians and allied peoples from 
the West were appointed to assume the administration of some 
of the conquered provinces. Certain areas were, however, 
left under the control of Indian Rajas. 1 

Alexander died in 323 B.C. His successors, who met to parti- 
tion the Macedonian empire at Babylon on the day after his 
death, and again at Triparadisus in Syria towards the end 
of 321 B. C., had no desire to withdraw altogether from the 
Indian provinces. They could not however be blind to certain 
new developments. The Macedonians were torn by internal 
dissensions and their ranks were getting thinner in India. 
Antipater, regent of Macedonia from 321 to 318 B.C., managed 
to retain control over the satrapy of India which “bordered on the 
Paropanisadac” which he gave to Pithon in 321 B.C. “Of the 
adjacent kingdoms he gave that which lay along the Indus to 
Porus, and that along the Hydaspes (Jhelum) to Taxiles 
(Ambhi), for it was impossible to remove these kings without 
royal troops under the command of some distinguished general.” 2 
Smith seems to think that the names of the Rajas have been 
interchanged. 3 This is not improbable. But it is well to 
remember that the city of Taxi la did not lie far from the 
Hydaspes, and Porus might have been given charge of a part 
of the Indus valley over which Eudamus, the Thracian, 
exercised sway as one of the joint successors of Philippus. 


1. See ch. Ill above. 

2. McCrindle, India as described in Classical Literature , pp. 201 — 2. 

3. Aioka , (3rd ed.}, p. I2n. 



150 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURY AS 


Eudamus was probably disfavoured as a partisan of Eumenes, 
a rival of Antipater. 1 It is significant that according to a reading 
of a passage of Diodorus, Eudamus is said to have seized a number 
of elephants after the death of Alexander, having treacherously 
slain Porus. 2 The hostility to Porus is explicable if the Indian 
Raja had been granted favours by the Regent in Macedon at 
the expense of the Thracian commander. Eudamus had how- 
ever soon to leave India to help Eumenes in his fight against 
Antipater. The event is usually dated in or about 317 B.C. 
and must in any case have preceded the execution of Eumenes 
in 316 B. C. Pithon, who favoured the side of Antigonus, 3 
another great general who claimed a share of Alexander’s inhe- 
ritance, left India about the same time in 316 B.C. 4 and was 
slain in the battle of Gaza four years later. 5 

The leading part in the destruction or expulsion of Alexan- 
der’s commanders in India is, as already stated, assigned by 
Justin to Chandragupta. The earlier attempt of Samaxus, 
the Assakenians, the Brahmanas of the Lower Indus valley, 
and Musicanus (Mousikanos) had ended in failure. The 
process of liberation is likely to have begun before the Partition 
of Triparadisus when the lament is already heard about the 
growing power of the Indian Rajas and the absence or at least 
inadequacy of royal “troops under the command of some dis- 
tinguished general.” “It seems however that the country” “eman- 
cipated from foreign thraldom” did not stretch at first beyond 
the Hydaspes (Jhelum) in the north-west. The Macedonian 
Regent claimed to dispose of territories extending eastwards 
as far as that river in 321 B.C. But soon the Magadhan fron- 
tier reached the Indus. According to a fragment quoted by 
Pliny, possibly from Mcgasthenes, “the Indus skirts the 
frontiers of the Prasii” 6 that is, the Magadhan empire, doubtless 
during some part of the reign of Chandragupta as his predece- 
ssors did not control any part of the Punjab, and his successors 
seem to have exercised sway over the province as far as the 

1. McCrindle, Invasion p. 389. 

2. Smith, Aioka , (3rd ed.), p. I2n. 

3. McCrindle Invasion , p. 400. 

4. Tam Greeks in Bactria and India , p. 47 n 2. 

5. McCrindle Invasion, p. 400. 

o. McCrindle, Ancient India as described by Mcgasthenes and Arrian p. 143* 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


151 


north-western mountains. The Indians whose territory 
“bordered on the Paropanisadae” (in the Kabul valley) are 
known to have been under Pi thon till c. 316 B.G. The district 
to which Eudamus clung, after the partition of Triparadisus 
which ignored him, may also have lain, like that of his predec- 
essor Philippus, partly at any rate, beyond the Indus. These 
commanders had been partisans of Antigonus and Eumenes 
respectively. The execution of Eumenes in 316 — 15 B.G. 1 and 
the exhaustion of Antigonus in the war of 315 to 312 — 11 B.G. 2 
left the way clear for Seleucus who returned to Babylon in 312 
— 1 1 B.G., and soon made himself master of “the whole region 
from Phrygia to the Indus”. 3 Appian, to whom we are indebted 
for the information conveyed by the last few words, seems clearly 
to suggest that the Indus formed the boundary between the. 
dominions of Seleucus and Chandragupta before the two kings 
came to blows. The former is said to have crossed the Indus 
and waged war with Androcottus, king of the Indians, who 
dwelt on the banks of that stream .” 

It is a matter for surprise that the classical writers who have 
so much to say regarding the Indian campaigns of Alexander 
should preserve reticence in regard to the details of the famous 
struggle to which Appian refers. Even the date of the war 
and its total duration are not known for certain. Appian 
informs us that the fight went on “until they (i.e., the Syrian 
and Indian Kings) came to an understanding with each 
other and contracted a marriage relationship ( kedos ).” He 
adds that some of the exploits of Seleucus were performed 
“before the death of Antigonus (at Ipsus, 301 B.G.) and some 
afterwards.” 4 The “understanding” or treaty with Chandra- 
gupta and “settlement of affairs in the East” are definitely dated 
by Justin before Seleucus’ return home to prosecute the war 
with Antigonus. 5 Pliny refers to the opening up of India with 
its numberless nations and cities by the arms of Alexander, 


1. Ino. Alex . p. 385, Companion to Greek Studies p. no. 

2. Companion , p. no. 

3. Appian, Roman History , Vol. II. (Loeb Library) — Syr. XI. 9.55. 

4. Appian, Ibid . 

5. Ino. Alex., 328. 



152 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Seleucus and Antiochus, but gives no details that might have 
thrown light on the war with Chandragupta . 1 

While the war itself received scant attention at the hands 
of the historians, the “understanding” seems to have attracted 
greater notice. Plutarch tells us that Chandragupta “made a 
present to Seleucus of five hundred elephants .” 2 Fuller infor- 
mation is given by Strabo who says : 

“Along the Indus are the Paropamisadae, above whom lies 
the Paropamisus mountain ; then, towards the south, the 
Arachoti ; then next, towards the south, the Gedroseni, with 
the other tribes that occupy the seaboard ; and the Indus lies, 
latitudinally, alongside all these places ; and of these places, 
in part , some that lie along the Indus are held by Indians, although 
they formerly belonged to the Persians. Alexander took these 
away from the Arians and established settlements 3 of his own, 
but Seleucus Nicator gave them to Sandrocottus, upon terms 
of intermarriage ( epigamia ) and of receiving in exchange five 
hundred elephants .” 4 / 

In another passage we are informed that “the Indus River 
was the boundary between India and Ariana, which latter was 
situated next to India on the west and was in the possession of the 
Persians at that time (i.e., at the time of Alexander’s invasion) ; 
for later the Indians also held much of Ariana, having received 
it from the Macedonians .” 5 

Diplomatic relations were also established between the 
contracting powers, for Strabo refers to the sending of Megas- 
thenes to the court of Chandragupta at Pataliputra. 

The details of the “understanding” to which Strabo bears 
witness leave no room for doubt that Seleucus could not make 
much headway. Even royal Macedonian troops under a dis- 

1. McCrindle, Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, p. 107. 

The journeys made from the Beas for Seleucus Nicator, to which Pliny bean 

witness, may, as pointed out by Macdonald, refer not to reconnaissances made 
during a campaign, but to information gathered subsequently by Greek envoy* 
accredited to the Court of Pataliputra ( Megasthenes and Arrian , 1926, 129* ft*., 
Camb . Hist. Ind . I. 430.). 

2. Plutarch, op. cit. Ch. LXII. 

3. Governments or provinces according to Tarn ( Greeks in Bactiia and 
India , p. 100. 

4. Geography (Loeb. Library) translated by H. L. Jones, (XV. 2. 9)* 
P- 143 - 

5. Ibid. p. 15 (XV. i. 10). 



GHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


15 $ 


tinguished commander failed to dislodge the king of the Prasii 
from the Punjab. On the contrary, the invader had to give 
up some of the Macedonian possessions on the Indus “receiving 
in exchange the comparatively small recompense of five hundred 
elephants.’ * In regard to the extent of the territory surrendered 
by Seleucus and the nature of the marriage compact of 
which, according to Strabo, the cession was in part the conse- 
quence, there has been considerable difference of opinion. 
Smith believed, on the strength of a passage of Pliny, that the 
countries ceded included the four satrapies of Gedrosia, Ara- 
chosia, Aria, and the Paropamisadae. 1 Pliny however simply 
says that “numerous authors include in India the four satra- 
pies” in question. 2 He may have been referring to conditions 
not in the days of Seleucus and Chandragupta, but in some ’ 
later epoch, e.g., that of the monarchs of the Scytho-Parthian 
dynasties who reigned previous to A.D. 7 7. 3 The words used by 
Strabo “and of these places, in part , some that lie along the 
Indus are held by Indians” do not convey the idea of a complete 
abandonment of the Satrapies in question including even Aria. 
Tarn is inclined to think that only those parts of the three 
satrapies of Paropamisadae, Arachosia and Gedrosia which 
lay along the Indus were ceded by Seleucus. In Gedrosia the 
district ceded was, in his opinion, that between the Median 
Hydaspes (identified with the Purali) and the Indus. Of the 
satrapy called Paropamisadae Chandragupta got, according 
to this view, only Gandhara between the Kunar river and the 
Indi^. The boundary in Arachosia is not precisely defined 
but it is suggested that what Chandragupta got lay east of a 
line starting from the Kunar river to somewhere near Quetta 
and then going to the sea by Kalat and the Purali river. 4 The 
contention of Tarn cannot however be accepted in its entirety. 

1. E.H.I. , 4th ed. p. 159. 

2. Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 156 ; E.H.I. 4th ed. p. 159. 

3. Pliny’s information was not solely drawn from the contemporaries, 
of Alexander and Seleucus. He refers to the opening up of India by the arms 
of Antiochus as well as Alexander and Seleucus. He utilised the evidence not 
only of <c old writers ” but of ambassadors who came to the early Roman 
emperors (Me Crindle Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, 
pp. 103, 107). He speaks of a discovery of a shorter route to the 
Indian ports by a merchant (p. in) in comparatively recent times. 

4. Tam, Greeks in Bactria and India , p. 100. 



154 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


In regard to one point he is definitely wrong. The V and 
XIII Rock Edicts of Asoka count among the north-western 
tribes who were included within the rdja-vishaya , and were 
subject to the jurisdiction of imperial officials, not only the 
Gandharas but the Yonas. Association with the Kambojas 
and the Gandharas suggests that these Yonas are the people 
of that name mentioned in the Mahavamsa whose city Alasanda 
had been identified by Cunningham and Geiger with Alexandria 
in the country of the Paropamisadae near Kabul 1 . When 
Strabo says that “the Indiansheld muchoi Ariana, having received 
it from the Macedonians”, it is difficult to believe that 
he means only the comparatively narrow strip of territory that 
lay to the west of the Indus and east of a line drawn from the 
Kunar to the Purali. 

In regard to the marriage compact Macdonald draws a 
distinction between the terms kedos and epigamia used by Appian 
and Strabo respectively. The former, we are told, would 
signify an actual marriage, while the latter probably implied 
only “a convention establishing a jus connubii between the two 
royal families ”. 2 It is observed in this connection that there was 
no room in the family circle of Seleucus for any actual marriage 
relationship. Both the expressions used by our authorities may, 
however, signify a “connection by marriage,” though the word 
used by Strabo has also the sense of “right of intermarriage 
between states .” 3 The cession of territories “upon terms of 
intermarriage (epigamia)” implies that the marriage did take 
place, the lands in question being possibly treated as the dower 
of the Seleucid princess like the Kasi village in the Budclhist 
story of Kosala devi and Bombay in case of Catherine of 
Braganza 4 . 

By his victory over the Nandas and the Macedonians 
Ghvilragupta became master of the extensive region stretching 
from Magadha and Bengal to the easternmost satrapies of 
Ariana. The king of Pataliputra and the Prasii dominated 

i.. Cunningham, Ancient Indian Geography , p. 18 ; Geiger Mahavamsa , 
p. 194. 

2. Camb. Hist, of India , Vol. I., p. 431. 

3. Liddell and Scott., Greek-English Lexicon , pp. 626, 946. , 

4. See on this point the observations of Tarn, Greeks in Bactria and India 
p. 174m 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


155 


not only “the whole tract along the Ganges ”, 1 but thecountries 
on the Indus that had once acknowledged the sway of the 
Persians and Alexander. Unfortunately the classical writers 
do not say much about any further extension of the Magadhan 
dominions in the interior of India. We have only the vague 
statement of Plutarch that “with an army of six hundred 
thousand men (Ghandragupta) overran and subdued all India .” 2 
The conquest and subjugation of one important province, that 
of S irashtra or Kathiawar in the extreme west, is however 
clearly attested by the Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudra- 
daman which refers to Ghandragupta’s Rashtriya or High Com- 
missioner Pushyagupta, the Vaisya, who constructed the famous 
Sd i irsana Lake. The incorporation of this country within the 
Magadhan empire implies control over Avanti or Malwa. The 
‘Muriyas’ or Mauryas are actually included by Jain writers 
am mg the successors of Palaka of Avanti 3 . Ujjain, the capital 
of the province, long remained the seat of a Maurya viceroyalty. 
In the days of Asoka, grandson of Ghandragupta, the 
Maurya frontier reached North Mysore. As the only specific 
conquest claimed by that emperor is that of Kaliriga, the exten- 
sion of the empire beyond the Tungabhadra must be due 
to one of his predecessors. Certain mediaeval inscriptions 
speak of parts of Mysore being protected by Ghandragupta . 4 
The evidence is late and too much cannot be built on it. It 
should however be noted that a number of Tamil authors, 
usu illy assigned to the early centuries of the of the Christian 
era, mike allusion to the “ Moriyar ” having crossed a mountain 
with ^low-capped peaks towering to the skies, and these allu- 
sions will be discussed elsewhere in the section on South India. 
In the third century B.G. the Chitaldrug district marked 
the furthest limit of the Maurya empire in the South. But 
posterity ignored these limitations and loved to regard the hero 

1. Alegasthjnes and Arrian p. 141. That the king of the 'Palibothri* 
(Pafaliputra) referred to in the Fragment is Chandragupta is clear from the 
description of the standing army which follows the account of the people 
and the capital city. 

2. Plutarch, op. cit. % Ch. LXII. 

3. Jacobi, Kalpasutra of Bhadrabahu , 1879, p. 7 J Parifishpaparvan, 
"Jacobi, 2nd. ed., p. xx. 

4. Rice, Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions , p. 10. 



156 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


who had overthrown the Nandas and given protection to the - 
earth harrassed by the Mlechchhas as “king over all Jambudvipa”, 
sole monarch of the country that extends “from the lord of the 
mountains ( Sailendra , i.e., the Himalayas), cooled by showers 
of the spray of the divine stream (Ganges) playing about among 
its rocks, to the shores of the Southern ocean ( dakskinarnava ) 
marked by the brilliance of gems flashing with various colours. 5 ’ 1 
These words find an echo in the statement of Plutarch quoted 
above, thus pointing to the prevalence, as early as the beginning 
of the Christian era, of the tradition of Chandragupta’s 
universal rule — the realisation of the ideal of a united India 
under an Ekardt or Chakravartin to which the Brahmanas and the 
Nikayas give eloquent expression. 

The political and military record of Chandragupta, brilliant 
as it is, does not sum up all his achievements. The great soldier 
who had liberated one part of his country from an unpopular 
dynasty, and another from foreign yoke, the architect of an em- 
pire embracing the greater part if not the whole of India, was 
as “strenuous in the arts of peace as in the arts of war.” The 
conqueror of Bhadrasala and Seleucus, master of a host of 
600,000 foot-soldiers, 30,000 cavalry, 8,000 or 9,000 elephants 2 , 
wore the velvet glove as soon as conditions permitted. Great 
though he was as a war-leader, he had no inordinate passion 
for the sanguinary revelries of the battle-field. He set out to 
accomplish the unity of India, but beyond its borders he never 
cast his covetous eyes. The statement of Arrian, who apparent- 
ly quotes from Megasthenes, that “a sense of justice, they say, 
prevented an Indian king from attempting conquest beyond 
the limits of India 3 ” perhaps reflects one of the fundamental 
principles of Mauryan foreign policy as laid down by the foun- 
der of the line and upheld by his successors. 

The conquests of Chandragupta brought India into 
closer touch with the outer world, particularly with the coun- 
tries of the Hellenic West. We have noted above that the-£lash 
of arms with the Tavana king of Western Asia was followed by 

1. Mudrdrdkshasa y Act. III., verse 19. 

2. McCrindle Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian, t 
pp. 141, 161. 

3. Ibid, p. 209. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


157 


-the establishment of an intimate relationship of a personal 
character between the ruling houses of Pataliputra and Babylon- 
Seleucia. A lady of the Seleucid family probably graced the 
royal palace of the king of Prasii, and a Greek envoy adorned 
his court. The consideration thus shown did not remain 
unreciprocated. We are informed by Athenaeus on the autho- 
rity of Phylarchus that th*e Indian king sent sundry presents 
to Seleucus which included certain powerful aphrodisiacs 1 * . 
Chandragupta’s respect for Hellenic genius is also illustrated 
by the story that he did honour to the altars of Alexander 1 
Diodorus speaks of a Greek author named Iamboulus who was 
made a slave by the Ethiopians and was later ship-wrecked 
on the shores of India and carried to the “king of Palibothra 
who had a great love for the Graecians 3 .” It is, however,* 
difficult to determine whether we have here an allusion to Chan- 
dragupta’s phil-Hellenism, or, a reference to the liking that his 
son and successor had for Greek sophists. It is interesting to 
note in this connection the presence of a considerable number 
of foreigners in the metropolitan city of Pataliputra. A spe- 
cial board of municipal officers engaged itself in looking after their 
safety and comfort. Special arrangements were also made to 
meet their judicial needs 4 . Arrian informs us that “the 
Indians do not use aliens as slaves.*’ 

In civil government Ghandragupta showed an aptitude 
which placed him far above the ordinary warrior-king. The 
selection of councillors from men respected on account of their 
high character and wisdom, an equitable system of judicial 
administration, efficient management of municipal affairs, 
development of roads and iri igation works, concessions to hus- 
bandmen and artisans, encouragement of passenger traffic and 
commerce, and perhaps also the suppression of piracy, by a 
board of admiralty, limitation of slavery, and many other 
measures to promote the prosperity and civilization of the 
people, do not support the stricture of Justin that he “changed 


I. McCrindle, Invasion p. 405. 

a. Smith, E.H.I. p. 12511. 

3. Ancient India in Classical Literature, p. 204-5. 

4. Megaitfunis and* Arrian, pp. 42, 68. 



158 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the name of freedom to that of bondage” and oppressed his 
countrymen. The judgment of the Latin historian may have 
been based on the strict discipline that he enforced, and the 
severity of the penal code which permitted mutilation. We 
shall not deal in detail with these and other matters relating 
to Maurya polity as they will receive attention in a 
later chapter. We shall content ourselves with a brief notice 
of the king and his court. 

The monarch usually resided in the famous metropolis 
of Pataliputra, known to the Greek and Latin writers as Pali* 
bothra, Palibotra and Palimbothra. 1 But on occasions he 
must have moved about from place to place like Harsha. Ap- 
pian’s reference to Androcottus as the king of the Indians, who 
'dwelt on or about the Indus, 2 suggests that the emperor might 
have used some city on or near that river as an alternative capi- 
tal or at least as a ‘camp of victory’ (jayaskandhavdra ) . The 
classical writers have left interesting accounts of the Maurya 
metropolis in the land of the Prasii. Pataliputra, we are told 
was a large and wealthy city, situated at the confluence of the 
Erannoboas (Hiranyavaha or Son) and the Ganges, stretching 
in the form of a parallelogram. Its “inhabited quarters’* 
covered an area 80 stades (9 miles 352 yards) in length and 15 
stades (1 mile 1270yards) in breadth. It was enclosed by a wooden 
wall 3 * pierced with loopholes for the discharge of arrows and 
crowned with 570 towers, apparently for keeping watch. The 
approaches to the city consisted of 64 gates. Running along the 
wall, but outside it, was a gigantic trench fed by water intro- 
duced from the neighbouring rivers, 6 plethra (200 yards) "wide 
and 30 cubits deep, constructed for the purpose of defence as 
well as reception of sewage. Sumptuous palaces adorned the 
city, which housed a numerous population, including a large 

I. The foundation of the city, as is well, known, is ascribed by Indian 
writers to Udayi, son of Ajatsatru. Curiously enough a tradition quoted 
Diodorus, presumably on the authority of Megasthenes (McCrindle, Ancisni 
India as described by MtgaAhene* and Arrian , p. 37), gives the credit to Heracles* 

a. Appian, op. cit. XI. 9. 55. 

The capital of Uttardpatha (the Indus Valley and the Borderland) in the 
Maurya period is known to have been at Taxila. It is not improbable that 
App*an ahudes to the residence of Chandragupta in this city* 

3. Ci. Patarnali IV. 3. 2. “ Pdtalifrutrakah prdsdddh Pd^aliputrakdh 

prakdra iti * 9 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 15 $ 

^ number of foreigners. The care of the metropolis was entrus- 
ted to a corporation of 30 members (astynomoi ) .* 

If Aelian is to be believed the royal palace “where the 
greatest of all the kings” of India resided was a marvel of work- 
manship with which “neither Memnonian Susa with all its 
costly splendour, nor Ekbatana with all its magnificence, can 
vie.” Parks, resonant with the melodious notes of peacocks 
and pheasants, shady groves and ever green trees “set in clumps 
and branches woven together”, some of which were brought 
from distant lands, lovely tanks abounding in tame fishes, and 
with little princes fishing, playing and swimming in them — 
were all calculated to lend charm to the scenery. 1 2 The 
majesty and beauty of the palace befitted the residence of a 
mighty monarch, and its dweller is revealed to us as a man of 
fine aesthetic sense with “a genuine joy of life and love of nature” 
not usually associated with a stern soldier. Excavations have 
brought to light the ruins of Maurya buildings at the village 
of Kumrahar, not far from the modern city of Patna. The 
wooden structures, especially fragments of timber palisade, 

* probably date back to the reign of Chandragupta. 3 

Among the inmates of the palace the consorts of the great 
king claim special attention. One of them, if we accept the 
traditional interpretation of the treaty between Chandiagupta 
and Seleucus, must have been a Seleucid princess. 4 Jain 
tradition refers to the name of another lady called Durdhara, 
represented as the mother of Binduasara. 6 Burmese legends 
do not mention the name, but assign to the mother of Chan- 
dragupta 5 s successor a Maurya lineage and the chief place 
among the queens. 6 The queens of the first Maurya are rather 

1. McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian , pp. 37, 65^ 67f. 87, 2ogf. 

2. Cf. Rock Edict II of Asoka for importation of herbs, roots and 
fruits. 

Monahan, Early History of Bengal, p. 177 ; C.H.I. , I., p. 41 if ; McGrindle, 
Ancient India in Classical Literature , p. 14 if. 

Curtius in his History of Alexander (Inv. Alex., pp. i88f) describes an Indian 
palace which is taken by some to be that of Chandragupta. But as has been 
pointed out by Monahan (op. cit. p. 178), it is not clear whether wc have here 
a description of the court of the Imperial Maury as or of some minor potentate. 

3. Monahan, op. cit. pp. 1 73I' \ Smith E.H.I. (4th edn.) p. I28n. 

4. Cf. the views of Tarn, one of the most recent wi iters on the subject, 
JpreJcs in Bactria and India, p.i74n. 

* 5. PariEshfaparvan, pp. lxxlx, 234 (VIII. 439 b 

6. Bigandet, op. cit., pi 128. 



160 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


shadowy figures, and we do not know whether like the wives of 
Chandragupta’s Hellenistic contemporaries they played any 
conspicuous part in public life, court ceremonial, and policy. 
The sons of the king find mention in a passage of Aelian 
noted above as engaged in fishing, playing and swimming in 
ponds within the palace grounds. We do not know if these 
youngsters included the famous Bindusara whose name and that 
of Simhasena among those of the sons of Ghandragupta have 
been transmitted by tradition . 1 

Besides these members of the royal family, there was a host 
of women “bought from their parents” who took care of the 
king’s person inside the palace, and even accompanied him on 
hunting expeditions . 2 

We have interesting glimpses of the private life of the king. 
He sometimes permitted himself to indulge in drinking 3 , in all 
probability at sacrifices, but never to an excess as he might fall 
a victim to foul plots of ambitious women. He did not sleep 
in day time, and even at night he had to change his bed occa- 
sionally as a precaution against attempts on his life 4 . 

The court of Ghandragupta was no less imposing than his 
palace. In later times the grammarian Patanjali could still 
recall the Chandragupta-sabha 5 . Here the king conferred with 
his councillors and assessors who excelled in wisdom, received 
ambassadors, listened to the reports of the episkopoi who inquired 
into and watched all that went on in his vast dominions, and 
administered justice to his subjects even when the time came 
for attending to his person, that is, when he was to be rubbed 
with cylinders of wood 6 . 

The prominent figures of the sabhd , who were outside the 
class of diplomats, are known more from tradition than from 
documents of unassailable fidelity. Mention is no doubt 
made in an inscription of the Rashtriya Pushyagupta, the 
Vaiiya, who was put in charge of an important province. It is, 

i. Simhasena may have been only an epithet of Bindus&ra. 

t. Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 7of. 

3. Cf. Bindusara’s letter to Antiochus Soter, asking the latter to buy 
for him sweet wine. (Itw. Alex. 4090). 

4- Meg. and An. p. 70!. 

5. I. I. IX. JL 

6. Megasthenes and Arrian f pp. 41, 7of, 85, ai7f 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 161 

however, not known definitely whether he graced at any time 
the central darbar of his sovereign. 

Tradition has preserved for us the names of several persons 
who are reputed to have attended the court of Chandragupta. 
Among these the place of honour should be given to the cele- 
brated Kautilya or Chanakya, the all-powerful chancellor of 
the Maurya empire. We Save already referred to the famous 
work on statecraft attributed to him. The contemporaneity 
of the king and his famous minister, though not proved by irre- 
fragable evidence, is rendered possible by the unanimity of 
traditions to that effect recorded in the works of Indian, Cey- 
lonese and Burmese writers of different persuasions. A second 
minister of Chandragupta, according to Buddhist legends, was 
a Jatilian, Maniyatappo by name, mentioned in the Mahd -‘ 
varhsa Jikd 1 . 

Among other personages who figured in the Sabhd mention 
may be made of envoys who came from foreign courts. Of 
these the most celebrated was Megasthenes. He brought his 
credentials from Seleucus and resided long enough in Patali- 
putra to observe things for himself. He wrote a book on India but 
unfortunately this interesting work has been lost. Only frag- 
ments have survived in the quotations of later classical writers. 

If tradition is to be believed, the court of the first Maurya, 
like that of many of his successors who wore the imperial crown 
of India, opened its portals to a third group of personages, besides 
ministers and diplomats, viz., religious teachers. Jain writers 
emphasise that in his later days Chandragupta came into inti- 
mate touch with pontiffs of their faith, the most eminent among 
whom was Bhadrabahu who is reported to have died in 170 A.V., 
i.e., 15 years after the accession of the first Maurya according 
to one reckoning 2 . He was the reputed author of the Kalpasutra 
and other works. According to the Rajavallkathe he was born 
in a Brahmana family at Kotikapura in Pundravardhana*. 

1. Tumour, op. cit. y p. xlii. 

2 . Parttishtaparvariy pp. vii, xx, 248 (IX. 112). 

3. Ind. Ant. t 1892, p. 157. 

Fleet (Ibid.) pp. i56ff : J.R.A.S. 1909, p. 2311) is sceptical about the Jain 
story. Jacobi (Parisishtaparvan, pp. vi — vii : Kalpasutra p. 22) thinks that some 
‘works, e.g., the Niruktas , attributed to the sixth Patriarch, who died in iyoA.V^ 
really proceeded from the pen of a late’ namesake. According to him the 
Samacharis .may be regarded as the work of the great Bhadrabanu. 



162 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


The king, says Strabo, left the palace usually on four occa- 
sions, viz., to lead the army in person in time of war, to 
administer justice, to offer sacrifice, and lastly, to go to the chase. 
Hunting was a favourite pastime. The king marched out of 
the palace to the accompaniment of drums and gongs, and was 
surrounded by a host of armed women who rode “some on 
chariots, some on horses and some even on elephants”. Spear- 
men were posted to protect the whole company. The king 
hunted in fenced enclosures, either from a platform in his chariot 
or from the back of an elephant 1 . 

On occasions he seems to have attended public spectacles. 
One such show is referred to by Pliny (on the authority of 
Megasthenes) in which foals of kartazons — a kind of one horned 
animal, probably the rhinoceros, — were set to fight each other 2 . 
Some of the facts mentioned by the classical writers receive 
confirmation from the inscriptions of Asoka. The predecessors 
of that king, we are told, went on vihara-yatra , an important 
feature of which was hunting. They also celebrated samajas 
which may be compared with the public spectacles of Pliny. 

In a passage of Strabo 3 reference is made to a great festival 
on the occasion of the hair-washing ceremony of the Indian 
king when the people brought him costly presents and made a 
display of their wealth. Certain writers are inclined to think 
that the Greek geographer got his information fromMcgasthenes, 
and that therefore the ceremony pertains to the court of Patali- 
putra. They further urge that the festival was borrowed from 
Persia and regard it as a proof of India’s indebtedness to Persian 
culture. It may however be pointed out that Strabo introduces 
the passage in question with the words “the following state- 
ments are made by historians ”, and makes special mention of 
Clitarchus 4 . The festival in question might, therefore, have 
been current even before Chandragupta. At any rate there is 
little warrant to connect it definitely with the court of Chandja- 
gupta at Pataliputra. 

i. Megasthenes and Arrian p. 71, 

-• Ibid. p. 58. 

3 - XV. I. 69. 

4. Author of a Lift, of Alexander , and a contemporary of that king. 

ICi. Inv.Alex. pp. 8, 10 : 399, G75) Jayaswal in J.B.O.R.S. . II., p. 98. 

Buses the reference to Clit.uchus. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 163 

W r 

The personal gifts of Chandiagupta were of a varied kind. 
Reference has been made to his interpidity and ability as a 
soldier, vigour and wisdom as an administiator, to his keen 
sense of beauty and love of nature. To these he added a wide 
intellectual curiosity and, according to traditional accounts, 

. a deep interest in religion. These were probably imbibed from 
contact with philosophers. Megasthenes tells us that it was a 
general practice among Indian kings to consult through 
messengers a class of philosophers called the Hylobioi — a section 
of the Sarmanes ( Sramanas ) — who dwelt in the woods and lived 
a life of continence. The questions regarding which rulers sought 
illumination related to the cause of things and other matters. The 
services of these philosophers were also employed for the worship 
or supplication of deities 1 . Again, at the beginning of the year, 
a great Synod of philosophers was called by kings in order that 
they might communicate useful suggestions in writing concern- 
ing the improvement of crops or the cattle or the promotion of public 
interest 2 . It will perhaps not be unreasonable to surmise that 
the Greek envoy learnt about some of these things from what 
actually came under his observation at Pataliputra. 

The king who conversed with philosophers, to benefit by their 
wise counsel, included within the range of his interest, even 
wild races. This is well illustrated by stories about the Astomi, 
who lived near the source of the Ganges and were brought to 
the court, and the Enotokoitai who died on the way as they 
refused to take food'*. These stories may not be worthy of 
credence in all their particulars. But they prove that the classical 
writers credited Chandra gupta with an amount of curiosity, not 
unworthy of a modern anthropologist. 

The reign of Chandragupta was not altogether devoid of 
literary interest. We have already seen that tradition associates 

1. McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian , pp. 102 ff. Next in rank 
to the Hylobioi were the physicians who lived indoors, and effected 
cures by regulating diet rather than by the use of medicines. Among 
philopsophcrs there were some women. Modicine received attention 
along with philosophy. 

2. Ibid., pp. 38, 83, 214. Or, according to another interpretation, 
prosperity of either fruits or living beings or concerning government. Geography of 
Strabo (Loeb), VII, p. 69. 

3* PP- 75, 80 . 



164 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the authors of the Kautiliya Arthasastra and the Jaina Kalpasutra 
with his court. The existence of a body of literature including 
Suttas , gdthds , and apaddnas in the early Maurya period is vouched 
for by the inscriptions of ASoka 1 . The reference to the story 
of Herakles and Pandaia 2 in the fragments of Megasthenes 
points to the popularity of epic tales ( akhydnas ) in some shape. 
In explaining the statement of Megasthenes that the Indians 
had no written laws Biihler suggested that the Greek envoy 
took the term Smriti used by his informants in the sense “memory” 
instead of “sacred tradition concerning law” or “the law books 3 ” 
If this view be correct then a part at least of the Smriti litera- 
ture was probably in existence in the days of Chandragupta. 
The Indika of Megasthenes, though largely based on personal 
.observations of the famous ambassador, may have drawn upon 
texts of this type 4 as well as myths and legends some of which 
had probably a place in the folk literature of the day. 

We have seen above that one of the occasions when the 
king came out of the palace was to offer sacrifice. This possibly 
implies that Chandragupta was known, to the Greeks as a 
follower of the Brahmanical religion. The celebrated Jaina 
author Hcmachandra admits that the emperor patronised 
heretical (i.e., non-Jaina) teachers ( m i thyadrikpasha tidimatabha- 
vitam 5 ). As has been noted above one cf the king’s ministers 
was a Jatilian or a follower of “a class of ascetics, so called on 
account of their matted hair 6 ”. Jatilakas figure in a list of 
“schools or corporate bodies of Wanderers, or of Hermits” men- 
tioned in early Pali Canon 7 . We do not know what was 
exactly the attitude of Chandragupta towards the Buddhists. 
If the Theragathd Commentary is to be believed he put into prison 
the father of an Elder {Thera) at the instigation of Chanakya 8 . 

1. Cf. the Bairat Edict and Pillar Edict VII. (EE. dhammapadane) 

2. Megasthenes and Arrian , pp. 163, 206. 

3. Monahan, Early History of Bengal , pp. 167 f. 

4. Compare the statement of Strabo (McCrindlc, Ancient India as 
de enbed by Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 69) : 

“They marry many wives, whom they buy from their parents, giving in 
exchange a yoke of oxen”, with Smriti texts on Arsha marriage (Gautama, IV. 
Baudhayana, I. 1 1. 4. : Manu, III. 29). See also Monahan op. cit , p, 165. 

5. Paniishtaparvan ., p. 232 (VITI. 415). 

6. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pan Proper Names t Vol. I, p. 931. 

7. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, p. 14.5 

8. Malalasekera ob . cit. pp. 846, 860 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


165 


But the person in question may have suffered for his political 
views or conduct. Jain tradition avers that towards the end of 
his life he became a convert to the religion of the Tirthankaras 
after the rival teachers had been discomfited in a synod 1 . It 
is also affirmed that when Magadha was confronted with a 
famine of twelve years Chandragupta abdicated in favour of a 
son named Simhasena and retired to Sravana-Belgola in Mysore 
with the Saint ( Sruta-kevalin ) Bhadrabahu. There he starved 
himself to death in the Jaina fashion 2 . Several inscriptions in 
Mysore dating from about 900 A.D. refer to the pair ( yugma ) 
Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta 3 . 

Bindusdra 

Chandragupta died after a reign of 24 years, probably some 
time after 301 B.G. But his work did not perish with him. 
This was no doubt due in large measure to the vigour and effi- 
ciency of the system of government which he had organised, 
and the wise policy he had followed. But the machinery of 
administration would by itself hardly have worked smoothly 
if it had not at its head a man who appreciated the ideals and 
methods of the dead king and did his best to preserve the tradi- 
tions of the illustrious founder of his line. This is not the only 
title of Bindusara, the son and successor of Chandragupta, to 
fame. If he sought to preserve unimpaired the heritage of his 
father, he also prepared in some respects the way for his great 
son. His reign is not merely a continuation of that of Chandra- 
gupffa. It also presaged in some respects the glorious epoch 
of DharmaSoka. 

Little is known about the early life of the new king. If 
Jain tradition is to be believed the name of his mother was 
Durdhara. Histoiy does not record if he was one of the young 


1. Pariihhtaparvan . (Jacobi), 2nd ed., p. Ixxix, VIII. 415 ff. 

2. Ibid., VIII. 444, Samadhimaranam prapya Chandragupto divam 
yayau : Rajavalikathe LA. 1892, p. 157. 

3. Rice, Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions, pp. 3ff. 

Fleet {I. A. 1892. pp. 156 ff : J.R.A.S. , 1909, p. 24n) regards the story as 
presented in the Rajavalikathe as “probably of quite modern invention”. 
Even the legend in its earlier form “has not the slightest historical value as 
affecting Chandragupta, the grandfather of Asoka”. 

Smith ( E.H.I. , p. 154) however thinks “that the tradition probably is true 
in its main outling.” 



166 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


princes who, according to Aelian, amused themselves while 
fishing in the unruffled sheets of water within the palace grounds 
of the greatest of all the kings of India, and learning how to sail 
their boats. In later life he showed an aptitude for government 
and a taste for culture which in all possibility were acquired in 
boyhood. The name of Amitrochades (variants, Amitrachates 
and Allitrochades, the \ \ having arisen from a loosely formed 

cursive M) 1 2 by which he is known to the Greeks suggests not a 
weakling brought up amidst the pleasures of the harem, but a 
man of steel, fit to bear the weight of a great empire and defend 
it against all enemies. Fleet takes the Greek appellation as 
meaning “Amitrakhada”, ‘devourer of enemies’, which occurs 
as an epithet of Indra. Lassen and others prefer to equate it 
with the Sanskrit Amitraghata, slayer of foes — a term that 
occurs in the Mahdbhdshya 2 of Patanjali. Amilranam hanta is a 
well known title of royalty in the Aitareya Brahmana and Amitra - 
ghdtin is frequently used in the Mahabhdrata as an epithet of 
princes and warriors. 3 

As Chandragupta, according to the evidence of Plutarch 
and Justin, had not yet mounted the throne in 326 — 25 B.G. 
and is traditionally credited with a reign of 24 years, his succes- 
sor could hardly have obtained the imperial crown before 301 
B.G. The new monarch must have ceased to rule before 270 — 
69 B.G. if the king Magas, mentioned in the rescripts of his son 
written not earlier than the twelfth regnal year, died in 258 B.C. 
Regarding the actual period of Bindusara’s rule the evidence is 
discrepant. The Puranas allot to him a period of 25 years. 
Burmese and Ceylonese chronicles raise the figure to 27 and 28 
respectively. 

Greek historians say little about the internal affairs of India 
in the days of Bindusara. Our main reliance has to be placed 
on tradition. The accounts of the Buddhist and Jain writers 
of a late date suggest that the services of the most able and astute 
of Chandragupta’ s officials were retained by his son. Anjpng 
these was Kautilya or Chanakya who is said to have had a rival 

1. Fleet J.R.A.S.. 1909., p. 24,11. 

2. III. 2. 2. 

3. AitBr. VIII. 17 : Mbh. II. 30. 19 ; 62. 8, VII. 22.16. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


167 


in Subandhu . 1 The post of chief minister (« agramatyd ) even- 
tually went to Khallataka and later on to Radhagupta 2 3 . The 
name of the principal queen was, according to the Mahavamsa 
Tika 9 Dhamma. The Asokdvaddna calls her Subhadrangi®. 

Bindusara was fortunate in having in his sons, especially 
ASoka, proconsuls of exceptional ability who did much to curb 
the impetuosity of some oShis officials in the outlying provinces. 
With their help it was not difficult for him to maintain 
unimpaired the empire he had inherited from his father and 
even to extend its boundaries. The Divyavadana tells the story 
of a revolt in Taxila, the citizens of which complained of the 
high-handedness of certain amdtyas. That there was a substra- 
tum of truth in the complaint appears not improbable in view 
of certain words of ASoka himself in the Kalinga edicts that 
refer to the measures adopted by that great emperor to check 
ministerial oppression in the provinces. When Bindusara was 
confronted with a difficult situation in Taxila, he is said to have 
commissioned Asoka with the task of restoring order. This 
the prince accomplished without much difficulty as the people 
“were not opposed to the Kumdra or even to king Bindusara” 
and had grievance only against the “wicked officials” ( dusht - 
dmatyah) . The Maurya prince is said to have pushed on to the 
Svasi rajya, evidently a mislectlon for Khasa rdjya , the realm of 
the Khasas, whose settlements extended, according to Stein, 
in a wide semicircle from Kastvar to the Vitasta (Jhelum) valley 
in the south and west of Kashmir . 4 

Some interesting details about the warlike activities of Bindu- 
sar£ and his Chancellor, the Brahman Chanakya, are recorded 
in the history of Taranatha. We are told that they destroyed 
kings and nobles of about sixteen cities and reduced to submission 
all the territory between the eastern and the western seas. In 
view of the late date of the author it is difficult to say what 


1. PariUshtaparvan, VIII. 446. ff. Cf. Kathdsaritsdgra Kathapithalam - 
taka 5th Taranga , Vers^ 115 l Ptnzer’s edition, I. p. 57. 

2. _ Divyavadana , p. 372. P.H.A.l. 4th ed. ; pp. 243a, 248. The 
Divyavadana , p. 372 refers to a council of five hundred under Bindusara. 

3. R. L. Mitra, Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal, p . 8 \ Biganded II, 
p. 128. 

4. J.A.S.B . , Extra No. 2, 1899^. ^9 



168 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


element of truth is contained in his narrative. The vanquished- 
monarches “between the eastern and the western oceans’* have 
been taken to refer to the petty sovereigns of the Peninsula. 1 
This is not a necessary inference as North India from Kathiawar 
to Bengal may also be said to extend from sea to sea, Kalinga 
on the eastern coast of the Deccan is known to have retained its 
independence till the days of Asoka: The statement of Tara- 

natha, if based on authentic tradition, need mean nothing more 
than the suppression of revolts of the type alluded to in the 
Divydvadana in the vast stretch of territory between Surashtra 
and the Gangetic delta. No Greek or Indian record of any 
early date connects the name of Bindusara Amitraghata with 
the conquest of any large tract of Peninsular India. Inscrip- 
tions of Kalinga and Mysore, which tell us so much about the 
Nandas, Chandragupta and Asoka, are silent about the second 
Maurya . 

Bindusara seems to have been perfectly pacific abroad. He 
maintained the relations of friendship with the Hellenic world 
that had been established in the later days of his illustrious 
father. Diodorus testifies to the great love of the king of Pali- 
bothra (Pataliputra), apparently an early Maurya monarch, 
for the Graecians. The policy was reciprocated by the Greek 
contemporaries of Bindusara. Strabo refers to the sending of 
Deimachos to the court of “Allitrochades, son of Sandrokottos” 2 3 . 
We lcain from Pliny that another envoy named Dionysius came 
from (Ptolemy II) Philadelphus, king of Egypt (285 — 47 B.C.) a 
The name of the monarch to whom he presented his credentials 
is not stated. The Egyptian king appears to have been a con- 
temporary of both Bindusara and Asoka. The silence of Greek 
and Latin writers regarding Asoka, when contrasted with 
repeated references to Chandragupta and Amitraghata makes 
it probable that the monarch in question was Bindusara, rather 
than his great son. Athenaeus, a Greek writer of the third 
century, tells us on the authority of Hegesander, that Amitro- 
chates, king of the Indians, wrote to Antiochus (I of Syria) asking 
that monarch to buy and send him sweet wine, dried figs and a 

i. J.B.O.R.S . , II, p. 79 ff. 

2 « II. 1.9. ; Megasthenes and Arrian, pp. 12, 19. 

3. Ibid. pp. 13, 20 J Ancient India in classical Literature, p. 108. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


169 


sophist. The Syrian king replied “we shall send you figs and 
the wine, but in Greece the laws forbid a sophist to be sold 1 ”. 

The passage, brief as it is, is important in more respects 
than one. It reveals Bindusara as a man who sought like his 
father to foster friendly contact with the outer world. The 
mention of sweet wine and figs coupled with the information 
vouchsafed by Phylarchus, Strabo and Appian, aflords a glimpse 
of the kind of pacific intercourse between India and the west, 
diplomatic, sbeial and commercial, that was ushered in by the 
treaty between Chandragupta and Seleucus. But the most 
significant fact noted by Hegesander is the demand for a Greek 
sophist. It affords proof not only of Bindusara’s taste for 
culture, but his special interest in philosophy. We may also 
take note of the story related by Diodorus of a Greek author- 
Iambulous, who was hospitably received by the king of Pali- 
bothra who had a great love for Graccians. The name of the 
king is not given. But the tale admirably fits the correspondent 
of Antiochus. Nor was the interest of the king of Pataliputra 
confined to Greeks alone. The Divyavadana has an interesting 
reference to an Ajiva-parivrajaka as a prominent figure in the 
court of the second Maurya 2 . Ajlvikas, it may be remembered, 
were special objects of the bounty of the later kings of the line 
like Asoka and Dasaratha. The intensity of Anoka’s devotion 
to matters spiritual is better understood when we remember 
the kind of men his father loved to gather round himself. It 
is said in the Seventh Pillar edict that kings in times past also 
desired that “men might be made to progress by the promotion 
of DfLamma”. Bindusara might well claim a place among 
these past rulers. From him and some of the brilliant men who 
graced his court, Asoka may well have imbibed ideas that fructi- 
fied in later times, when he came into close touch with the 
Buddhist Sangha . The reign of Bindusara may with plausi- 
bility be regarded as a prelude to that of his great son. 

Certain unhappy incidents clouded, according to tradition, 
the last days of Bindusara. He had doubtless many children, 
both sons and daughters, as we may infer from the Fifth Rock 
edict of Asoka. If reliance can be placed on late chroniclers, 

1. Inu. Alex . , p. 40911. 

2, pp. 37off ; P.H.A.1 , 4th ed., p. 26711. 



170 AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAS 

the relations among some of them were none too friendly. A£oka, 
whom we have seen taking a prominent part in the affairs of the 
state during the life-time of his father, is represented as having 
seized the throne as the outcome of a fratricidal struggle. The 
story lacks confirmation from contemporary sources and its 
verification must await future discoveries. The incidents to 
which it refers, if they really took #lace, must have helped to 
deepen in the long run the religious conviction of Aioka who 
sought to make amends for the misery he had inflicted on his 
fellow creatures in his unregenerate days. 



CHAPTER VII 


SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 

The inscriptions of Asoka at Brahmagiri and Siddhapura 
in Mysore mark clearly *the southern limit of the Mauryan 
empire which might have extended even a little further south 
to the latitude of the modern city of Madras. Kannada ins- 
criptions from Mysore and Bombay Karnatak of the tenth and 
eleventh centuries A. D. preserve faint memories of the rule of 
Nandas in those parts, but there is little tangible confirmation 
of this tradition, unless it be that the punch-marked purana coins 
found all over Deccan, South India and Ceylon are to be 
accepted as witnesses of ancient contacts between the North and 
South of which the details are now lost beyond recovery. Then 
there is the Jaina legend, late, multiform, and oft-discussed, 
of the migration of Chandragupta to Sravana Belgola when 
Bhadrabahu, the Jain patriarch, foretold a famine of twelve 
years’ duration. Chandragupta is said to have lived several 
years as a Jain monk in Sravana Belgola until his death by the 
rite of Sallekhana. The legend is improbable in itself and the 
identity of the Chandragupta it relates to is not above doubt. A 
late Pallava charter mentions an Asokavarma among the earliest 
rulers of Ranchi, and one may wonder if this is a reference to the 
Mauryan emperor. 

The most direct clues to the condition of South India and 
Ceylon in the Mauryan epoch are furnished by the references to 
the Southern kingdoms in Megasthenes, in the edicts of Asoka, 
and in the short Brahm! inscriptions in natural caverns with 
rock-cut beds scattered all over South India and found in some- 
what larger numbers in the Madura and Tinnevelly districts, 
and much more on the island of Ceylon. The oldest strata of 
extant Tamil literature cannot lay claim to equal antiquity, but 
they contain references to Nandas and Mauryas, and it will be 
necessary to review them in their contexts, particularly because 
they have been made the basis of far-reaching theories regarding 
a Mauryan invasion of South India by some writers, while 
others have seen in them a reference to the Mauryas of Kohkan. 



250 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


Lastly, the Mahdvarhsa has conserved the story of Ceylonese 
affairs in much detail, and as the chronicle is obviously worked 
up from more ancient records, and some of its details find con- 
firmation in the rock-cut Brahmi inscriptions above mentioned, 
we come to know a little more of Ceylon in this period than of 
the mainland of South India. 

The second and thirteenth Rock-Edicts of ASoka mention 
the Southern kingdoms and Ceylon ; the list in the second edict 
is fuller and comprises the names of Coda, Pandya, Satiyaputa* 
Keralaputa and Tambapanni. All these lands lay outside the 
empire of A£oka, but he was on such friendly terms with them 
that he could arrange for the medical treatment of men and* 
animals in all these lands, and for the importation and planting 
of useful medicinal herbs and roots wherever they were needed ; 
he also sent missionaries for the preaching of the Dhamma among 
the people of these countries — thus evincing his interest in the 
physical and mental well-being of his neighbouring states. Now 
the merest mention of such facts raises the presumption of a 
certain level of culture and progress in the arts of life. The 
Tamils and the Sinhalese had a settled polity and lived in well- 
ordered states, and some decades before the date of the ASoka 
inscriptions, Megasthenes had heard somewhat of the trade of the 
Sinhalese and of the polity of the Pandyan kingdom 1 . He knows 
that Ceylon is an island more productive than India of gold and 
large pearls ; a good part of the island was forest inhabited by 
wild beasts, a large breed of elephants among them. His 
quaint account of the Pandyan kingdom seems to be an idealised 
mixture of fact and fable. He says that Heracles had a daughter 
Pandaea to whom he assigned the southernmost portion of India ; 
the people in this country comprised 365 villages which bi ought 
by turns their tribute to the royal treasury every day of the year ; 
what is called tribute here seems to have been the supply of 
the provisions needed for a day for the royal household ; in the 
Silappadikaram , a work of six or seven centuries later than the 
time of Megasthenes, we hear of households of shepherds in the 
capital city of Madura supplying ghee by turns to the palace 2 . 


1. K. A. N. Sastri, Foreign Notices, p. 41. 

2. xvii, I.7. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


251 


Much discussion has taken place on the name Satiyaputa ; 
it is now generally recognised that the ending - puta signifies 
membership of a tribe as demonstrated by Liiders. Satiya 
(which occurs as satiya in Khalsi) must be sanskritized into 
satya- truth, though the formation satiya or satiya must be 
held to be unusual. And the only tribe known to early 
Tamil literature, and # answering to this description — 
‘members of the fraternity of truth* — are the KoSar who were 
well known for their unswerving fidelity to the plighted word 
in assemblies and halls of justice, as well as for their heroism in 
war 1 . The land of Kongu, modern Salem and Coimbatore 
districts roughly, is said to have been their home, and in the 
early centuries A. D. they seem to have overrun the Tulu 
country on the West coast. After the three well-known Tamil 
kingdoms, Pandya, Chola and Chera (Kerala), the tribe of the 
Kosar may be said to occupy a considerable place in the litera- 
ture of the Sangam period, and it seems highly probable tfiat 
they should find a place in the earliest enumeration of the poli- 
tical divisions of the Tamil country. It has been suggested that 
Satyamangalam in the Coimbatore district, the home of a sub- 
division of the Brhat-carana sect of theBrahmanas of South India, 
has something to do with this name Satiyaputra 2 ; there is little 
direct evidence in support of the view, and it is difficult to trace 
the antiquity of Satyamangalam or the sub-sect which bears 
its name to such remote times ; but we know of several instances 
from the mediaeval period of Brahmin clans and groups distin- 
guished for the very qualities of excellence in council-room 
and osl the field of battle for which the Ko&ir were celebrated, 
and there is no intrinsic improbability in the suggestion that 
Brahmins maintained this tradition continuously from the days 
of Bhishma and Drona of legendary fame. The Satputes among 
modern Marathas may have been emigrants to Maharastra from 
the South 3 . 

The impression of a fairly developed cultural milieu in 
the Tamil land derived from the references in Megasthenes and 
the A£oka inscriptions is confirmed by other lines of evidence. 

1. JRAS. 1923 pp. 609-13. 

2. Smith : Atoka? p. 161. 

3. JRAS. 1919 p. 584 n. 1. 



252 age of the nandas and mauryas 

Kautilya notes that the Pandya-kavata, a pearl fishery on the 
coast of the mainland on the gulf of Mannar, was noted for the 
quality of the pearls it exported, and that Madhura, the capital 
of the Pandyas, lent its name to some of the finest cotton fabrics 
of all India 1 . The Brahmi inscriptions in rock caverns in hills 
have many features in common with the similar records of 
Ceylon, and these are among the earliest monuments of the Tamil 
country to which we may assign a date with some confidence. 
The script employed has much in common with the brief ins- 
criptions from Bhattiprolu, and may well be assigned to the 
third century B. C. Though these inscriptions have not yet 
been fully elucidated, enough is known to say that they are 
mostly either brief donative records or simply the names of 
monks who once occupied the beds or caverns. The close 
resemblance between these monuments and inscriptions and 
others of the same age in Ceylon and the name Kajugumalai, 
Tamil for Grdhrakuta, of one of the places where such inscribed 
caves are found, have been held to establish an exclusively Bud- 
dhist origin for these monuments ; it is, however, premature to 
formulate any views conclusively on such questions. New 
caverns and inscriptions are still being discovered one by one — 
witness the inscribed natural cavern at Malakonda in the 
Nellore district 2 . And tradition is strong that Jainismc ame into 
South India about the same time as Buddhism if not earlier. 

While it is thus no - " possible to decide if these monuments 
are Jain or Buddhist or both in their origin, the study of the 
inscriptions made so far 3 suggests that thoughthe script employed 
in them was Brahmi of the southern variety, the language was 
Tamil still in its formative stages. The script was alphabetic, 
and already included signs for peculiarly Dravidian sounds like 
f, /, /, and n ; other peculiarities are that vocalic consonants were 
represented by two symbols first the sign for the consonant and 
then the complete vowel signs — thus yu was written as y (a) u . 
These developments and other peculiarities, not detailed Jiere, 
must have come as the result of a pretty long process of trial and 
error extending over several generations. 


1. KA. II. u. 

2. ARE. 1937-8 II. 1 

3. Proc. Third Oriental Conference, pp. 275 ff. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


253 


The exact contents of the inscriptions still remain obscure, 
but a few facts emerge from tentative studies of them. A husband- 
man (kutumbika) of Ceylon (Ila) figures as a donor ; and a 
woman, members of the Karani caste, and merchants ( vanikan ) 
figure in other inscriptions in a like capacity. These brief 
inscriptions are thus seen already to bear testimony to the support 
commanded from all classes of the laity by the ascetics who 
were engaged in the pursuit of the life divine in the solitudes of 
mountains and forests. 

We must now turn to a consideration of the references to 
the Nandas and Mauryas in early Tamil literature. They 
occur in five poems, three of which are by one writer, Mamu- 
lanar whose statements are the clearest, and one each by two 
other poets. The relative chronology of the Sangam poets is 
by no means settled, and the whole body of Sangam literature 
can only be dated within broad limits in the first three centuries 
A. D. Thus the mention of Nandas and Mauryas in these poems 
is by no means a reference to contemporary facts, but to events 
preserved in the memory of people or in other ways of which 
we have no knowledge now. It may even be doubted if 
two poets whose references are not half as intelligible as those 
of Mamulanar were really referring to the Mauryas of history 
or some aspects of an obscure mythology ; that they both refer to 
the same fact or myt his clear beyond doubt ; the expressions 
used are identical, though one of them Kallil Attiraiyanar 1 , 
gives more details than the other — Parangorranar 2 . The fuller 
account refers to the Moriyar, their victorious lance, their sky- 
scpaping umbrella, and their chariots bearing banners ; it then 
states that their strong bright-rayed wheel cut across a 
mountain at the end of the earth and rolled past it and past the 
broad disc of the sun fixed near the pass so made. The com- 
mentator ekes out the sense by some additions of his own ; he 
says that the Moriyar ruled the whole world, and that the 
mountain cut across by their discus was the silver-mountain 
which separated this earth from another world, and that the 
sun’s disc was fixed near the pass by the gods. He also adds 
that the Moriyar were the Chakravala emperors or Vidyadharas 

1. Puram 175. 

2. Aham 69. 



254 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

and Nagas, an interpretation which would suit the alternative 
reading ‘Oriyar’ much better than the Moriyar, the Mauryas 
of history. But stress need not be laid on the alternative read- 
ing, because, the cutting of the hill and the rolling of the wheel 
are features that, as we shall see, recur in the unmistakable 
references of Mamulanar to the Mauryan emperors. It is 
clear at any rate, that if these two other poets were also thinking 
of the Mauryas, they had but vague notions about them and their 
achievements, and classed them with the superhuman beings 
whose deeds fill the annals of universal history for many aeons 
after the dawn of creation according to the Puranic lore of India. 

Mamulanar had a better knowledge of the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, and his statements are much more precise and credible 
though he too retains the quasi-legendary feature which is all 
that the two other poets recorded about the Mauryas. He men- 
tions the Nandas and the enormous treasure accumulated by them 
in a telling context. ‘What is it’, asks a love-lorn lady, ‘that 
has attracted my lover better than my charms?’ ; and among the 
alternatives postulated occurs this 1 : ‘Is it the treasure accumu- 
lated in the prosperous Pataliputra and hidden in the waters 
of the Ganges by the Nandas of great renown, victorious in war?’ 
Here is much that we know of the Nandas from other sources, 
and one fact that is new — the manner in which they kept the 
treasure hidden under the waters of the Ganges, which reminds 
one of a similar practice attributed to the Maharajas 
of Zabag by Arab travellers of the eighth century A. D. Mamu- 
lanar ’s mention of the Mauryas is accompanied by equally 
clear and precise indications of historical events. There are 
two passages for consideration, both from the Ahananuru . 
One 2 starts by saying that the lover would not stay 
behind even if he got the wealth of the Nanda for 
doing so — a second reference to this topic by this poet ; it 
then proceeds to say that Kosar of the victorious banner 
started operations against their foes and gained victories agaiAst 
several ; but as Mohur did not submit to them, the Moriyas 
who had a large army led an expedition ; and it adds that the 
Mdriyar’s chariots rolled across a cutting made in the mountain 

1 . Aham 265. 

2. Aham 251. 



SOUTH INDIA WD CEYLON 


255 


for that purpose. Here is perhaps some fresh support for the 
identification proposed above of the KoSar with the Satiyaputa ; 
but what is more important, the Mauryan imperial power was 
so friendly to the Kosar as to be ready to go to their help in 
their wars against their enemies ; this active intervention in the 
politics of the Tamil country brings to our view a phase of 
Mauryan imperialism that has so far escaped notice. The last 
reference in Mamulanar 1 adds some more particulars; it says 
that when the Moriyar turned to the south, the war-like Vadu- 
gar preceded them as their van, and the mountain which was 
cut to make a way for the chariots on this occasion is described 
as the large snow-mountain reaching up to the skies — obviously 
the Himalayas. This last detail betrays that Mamulanar too 
is by no means free from the legendary notion about Mauryas 
that was the entire stock-in-trade of the two other poets; only he 
manages to convey to us some facts besides the legend. Vadu- 
gar is a rather vague term in Tamil literature ; it means literally 
northerners, and was generally applied to the Kannada-Telugu 
peoples of Southern and Eastern Deccan together. These 
peoples were included in the Mauryan empire, and it is proba- 
ble that in a move further south they were called upon to take 
the lead. 

One last reference to the Nandas is simple and clear ; 
it occurs in Kurundogai 2 and refers to the abundance of gold 
in Pataliputra besides mentioning elephants bathing in the Son 
river. 

These Tamil texts, separated from the age of the Mauryas 
by' about three to five centuries, thus indicate to us that the 
Tamil states were within the sphere of Mauryan influence, if we 
may use a convenient modern expression for the relation, and 
that at least on one occasion the Mauryas went to the assistance 
of the Kosar to enable them to subdue the rebellious chieftain 
of Mohur ; the Vadugar took a hand in this expedition. 

And now one word on the legendary feature of the moun- 
tain being cut to make way for the wheel to roll across. This 
is obviously an echo of the mythology centring round the concept 
of the Chakravartin, the universal emperor, one of whose para- 

1. ib. 281. 

2. Poem no. 75. 



256 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


phernalia ( ratnas ) is the chakra (discus) ; this chakra leads the 
way in his digvijaya and has many mysterious properties, 
and A$oka was counted as one of such emperors as the 
Mahdvamsa and other Buddhist books show. It is significant 
that in most of the references to the wheel cited above, it is not 
clear if the wheel of the war-chariots, or the symbol of empire 
is meant, though once Mamulanar definitely says it was the 
former. This feature in any event cannot be treated as history. 

Ceylon, like South India, steps into the light of history 
with its notice by Megasthenes and by the Asoka inscriptions — 
both under the name Tambapanni which becomes Taprabane 
with the Greek writer. The opening chapters of the Mahdvamsa 
contain much edifying legend about the Buddha’s visits to the 
island, the arrival of Vijaya, and his encounter with Kuvanna 
(Kuveni in other accounts), and his marriage with a princess 
from the Panqlya country. Modern research has shown that the 
primitive population of the island were the Vaeddas, who were 
hunters living in forests and natural rock-dwellings ; the first 
immigrants into the island were probably people from the Mala- 
bar coasts who called themselves Nagas and gave the name 
Nagadvipa to the northern section of the island, the ancestors 
of the modern Nayars of Malabar — Naya being but the Prakrit 
form of the word Naga. The Vijaya legend, the Sinhalese 
language, and the Brahml script of the earliest inscriptions, are 
clear proofs of the advent of North Indian influences directly 
by sea, and the story of the marriage of Vijaya with a Pandyan 
princess represents perhaps the growth of contact between 
Ceylon and South India after they had both been Aryanized, 
each in its own way. Sinhalese memory goes back to a time 
prior to the advent of Vijaya when trading vessels coming in 
search of local products like ivory, wax, incense, pearls and gems, 
were sometimes wrecked on the shores of Ceylon. Much of 
this pre-history is necessarily speculative, and there can be no 
certainty about details. By the beginning of the Mauryan 
period in India, however, we may be certain that important 
settlements had been established in different parts of Ceylon 
and a fairly high degree of culture attained. The northern 
plain where was located Anuradhapura, the capital city, Rohana 
in the South-east, and Kalyani in the South-west were perhaps 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


257 


the most notable divisions in this period, and they might have 
started as independent colonies established by separate groups 
of settlers from the different parts of the mainland, being the 
first fruits, as it were, of the overflow beyond the limits of India 
proper and across the sea of the great movement of Aryan expan- 
sion begun in Vedic times. Agriculture was practised and rice 
grown in considerable quantity to meet the necessities of a 
growing population ; artificial irrigation by means of dams 
thrown across rivers and canals taking off from them had 
come into vogue ; and the art of building with large-sized 
burnt bricks was known. 

According to the Mahavamsa , the period covered by this 
volume comprised in the history of Ceylon the reigns of Pandu- 
kabhaya (B.C. 377-307), Mutasiva (307-247), Devanampiya 
Tissa (247-207) and Uttiya (207-197). The chronology 
of the first two reigns is suspect, as there is good reason to believe 
that their duration has been unduly lengthened in order to make 
Vijaya and the Buddha contemporaries 1 . The account of 
Pandukabhaya’s reign in the Mahavamsa 2 is much of it palpable 
legend ; but from it we may conclude generally that the king 
had to fight some of his collateral relations ruling in different 
parts of the island to impose his authority on those areas, that he 
made Anuradhapura the capital of the newly united kingdom, 
and that his reign witnessed decided advancement in the evolu- 
tion of Sinhalese culture by the blending of the indigenous 
Vaeda (Yakkha) elements with the Indo-Aryan elements which 
had entered the island with Vijaya and his followers. The 
capital city was well laid out with tanks, parks, and separate 
quarters for the different elements in the population including 
yonas, and among the recipients of the king’s benefactions were 
Nirgranthas, Ajivakas and Brahmanas, besides various other 
heretical sects. Of the reign of Mutasiva the chronicle 
has nothing to say except that he laid out the beau- 
tiful garden called mahamegha-vana and that he ruled the 
fair land of Lanka from the splendid city of Anur&dhapura. 
He had ten sons ‘each thoughtful , of the others’ welfare’ 

1. Geiger MV. (Tr.) p. xxi. 

2. ib. ch. x. 



258 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and two daughters. The second son Devanampiya Tissa 
was foremost among the brothers in virtue and intelligence, 
and succeeded his father. His friendly relations with the 
Mauryan emperor Atoka, the exchanges of embassies and 
presents between them, the introduction of Buddhism into 
Ceylon by Mahinda and the fetching of a branch of the bodhi- 
tree have been narrated in our account of Atoka’s reign. For 
the rest, there is good reason to believe that the development 
of culture by the reconciliation of the indigenous and exotic 
elements, by the growth of cities and the laying out of roads and 
extension of cultivation was going on apace. The Brahmi 
inscriptions found by the score in practically all the caverns on 
every hill in the island and clearly belonging to the short period 
between the middle of the third century B. C. and the beginning 
of the first, attest the large numbers of Buddhist monks, votaries 
of the new sect introduced by Mahinda, and their peaceful 
occupation of these dwellings : but the primitive religious 
practices of the Vaedas seem to have been kept, up side by side 
with other forms of worship. It is quite probable that some 
of the dagobas and viharas now in ruins, particularly those in 
Anuradhapura, may in their origin date back to the age of 
Tissa 1 and his successors, and that the style of these structures 
was borrowed from India along with Buddhism. The greeting 
of Mahinda by queen Anula and five hundred (i.e. many) other 
women*, and their subsequent ordination after the arrival of 
Sanghamitta 3 , as also some references to women in the cave 
inscriptions show that women enjoyed a considerable 
amount of freedom and influence in this early Sinhalese 
society. The earliest coins of Ceylon were like those of 
India, pur anas or salakas , pieces of silver or copper of varying 
shapes, generally circular or oblong with a corner or 
corners chipped in some specimens and bearing punch marks 
on one side. Silver and copper are not products of Ceylon, 
and the metals, if not the coins themselves, must have been 
imported from India. A fragment of an admirably engraved 
thin cornelian showingthe figure of a king sitting upon an orna- 

1. MV. ch. xx. 

2. ib. xv 1 8. 

3. ib, xix 65. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 259 

mental chair ‘which can be no other than a royal throne* was 
found in 1884 among the debris left round the Yatthala dagoba 
at Tissa ; and this is considered by Parker a specimen of early 
North Indian work under strong Greek influence affording 
proof of the intercourse between Tissa and Aioka recorded in 
the Makavamsa ; he even suggests that the seated figure on the 
cornelian may be Asoka himself 1 . 

Tissa had no son and was succeeded by his brother Uttiya. 
During his reign Mahinda and Sanghamitta attained nirvana 
and their remains were disposed of with all honours, and stupas 
erected in their memory. 


x. Ane % Ceylon , pp. 494-8. 



CHAPTER VIII 

INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 

Introductory 

The outstanding achievement of Mahapadma Nanda, the 
founder of the Nanda dynasty, was the completion of the political 
unity of Northern India, excluding the Indus basin, but includ- 
ing the Malwa tableland, the Kalinga seaboard and probably 
also a good part of the Deccan. Probably because of his low 
birth, he was led to make a clean sweep of the principal Ksha- 
triya ruling families of his time and make himself, in the expres- 
sive language of the Puranas, ‘the sole ruler of the earth.’ The 
consequence of this absorption of the petty States of Northern 
India into a large empire could not but have been highly bene- 
ficial to the cause of material progress. Northern India, by 
virtue of its fertile soil and favourable climate, its magnificent 
waterways and its extensive coastline must have from the first 
enjoyed exceptional opportunities provided by nature for eco- 
nomic prosperity. Under the strong and centralised adminis- 
tration of the Nandas, trade and industry could not but advance 
greatly. In particular, the needs of their exceptionally wealthy 
court, to which later traditions bear witness 1 and their organised 
administration heralding that of the Mauryas must have given 
a great impetus to industrial and commercial effort. The 
direct interest of the Nandas in commercial development is 
perhaps indicated by their invention of a new standard measure 
referred to in th eKdsika commentary 2 as well as their standardisa- 
tion of the old silver coinage to be described later on. 

Beyond the limits of the Nanda dominions lay the Indus 
basin conquered long before by the Achaemenids, but divided 
at this period into a group of small kingdoms and republics. 
Politically as disorganised as was MadhyadeSa at the time of the 
Buddha more than a century earlier, it stood now at a high level 


1. Cf. Mudra-rikshasa Act iii, v. 37 referring to the Nandas as navanavatL 
Jata-draiyakofisvardh . 

2. On Pacini ii. 4. 21. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 261 

of economic prosperity. The accounts of Alexander’s officers 
inform us not only of numbers of rich and populous cities located 
in the land of the Five Rivers, but also of the wealth of the royal 
courts and republics. The devastating effects of Alexander’s 
invasion could not but have affected disastrously the economic 
condition of the territories subdued by his arms and none of his 
measures for laying the foundation of an extensive commerce 
between India and the Hellenistic world took root immediately. 

The liberation of North-western India by Chandragupta 
Maurya, preceded or followed in a short time by his deposition 
of the last king of the Nanda line, and the series of his subse- 
quent victories laid the foundation of an empire extending 
from the Bay of Bengal to the Afghan highlands and from the* 
Himalayas to the Narmada and beyond. The military successes 
of Bindusara and ASoka helped not only to complete and conso- 
lidate the newly built empire, but extended its limits till it 
abutted on the Tamil Kingdoms of the far south. For three 
generations from the time of the founder the strong arm of the 
Mauryas ensured internal security and immunity from foreign 
aggression. ASoka’s vigorous propaganda further paved the 
way for the spread of Indian culture to distant Ceylon and the 
Hellenistic states almost to their furthest limits. It is not 
unreasonable to suppose that these favourable conditions were 
attended with a phenomenal development of industry as well 
as inland and foreign trade of the empire under Maurya rule. 

. Industry 

The enormous advance of Indian industries which has just 
been postulated for the Nanda and Maurya times was rendered 
possible by the abundance of India’s agricultural and mineral 
resources to which the Greek writers allude with evident admira- 
tion. ‘India,* says Diodorus (ii. 35-7) quoting from Megas- 
thenes, ‘has many huge mountains which abound in fruit trees 
of every kind and many vast plains of great fertility — more or 
less beautiful, but all alike intersected by a multitude of rivers 
. . . .And while the soil bears on its surface all kinds of fruits, 
^t has also underground numerous veins of all sorts of metals, 
for it contains much gold and silver and copper and iron in no 
small quantity and even tin and other metals India again 



262 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


possesses many rivers both large and navigable 1 . 5 A no less 
important factor of economic progress noted likewise by the 
observant Greeks was the extraordinary skill of the Indian 
craftsman which has been his heritage down to our own times. 
Thus, to continue the quotation from Diodorus given above, 
‘The inhabitants are found to l}e well skilled in the arts. 5 
Concrete instances of the skill of the Indian craftsmen are found 
in the Geography of Strabo (xv. 1 .67) from information supplied 
by Nearchus 2 . v 

One of the oldest Indian industries is that of textile manu- 
facture. The technical terms for warp ( tantu ) and woof ( otu ) 
are found in the Rigveda and Atharva-veda, while the shuttle 
(tasara) and the loom ( veman ) are mentioned in the Tajus - sam - 
hita and other texts 3 . Among the textile industries, that of cotton 
manufacture held the first place. It found an excellent market 
at home in the habits of the people whose immemorial dress 
consisting of a pair of cotton garments is referred to alike in the 
early Buddhist texts and in the writings of the Greek observers 4 . 
No wonder then that among the presents offered by the Malavas 
and their allies to the victorious Alexander was included a large 
quantity of cotton cloth. While the cotton industry evidently 
was spread over the whole land, certain centres had early become 
famous for the excellence of their fabrics. The early Buddhist 
texts speak with high praise of Benares cloth ( Kasikuttama or 
Kdsika-vattha) as well as the cloth of the Sivi country ( Siveyyaka 
or Siveyyaka ) 6 . We have a fuller list in Kautilya’s Arthasastra 
(ii. 11) where Madhura (capital of the Pandya country), 
Aparanta (Konkan on the western coast), Kasi, Vanga, Vatsa 
(Kauiambi region), and Mahisa are said to produce the best 


1. According to the above account, gold, silver, copper and iron to a large 
extent along with tin and other metals to a much less degree were mined from 
India itself. Among the five sources of gold and five of silver specified in the 
Arthaidstra (ii. 13), however, Gautfa alone can be definitely identified as belong- 
ing to India. 

2. Thus we are told that Indian craftsmen, seeing sponges used for the 
first time by the Macedonians, immediately manufactured imitations of them 
with fine thread and wool. They also quickly learnt to make Greek articles 
such as the scrapers and oil flasks used by the athletes. 

3. See Vedic Index , j.d. 

4. See P. T. S. Dictionary, s. v. kappdsa, and Arrian’s Indica , ch. xvi. 

5. Cf. Afiguttara Nikdya i. 248 : Vinaya Pitaka i. 278, 280 : Jatakas iv. 401 : 

vi. 51 etc. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


263 


cotton fabrics (kdrpdsika). In the same context, the Arthaidstra 
specifically mentions three varieties of dukula (an unidentified 
species of fibrous fabric) distinguished by their place of origin 
and their colour. These were the products of Vanga (East 
Bengal), Pundra (North Bengal) and Suvarnakudya (in Kama- 
rupa). They were respectively white, dark and coloured like 
the rising sun. In the same connection, the Arthaidstra mentions 
linen fabrics (kshauma) of Ka§i as well as Pundra. Kautilya 
also refers to the fabrics produced in Magadha, Pundra and 
Suvarnakudya. Linen fabrics ( khoma ) are also referred to in 
the early Buddhist literature 1 . 

It will be noticed from the above that Bengal, Kamarupa 
and Benares were the regions noted thus early as centres of the 
textile industry. The technical perfection of the industry is 
well illustrated by the fact that the Arthaidstra distinguishes 
varieties of dukula and kshauma according to their colour and 
process of manufacture, while those of patrornd are distinguished 
according to their material and colour. 

Coming to costlier textiles, we find references to silk cloth 
(koseya and koseyya-pavara ) in the Pali canonical works and the 
Jdtakas 2 . Kautilya (ii. 11) also mentions kauieya along with 
china-patta china-bhumija (Chinese fabric of Chinese manufac- 
ture). This last passage points to the fact that silks of Chinese 
origin competed at this time with the home-made product. 

On the other hand, the manufacture of wool was an old and 
indigenous industry. The fame of the fine wool of Gandhari 
goes Jjack to the Rigveda which also knows a woollen garment 
called iamulya 3 . The woollen fabrics of Gandhara along with 
those of Kotumbara or Kodumbara — a region connected by 
Jean Przyluski 4 with the Audumbaras of the Punjab — are men- 
tioned with high praise in the Jdtakas 5 . Kautilya, while silent 
about Gandhara, mentions by name (ii. 11) the woollen goods 
of Nepal called bhingist or apasdraka . These are said to be formed 
of eight pieces, dark in colour and rain-proof. What advance 

i. See P. T. S. Diet ., s. y. khoma . 

s. Ibid., i.y. 

3. See Vedic Index , s.v., for references. 

4. Un ancien people de P enjab ; Les Udumbara in J. As 1926, pp. 25-36. 

5- See Jat. vi. 500. 



264 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the manufacture of this material had attained during the period 
of the Arthasastra is proved by the fact that Kautilya specifies 
three varieties of fabrics of sheep’s wool distinguished by colour, 
four varieties distinguished by their manufacturing process, and 
no less than ten varieties distinguished by their use for human 
beings and for animals. The qualities of the best wool are 
carefully noted by the author in the same connection. The 
Arthasastra also distinguishes in the same context six kinds of 
fabrics manufactured from the hair of wild animals, and differing 
in their uses and qualities. 

Before closing the subject of textile manufacture, we may 
mention a few of its finer forms known at that period. The 
use of embroidered cloth ( pesas ) is as old as the JRigvcda, its manu- 
facture according to a Taj us Samhitd text being normally carried 
on by women 1 . The Jatakas refer to golden turbans used by 
kings and golden trappings for the use of State elephants 2 . In 
the times of the Nandas and the Mauryas, gold-embroidered 
garments were worn by Indians evidently of the richer class. 
This is borne out by the testimony of Strabo, who says (xv. 1 .54). 
‘They (the Indians) wear apparel embroidered with gold and 
use ornaments set with precious stones and gay-coloured linen 
garments 3 .’ These gorgeous dresses were specially displayed 
during festive occasions. Describing the festive processions 
of the Indians, Strabo (xv.l. 69) mentions not only the train of 
elephants adorned with gold and silver, but also the attendants 
wearing ‘garments embroidered and inter-woven with gold.* 
Curtius, again, in the course of his description of the Indian 
king’s public appearance, says that the king is ‘iobcd in fine 
muslin embroidered with purple and gold.’ 

Wood-work is a very old Indian industry. Reference to the 
carpenter ( takshan or tashtri) and his tools may be traced back 
to the Rigveda 4 . The art of the carpenter had attained a high 
skill by the time of the Pali canonical and other texts. There 

1. See Vedic Index , s.v. pesos. 

2 . Jdt. iv 404 : v. 322. . > 

3. Somewhat different is McCrindle’s translation which is as follows ; 
{Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian , Calcutta ed. } p. 69) : — 
•Their robes are worked in gold and ornamented with precious stones and N 
they wear also flowered garments made of the finest muslin.* 

4. See Vedic Index , s.v. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 265 

we find the vaddhaki engaged in all kinds of wood-work including 
ship-building, the making of carts and chariots, the manufac- 
ture of machines and house-building 1 . To the absolute perfec- 
tion of the craft in Maurya times we have a surviving testimony 
in the shape of the mysterious wooden platforms that have been 
recently dug up in the vicinity of Patna 2 . The excellent sculp- 
ture of ASoka’s time is admittedly modelled upon the much 
older art of the indigenous craftsmen in wood and ivory. 

Reference has just been made to the Indian ivory-worker. 
The Indians have excelled in ivory-work from early times down 
to the present. Specially, in the Jatakas we are introduced to 
various ornamental and useful articles prepared from this costly 
material 3 . The use of ivory ear-rings is noted by Arrian 
( Indica xvi) as a characteristic of very wealthy Indians. 

Another industry in which Indians have distinguished them- 
selves in ancient and mediaeval as in modern times is stone- 
cutting. In the Jatakas the stone-cutter (pasana-kottaka) is 
found engaged in building houses with the materials of a ruined 
village, in hollowing a cavity in a block of the purest crystal 
and so forth 4 5 . The wonderful stone pillars of Asoka’s reign are 
standing examples of the unsurpassed skill of the stone-cutters 
of the age. ‘The art of polishing hard stone,’ as Vincent Smith 
observes 6 , ‘was carried to such perfection that it is said to have 
become a lost art beyond modern powers.’ The ‘Mauryan 
polish’ is seen at its best in the walls of the Barabar caves of the 
hardest gneiss rock, which are burnished like glass mirrors. 

The use of deer and goat skins for clothing is as old as the 
jR igveda 6 . The leather-worker and his handiwork of various 
kinds are referred to in the early Buddhist literature 7 . Kautilya’s 

1. See P. T. S. Diet., s.v. vaddhaki. : also cf. Jdt. ii. 18 (for house-building) : 
v. 159 : vi. 427 (for ship-building) : iv. 207 (for carts and chariots) : v. 242 
(for machines). 

2. Ann. Rep. Arch. Surv. Ind., 1912-13, pp. 53 flf. 

3. See P. T. S Diet., s.v. danta cf. Jdt. v. 302 (for ivory handle of a glass 
mirror) : vi. 223 (for an ivory chariot). 

4. Jdt , I, 470. 

5. Oxford History of India, Part I, 2nd ed., p. 113. 

6. See Ve die Index, s.v. ajina. 

7. See P. T S Diet., s.v. upahand and chamma : cf. also Jdt. ii. 153 (for 
traps of leather) : iii. 79 (for single soled shoes) : iii. 1 16 and vi. 431 (for leather 
sacks) : vi. 454 (for leather shield), etc. 



266 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Arthasastra (ii. 11) shows knowledge of a wide variety of 
skins ( charma ) distinguished by their place of origin as well as 
colour and size. It is interesting to observe that the principal 
varieties are said to be products of various Himalayan regions. 
In the description of the Indian dress by Arrian ( Indica xvi), 
to which we have referred above, we have an incidental allusion 
to the skill of the Indian leather-worker. *The Indians, 5 we 
are told, ‘wear shoes made of white leather and these are ela- 
borately trimmed, while the soles are variegated. 5 

India has always been famous for its trees producing fragrant 
wood. Several varieties such as chandana , again and tagara are 
mentioned in the Pali canonical texts and the Jatakas 1 . Kau- 
tilya (ii. 11) mentions five kinds of fragrant wood, viz chandana 
aguru , taila-parnika, bhadrasri , and kdleyaka. These are further 
distinguished according to their place of origin, colour, fragrance 
and so forth. To judge from the commentator’s identification, 
many of these varieties came from Kamarupa, while other kinds 
came from Ceylon, the Himalayan region and the like. 

The use of metals may be traced back to the Indus people of 
pre-historic times. The Vedic Indians were acquainted with 
a large variety of metals, viz • gold ( chandra , jatarupa, hiranya, 
suvarna, harita ), silver ( rajata ), iron ( krishnayasa , syama), copper 
( lohildyasa , loha), lead (jfra) and tin ( trapu ). Mention is also made 
of gold and silver ornaments as well as ordinary metalware 2 . 
The Jdtakas refer not only to numerous metals including brass 
and bronze, but also to the manufacture of ornaments from 
precious metals and that of domestic and agricultural implements 
from baser ones 3 . Kautilya (ii. 12) specifies the characteristics 
of various metallic ores including gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, 
iron and vaikrintaka (unidentified). What is more, he refers to 
technical sciences dealing with veins of ore and metals, to 
the art of smelting metals and so forth 4 . In this connection, refer- 
ence is made to the manufacture of copper, lead, tin, bronze, 


i. See P. T. S. Diet ., s.v. f 

a. See Vedic Index . s.v., and ibid, English index, s.t. metals and ornaments 
for references. 

3. See Jdt. L 351 : iv. 60, 85, 296 etc. 

4. Sydbardhatuiastra-rasa-paka-maniraga in the original, rendered as above 
by Meyer. The translation of Shamasastry is inaccurate. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


267 


brass, iron and other wares. In the following chapters (ii. 13 
and 14), Kautilya deals with the characteristic qualities of 
several varieties of gold and silver together with the methods of 
their testing and purification, as well as the technical processes 
of their manufacture. These striking references may be taken 
effectually to dispose of the strange verdict of a Greek writer 
who, while describing the richness of the country in gold and 
silver mines, observes : ‘Nevertheless the Indians, inexperienced 
in the art of mining and smelting, do not even know their own 
resources, but set about their business in too primitive a 
way 1 / 

As regards the period of the Nandas and the Mauryas, we 
have positive evidence testifying to the skill of the Indian metal 
worker. From this standpoint the bare observation of Dio- 
dorus (ii. 36) based no doubt on Megasthenes, viz • that the 
Indians employed their rich store of metals in manufacturing 
articles of use and ornaments is not of much moment. More 
significant is the fact that among the presents offered to 
Alexander by the Malavas and their allies were included a 
hundred talents of ‘white iron’ ( ferrum candidum). This has been 
generally taken to mean steel, although Cunningham 2 identified 
it with nickel. Of the copper work of the Maurya times, an 
excellent specimen has survived in the shape of a solid copper 
bolt which was found in the Asokan pillar at Rampurva and was 
evidently used for fixing the colossal lion -capital to the pillar 
itself 3 . The Greek contemporary accounts also testify to the 
precious metal-work used in the royal court. In Strabo’s 
description (xv. 1.69) of the Indian festive processions to which 
we have referred above, we read how the great host of royal 
attendants carried ‘vessels of gold such as large basins and 
goblets six feet in breadth,’ as well as ‘drinking cups and lavers 
all made of Indian copper and set many of them with precious 
stones, — emeralds, beryls, and Indian garnets.’ Similarly 
Curtius, in describing the king’s public appearance, states how 
the royal attendants ‘carry in their hands silver censers’, while 

i. Strabo xv. z .3 1 . 

*. Afum. Ckron.y xiii (1873), pp. 188 ff. 

3. For a description of the copper-bolt with an accompanying photo- 
graph, see Panchanan Neogi, Copper in Ancient India . pp. 18-20. 



268 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


the king himself 'lolls in a golden palanquin furnished with 
pearls which dangle all around it. 9 

The use of jewellery may be traced back to the Indus peoples 
of prehistoric times. The profession of a jeweller ( manikara ) 
is referred to in the Vdjasaneyi - Samhi td and the Taittiriya Brah- 
ma na 1 . Coming to post-Vedic tim^s, we find the Jdtakas refer- 
ring to pearls, crystals and jewels as well as the art of cutting 
and polishing gems for ornaments 2 . Kautilya (ii. 11) 
shows acquaintance with pearls ( muktika ), jewels ( mani), 
diamonds ( vajra ) and corals ( pravdla ) of Indian as well 
as foreign origin. What is more, he carefully notes the 
characteristics of good and bad pearls as well as the different 
colours and qualities of rubies, beryls, sapphires, crystals, dia- 
monds and corals. The skill of the manufacturing jeweller 
is indicated by the fact that Kautilya mentions no less that five 
varieties of pearl necklaces ( yashti ) which are sub-divided into 
other classes. In a postscript, he adds that the same varieties 
apply to the ornaments for the head, arms, feet and waist. 
Coming definitely to the Nanda-Maurya times we find that 
the Indian love of ornaments is pointedly referred to by a 
Greek writer*. 

We have not space enough to describe the other industries 
to which the Jdtakas and other records of this period bear wit- 
ness, such as the manufacture of dyes, gums, drugs and perfumes, 
as well as that of pottery. But a word may be said about the 
manufacture of implements and weapons of war. Offensive 
and defensive weapons like the bow and the arrow, the sword 
and the spear, the helmet and the coat of mail are known from 
Vedic times 4 . Later in the Arthasdstra (ii. 18), we find mention 
of bows and arrows made of different materials along with 
different kinds of swords, axes, spears and the like. The 
ArthaSdstra also refers to two classes of war machines, viz. im- 
movable {sthitayantrdni) and movable (chala-yantrdni) , the first 
consisting of ten and the second of seventeen named varieties. 
The Greek accounts relating specifically to the Nanda-Maurya 

i. See Vedic Index, s.v. 

a. Cf. Jdt. i. 351, 479 : ii. 6 : iv. 60, 85, 296 : vi. 117-20, 279. 

3. See Strabo xv, 1. 

4. See Vedic Index , English index, s.v. war for references. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 269 

times bear out these observations. According to Arrian ( Indica 
xvi), the Indian foot-soldiers were armed with bows and javelins 
as well as broad-bladed swords, while the horsemen carried two 
lances. In the list of presents offered by the Malavas and their 
allies to Alexander were included 1050 (or, according to another 
account, 500) four-horsed chariots and 1000 bucklers. 

Trade 

By the time of the early Buddhist literature the Indians had 
developed an extensive system of inland trade which was borne 
along well-known trade-routes. These routes were marked by 
convenient stages and served to link up the most distant parts 
of the country with one another. Among them we may mention 
specifically the following : — 

1. East to west. This most important route ran principally 
along the great rivers. From Champa boats plied up 
to Benares, the great industrial and trading centre of 
those times. From Benares they led up the Ganges as 
far as Sahajati and up the Jumna as far as Kausambi. 
Further west the route led by land-tracts to Sindhu, 
famous for its breed of horses and Sauvira (‘Sophir* or 
‘Ophir’ of the Old Testament ?). 

2. North to south-west. This route extended from Sra- 
vasti, the famous capital of Kosala, to Pratishthana on 
the Godavari and the stations lying on it in the reverse 
direction included Ujjayini, Vidisa and Kausambi. 

3. North to south-east. Along this route which ran from 
SravastI to Rajagriha lay a number of stations including 
Kapilavastu, VaiSali, Pataliputra and Nalanda. 

4. North-west route, also referred to by Panini 1 . It 
stretched along the land of the Five Rivers to the great 
highways of Central and Western Asia. 

We also hear of merchants travelling from Kashmir and 
Gandhara to Videha, from Benares to Ujjayini, from Magadha 
to Sauvira and so forth 2 . What vast wealth accrued from this 
system of inland trade is illustrated by references to merchant 


i. V. 1. 1 7 : — Uttar apathendhttam ca. 

a. Cf. Jdt . ii. 248 : iii. 365 : Vimdnavatthu commentary 370 etc. 



270 age of the nandas and mauryas 

princes like Anathapindika of Sravasti whose trading connec- 
tions extended to Rajagriha on the one side and Ka§I on the 
other. Nevertheless, the path of the trader was anything but 
easy. Not only were the roads (specially through the forests) 
infested by robbers against whom the merchants protected 
themselves by hiring the services of forest-guards, but the 
deserts had to be crossed at night with the help of land-pilots 
( thala-niydmaka ) guiding the caravan by the stars. Associated 
with the wilderness was a host of real and imaginary dangers 
viz., drought, famine, wild beasts, robbers and demons. Some 
of the roads were already distinguished as ‘royal* or ‘great* roads 
(rajapatha or mahdmagga) unlike the ordinary bye-paths (upapatha). 
But the rivers were not bridged and had to be crossed by ferries. 
The overland as well as oversea trade likewise attracted the 
attention of Indian merchants. The Pali canonical texts speak 
of voyages lasting six months in ships ( ndva ) which could be drawn 
up on shore in the winter 1 . The Jatakas , above all, have pre- 
served memories of voyages of daring Indian merchants beyond 
the seas and lands to distant countries of the east and west. 
References are made in these works to merchants voyaging from 
Champa or even Benares to the mysterious land of Su varna bhumi 
which has been proved to be a generic title in those days for 
Burma, the Malay Peninsula and the Malay Archipelago. We 
hear even of merchants voyaging from the great western sea- 
port Bharukachchha to the same destination, obviously via a 
Ceylonese port. Indeed, Ceylon (Tambapanni) at that time 
was ‘another bourne of oversea commerce*. We also learn 
how another body of merchants travelled from Benares to 
Baveru (Babylon) 2 . An interesting sidelight is thrown upon 
the methods of Indian navigation by the reference to the direc- 
tion-giving crows (disa-kaka) showing the navigators as they flew 
towards the land, in what direction lay the coast 3 . This practice, 
as has been remarked 4 , was also known to the sea-faring Baby- 
lonians and Phoenicians of early times. 

The references in Kautilya’s Arthasastra , scattered and ^inci- 
dental as they are, register some advance in the conditions of 

1. Cf. Sam . N. Ill p-155 : Ibid, v p. 51 : Ang. N. iv. p. 137. 

2. Cf. Jdt. iv. 15-7 : vi. 34 : iii. 126 ff. 

3. Cf. Jdt. iii. 126-7, 267 etc. 

4. Sec Fick. op. cit., Eng. tr. p. 269. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


271 


trade above described. Active encouragement of trade on the 
part of the State is proved by the care with which Kautilya 
provides for the construction and security of trade-routes and the 
foundations of market-towns in his scheme of State colonisation 
of the country-part. Elsewhere (ii. 4), the largest scale of width — 
eight dandas as compared with the usual four dandas — is 
prescribed for roads leading to the market-towns ( samyaniya 
patha ). Intelligent appreciation of the importance of trade- 
routes is shown by the discussion in Arthasdstra circles (vii. 12) 
of the relative advantages of different types of trade-routes from 
the standpoint of their conduciveness to commerce. Such are 
the pairs: land and water-routes, water-routes along the coast 
and through mid-water, the Himalayan and the southern land- 
routes. In comparing the last pair, the Arthasdstra authors' 
give us a valuable, though far from exhaustive, list of the imports 
borne along both routes evidently to the Ganges valley. Accor- 
ding to an un-named teacher quoted by Kautilya, the costlier 
merchandise consisting of elephants, horses, fragrant products, 
tusks, skins, gold and silver were more plentiful in the Himalayas. 
In Kautilya’s opinion, on the other hand, the merchandise other 
than blankets, skins and horses, and consisting of conch-shells, 
diamonds, jewels, pearls and gold, was more plentiful in the 
South. For the rest, the remarkable lists of agricultural, manu- 
facturing and other products of different lands which Kautilya 
mentions (ii. 11-12) testify to the extent as well as the objects 
of India’s internal and foreign trade. Among these products 
are found textiles of Bengal, Assam, Benares, the Konkan and 
Pandya, the silks of China, the woollens of Nepal, the skins of 
the Himalayan regions, the fragrant wood of Assam, Ceylon 
(?) and the Himalayas, the gems of Ceylon (?), Alakanda and 
Vivarna (unidentified) and the like 1 . 

All indications point to the fact that the rise of the Nandas 
and the Mauryas helped greatly to improve India’s inland and 
foreign trade. The liberation of the Indus valley, and still more 
the repulse of Seleucus, gave Chandragupta Maurya complete 

i i- It is interesting to recall Panini’s sutra vi. 2.13 referring to the practice 

merchants being named from the countries which they visited. The late 
Kaiikd commentary gives the following illustrations of the above : — 

Madra-vdpija, Kabnira-vdnija and Gandhdrfrvdpija. 



272 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


control over the coveted north-western route to which we have 
referred above. With the conquest of the Deccan by Chandra- 
gupta Maurya or Bindusara, the possession of the equally, or 
still more, valuable western and southern routes was ensured to 
the Mauryas. The conquest of Kaliriga by ASoka destroyed the 
only possible rival for the mastery of the eastern trade. While 
the Mauryas thus brought all the great inland trade-routes under 
the control of a highly centralised and efficient administration, 
their rule was helpful for the growth of trade in other ways. 
That the Mauryas had a special department for the construction 
of roads is proved by Megasthenes’ reference (quoted, Strabo 
xv. 1.50) to the duties of officers called Agoranomoi (‘market com- 
missioners’). They had, among other duties, to ‘construct roads 
and at every ten stadia set up a pillar to show the bye-roads and 
distances.’ The most renowned of the imperial roads of these 
times was ‘the Royal Road’ connecting the North-West Frontier 
with Pataliputra and leading thence to the mouths of the Ganges. 
The stages of this first Indian Grand Trunk Road together with 
their distances have been recorded by the Roman writer Pliny in 
his encyclopaedic work called Natural History (vi. 21). His some- 
what confused account may be summed up in the following 
table 1 : — 

Roman miles 


From Peucelaotis (Pushkaravati) to the Indus 60 

Thence to the Hydaspes (Jhelum) . . 60 

Thence to the Hyphasis (Beas) . . . . 270 

From the Hyphasis to the Hesidrus (Sutlej) 168 

From the Hesidrus to the Jomanes (Jumna) 168 (jut) 

From the Jomanes to the Ganges . . 112 

From the Ganges to Rhodopha (unidentified) 119 
From Rhodopha to Kalinipaxa (unidentified) 167 (or 265) 
From Kalinipaxa to the confluence of the 

Jomanes and the Ganges . . . . 625 (sic) 


i. For a useful summary of the discussion relating to Pliny’s account see 
McCrindle, Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian y Calcutta ed., 
pp. 130-34. Arrian ( Indica f ch. iii) quotes Eratosthenes to say that thejloyal 
Road was measured by schoeni. According to Pliny, (Arrjan’s Indica, E. J. 
Chinnock’s tr. p. 40 m) the schoemu was reckoned by Erastothenes at 40 stadia 
(about five miles). Strabo (Geography xv. 1.11) mentions measurement of the^ 
Royal Road ‘with necessary lines’, which by a slight emendation of the te^ 
may be taken to mean ‘in terms of the schoenus ' (Loeb’s Classical Library ed. # 
Vol. viii. p. 17/1). 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


273 


From the confluence to Palibothra . . 425 (sic) 

From Palibothra to the mouths of the Ganges 638 

We have reasons to believe that the ancient foreign trade of 
India, like its inland trade, benefited by the strong and efficient 
administration of the Mauryas. The wise policy of friendship 
with the Hellenistic powers started by Chandragupta Maurya 
after the repulse of SeleucuS and maintained by his son and 
grandson, must have favoured the expansion of the Indian 
trade with West Asia and Egypt. It is interesting to learn from 
Greek classical sources that the main commerce between the early 
Seleucid Empire and India was borne partly by the land-route 
(the northern one passing through Bactria and the southern 
through Gedrosia and Carmania, Persis and Susiana) and 
partly by the sea-route (through Gerrha on the west coast of the* 
Persian Gulf). Like the Indian route to Egypt stretching along 
the east shore of the Red Sea, the route through the Persian Gulf 
was controlled by powerful Arab tribes engaged in a highly 
developed trade 1 . How valuable was this western trade to 
India will appear from the list of her exports into Egypt, which, 
according to Greek classical sources, consisted of ivory, tortoise- 
shell, pearls, pigments and dyes (specially indigo), nard, costum, 
malabathron and rare woods 2 . It is probably in the light of this 
extensive commerce with western lands that we have to under- 
stand Asoka’s ambitious attempt to extend the benefits of his 
religious and humanitarian propaganda to the Hellenistic king- 
doms almost to their furthest limits. To the mutual knowledge 
and understanding derived from long-continued commercial 
intercourse, again, we may probably attribute the success which 

1. For references see Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic Histoty of the 
Hellenistic World> p. 457. 

2. Rostovtzeff, op. cit.y pp. 386-7. We have an interesting reminiscence 
of Indians sharing in this western trade in a story narrated by Posidonius 
and quoted by Strabo in his Geography (ii. 3.4). According to this story while 
Euergetes II (145-116 B.C.) was reigning in Egypt, an Indian being stranded 
on the shore of the Arabian Sea was brought to Alexandria and having learnt 
Greek gave the Court information of the sea-route to India. Then the king 
sent out an expedidon under Eudoxus of Cyzicus. The expedition set out 
probably in the last years of Euergetes II and returned heavily laden with goods. 
Equal success attended a second expedition sent out under the same captain 
in the following reign. It has been recently suggested on good grounds that the 
discovery of the monsoon attributed to Hippalus in the literary records was 
wade by Eudoxus himself who probably derived his information from the 
branded Indian merchant and undertook his first expedition with his help* 
On the whole subject, see Rostovtzeff, op. cit . pp. 926, 927, 929. 



274 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


attended Afoka’s mission to Ceylon and, if this can be taken to be 
authentic, the mission of Soi^a and Uttara to Suvannabhumi 
(Further India). 

The Organisation of Industry and Trade 

The organisation of crafts and trades in some forms of asso- 
ciation was known from early times. In so far as the crafts are 
concerned, we find in the Jdtakas that sons ordinarily, if not 
invariably, followed the occupations of their father, while the 
industries used to be localised in towns and villages, and the 
separate crafts had frequently a pamukha (president) or jeffha 
(alderman) presiding over them. These three features, as 
Fick observed long ago 1 , point to an organisation similar 
to that of the craft-guilds in mediaeval Europe. The Jdtakas 
in fact refer to eighteen senis (guilds), mentioning four by name, 
viz., those of woodcutters, smiths, leather dressers and painters 2 . 
As regards the organisation of trade, the Jdtakas refer to sattha - 
vdhas whose directions were obeyed by the caravans along the 
trade-routes as well as to panuikhas and jetthas of the separate 
trades. We also hear of disputes between guilds being decided 
by a mahdsetthi who acted practically as ‘chief alderman over 
the aldermen of the guilds 3 .’ The early Dharmasdstras and the 
Arthasastra register a somewhat advanced stage of development. 
From an oft-quoted passage (xi 1) of Gautama’s Dharmasutra 
supposed to be the oldest of the existing Dharmasutras , we learn 
that traders and artisans along with others had the authority 
to lay down rules for their respective classes. Of the Sahghas 
(‘corporations’) described by Kautilya (xi. 1), who w'ere ruled 
by mukhyas (‘executive officers’), one class consisted of certain 
specified and unspecified groups living by vdrtd (agriculture, 
cattle-breeding and trade) as well as by Jastra (fighting). Else- 
where (ii. 7, iii. 1 , viii. 4 etc.) Kautilya refers to bents (guilds) 
organised under mukhyas , which were thought to be sufficiently 
important for their customs to be recorded in official registers 
and were otherwise a factor to be reckoned with in the working 
of the State administration. 

I. The Social Organisation in North-east India in Buddha's time (Eng. tr. of 
Die Social Gliederung in Nordostlichen Indian zu Buddhas zeit ), pp. 177-183. ^ 

a. Cf. Jat. i. 267, 314 : iii. 281 : iv. 41 1 : vi 22. 

3. Cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India , p. 97. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


275 


The industrial and commercial irenls and sanghas we have 
described above represent the type of guild organisation under 
which there could be little scope for a separate class of wage- 
earners as distinguished from producers. But already in these 
tijnes we hear of another type of organisation involving the 
employment of hiredl abourers by the capitalists. The Jdtakas 
make frequent references to free labourers working for hire ( kam - 
makara and bhatakas) often along with slaves ( ddsas ) ands ervants 
(pessas) 1 . Kautilya (iii. 13-14) not only refers to free labourers 
(karmakaras and bhri takas) along with slaves {das as), but gives 
a whole body of laws for regulating their work and wages. 
That the free labourers along with slaves formed an important 
element of the population in Maurya times is proved by ASoka 
including the kind treatment of ddsas and bhatakas among the* 
constituent qualities of his dhamma (R. E. ix, xi etc.) 

State Industrial and Commercial Policy 

No account of the economic conditions of the Nanda-Maurya 
times will be complete without some reference to the policy 
pursued by the State in rel '.lion to industry and trade. We 
may begin by noticing some features of the traditional policy 
in these respects as reflected in the Arthasdstra . That the active 
encouragement of industry and commerce was contemplated 
as a duty of the State is illustrated by the measures included in 
Kautilya’ s scheme of State colonisation of rural areas (ii. 1) : 
they include the working of mines and forests, the construction 
and security of trade-routes and the foundation of market-towns. 
In this connection the king is enjoined to secure trade-routes 
from obstruction by his favourities (vallabhas), officers ( karmikas ) 
and frontier guards (anta-pdlas) as well as by thieves and animal 
herds — a list sufficiently instructive as putting the danger from 
the King’s officers on a level with that caused by thieves and 
animals. How fully the industrial and commercial classes were 
associated with the royal court and capital is proved by the 
immediately following rules (ii. 4) relating to the planned settle- 
ment of the fortified capital ( durga ). According to this descrip- 
tion which, by the way, illustrates the relative social status of 


i. See P. T. S. Diet., s.v. Also cf. Fick, op. cit. pp. 303-4. 



276 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


different groups of artisans and traders in the times concerned, 
the dealers in scents, garlands, paddy etc. and the chief artisans 
should live along with Kshatriyas to the east of the royal palace. 
The dealers in cooked food, liquors and flesh should live along 
with Vaigyas to the south. The manufacturers of woollen and 
cotton goods, the armour-makers etc. should live along with 
Sudras on the west. The manufacturers of base metals and 
precious stones should live along with Brahmanas on the north. 

Not only did the State associate itself closely with the trading 
and industrial classes, but it also undertook manufactures and 
trading on its own account 1 . What is more, the rules of the 
Arthasdstra repeatedly show how thoroughly the agricultural, 
mineral and ether resources of the State were understood to be 
the sources of its strength. Thus among the qualities of a good 
country are included (vi. 1) the possession cf agricultural tracts, 
mines, forests of various kinds, land and waterways and the like. 
Very characteristic again, is the general rule of foreign policy 
(vii. 1) stating that the king should follow that one of the six-fold 
forms by which he can exploit his own mines and forests and 
obstruct those of his enemy. No wonder, then, that the nice 
balancing of the advantages of working tracts rich in mines and 
in food grains, of working mines yielding a precious but small 
output and those producing inferior but large output, of working 
trade-routes by land and water and so forth, formed the subject 
of keen discussion in Arthasdstra circles dealing with questions of 
foreign policy (vii. 11-12). 

Another aspect of State industrial policy in these times is that 
relating to the strict control of artisans and traders. We have 
in the Arthasdstra a whole Section (Section iv) significantly called 
* Removal of Thorns' ( kantaka sodhanam ), which describes successi- 
vely the measures to be taken by the king for securing the people 
against artisans and merchants, against natural calamities, 
against persons living by clandestine means and so forth. In 
thorough accord with this attitude is the fact that elsewhere 

i . For examples see Contributions to the History of the Hindu Revenue System , 
PP* 73 > 77 > 9 0 " 1 * iq 6 8. In the chapter (v. 3) describing what may be 
called the expenses of the king’s establishment, we have the following rates of 
pay 

Carpenters— 2,000 to pas. 

Skilled and unskilled craftsmen — 120 panes . 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


277 


(iv. 1), Kautilya characterises merchants, artisans and some 
other specified classes as thieves in fact, though not in name. 
In the class of artisans just mentioned, are included weavers, 
washermen, goldsmiths, workers in copper and other metals, 
physicians, actors, minstrels and beggars. How drastically 
paternal the State regulations for protection of the public against 
these classes sometimes might be, is proved by a number of 
examples. Not only is a differential scale of wages fixed for 
weaving different kinds of cloth, but fines and other penalties 
are prescribed for reduction in their weight and measures. Fines 
are also prescribed for washermen washing clothes elsewhere 
than on wooden planks or on smooth stone, for wearing clothes 
other than those marked with a cudgel, for selling, mortgaging 
or hiring clothes of others, and even for delay in returning the 
clothes. Wages at varying rates are laid down for dyeing differ- 
ent qualities of cloth. A scale of penalties is laid down for 
physicians failing in or neglecting the treatment of diseases. 

The measures for public security (iv. 2) against traders par- 
take of the same character. We read that such old wares as 
are of proved ownership should be sold or mortgaged at the 
market-place ( panya-samstha ) under supervision of the market- 
superintendent (samsthddhydksha ) . A graduated scale of fines 
is prescribed for deficiency in weights and measures. There is 
a similar scale of fines for exceeding the profit-limit of five 
per cent permitted on home-grown merchandise and of ten 
per cent allowed on foreign merchandise. In a later chapter 
of the same section (iv. 4) dealing with lost and stolen property, 
we are pointedly told that the sale or mortgage of old wares 
should not be carried out without informing the market- 
superintendent. It is characteristic of Kautilya’s attitude to- 
wards traders ( vaidehaka ) that unlike an unnamed ArthaSastra 
authority whom he quotes, he thinks (viii.4) the oppression from 
traders to be worse even than that caused by the Guardian of 
the Frontier ( antapala ). 

On the other hand it is only fair to add that the State in 
these times also took special steps to protect the artisans and 
merchants. For theft of small articles belonging to artisans 
and craftsmen, Kautilya prescribes (iv. 10) fines as high as 100 
panas. Elsewhere (iv. 13) he lays down elaborate rules for 



278 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

compensating merchants ( sarthika ) for theft or robbery of their 
merchandise during their journeys. 

The Mauryas followed the traditional State policy in relation 
to industry and trade at least in some important respects. We 
have already seen what care they bestowed upon the construc- 
tion of roads through a special class* of officers called Agoranomoi 
by Megasthenes. That they established State manufactures 
on their own account is proved by Megasthenes* reference to his 
fourth Indian caste, viz. that of artisans. Speaking of this class, 
Diodorus (ii. 41) says that they were not only exempted from 
paying taxes, but even received maintenance from the Royal 
exchequer. More guardedly Arrian ( Indica Ch. xii) states that 
while handicraftsmen and retail dealers pay tribute, an excep- 
tion is made in favour of makers of weapons of war, ship-builders 
and sailors, who even draw pay from the State. Evidently, 
the artisans maintained by the State were employed on govern- 
ment service. What strict control was maintained by the 
Maurya government over the artisans and merchants alike 
of the country-side and of the capital is proved by other state- 
ments of Megasthenes. We learn that the Agoranomoi had among 
other duties, to superintend crafts connected with land such as 
those of the wood-cutters, carpenters, blacksmiths and miners. 
Again, the officers known as Astynomoi (‘city commissioners’) 
were divided into six boards. Of these the fourth ‘is that which 
has to do with sales and barter, and these look after the measure, 
and the fruits of the season, that the latter may be sold by stamp* : 
the fifth ‘is that of those who have charge of the works made by 
artisans and sell these by stamps, the new apart from the old* 1 . 
We have elsewhere 2 given reasons for identifying Megasthenes’ 
officers in charge of measures with Kautilya’s pautavddhyaksha 
(‘superintendent of weights and measures’) and samsthddhyaksha 
(‘market superintendent’), while connecting ‘the stamp’ men- 
tioned by the Greek writer with the abhijfiana-mudra> which 
according to Arthafastra (ii. 27) was given by the antapdla to 
incoming traders. We have finally to mention in the present 
place another reference suggesting that the person of the artisans 


1. Strabo, xv. 1.50-51, tr. the Loeb Classical Library, Vol. vii, pp. 83-4. 

2. Contributions to the History of the Hindu Revenue System , p. 1 1 7. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


279 


was protected by a special law unlike the general rule of law 
known to the Arthasastra. According to Strabo (xv. 1.54), if a 
person caused the loss of a hand or an eye to a craftsman, he 
was put to death. This is a severe departure from the milder 
rule of law in the Arthasastra (iii. 19) imposing fines alone for 
the same offences. 


Currency 

Long before the rise of the Nandas and the Mauryas India had 
evolved her own monetary system based on the indigenous stand- 
ards. The Vedic nishka , satamana and suvarna may have been ingots 
of gold of definite weights. But in later works such as th e Jatakas, 
the grammar of Panini and the Arthasastra of Kautilya, we have 
definite references to gold coins called nishka and suvarna , 
silver coins called kdrshdpanas or dharanas and copper coins also 
called kdrshdpanas , along with their multiples and sub-divisions. 
The Vedic satamana , as its name implies, was based on the mdna 
unit, a weight known to the Rigveda. In later times the mdna 
was changed for the lighter unit called krishnala or rati, the seed 
of the guhja- berry. The weight of the gold suvarna in the Artha - 
Sdstra as well as in Manu and Yajnavalkya is given as 80 gufljas 
or ratis, the copper kdrshapana according to Manu and Yajna- 
valkya also weighing 80 ratis. The weight of the silver dharanas 
in the Arthasastra , however, amounts very nearly to 80 ratis, 
while in Manu and Yajnavalkya it is only 32 ratis 1 . As Professor 
Rapson has well observed 2 3 , the silver and copper coinages in 
Ancient India were often independent of each other, with differ- 
ent areas of circulation. In the Arthasastra , however, the 
silver pana with its sub-divisions is evidently recognised as the 
standard coin, while the copper mdshaka with its divisions ranks 
as a token currency. Apparently copper was linked up with 
silver in such a way that the mdshaka was one-sixteenth in value 
of the silver pana , its weight varying with the ratio between the 
two metals 8 . 

1. On the antiquity of the Indian coinage and its evolution, see D. R. 
Bhandarkar, Ancient Indian Numismatics , Lecture ii : S. K. Chakravorty, Armen 
Indian Numismatics , Chs. ii. and iv. On the origin of the 32 rati standard fo 
silver coins, see Bhandarkar op. cit . 9 pp. 93 — 4 and specially Chakravorty 
9 p. cit pp. 43 ff. 

2. Catalogue of Indian Coins in the British Museum , p. clxxix. 

3. Chakravorty, op. cit., 56-8. 



280 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


The punch-marked silver coins that have been found m large 
numbers all over India have been identified on all hands with 
the silver kdrshdpanas , dharanas or purdnas of the Smritis and the 
ArthaJastra. Some classes of these coins have been traced back 
to pre-Mauryan times. Thus a distinctive class of such coins, 
which was found some years ago in a deposit at Paila in the 
Kheri district of the Uttar Pradesh, has been generally identi- 
fied as the local currency of the independent Kosaln kingdom 
before its absorption by Magadha. These coins bear four obverse 
marks instead of the usual five, among which is included the 
four-spoked wheel in place of the usual five-spoked one. They 
are of the reduced standard of 24 to 30 ratis in place of the 
theoretical 32 ratis 1 . Of the punch-marked silver coins bearing 
the usual number of five obverse marks, two distinct classes 
assignable to as many distinct per : ods have been recovered from 
recent excavations on the site of Taxila. The Older Class is dated 
circa 317 B.C. by the presence in its midst of gold coins of 
Alexander and his half-brother Philip Arrhidaeus ‘in mint condi- 
tion,’ while the date of the Later Class is fixed at circa 248 B.C. 
by the occurrence of a coin of Diodotus in the same deposit. 
The two classes arc distinguished from each other by their fabric 
as well as symbols, though equally approximating to the standard 
of 32 ratis. The Older (pre-Maurya) Class consists of large 
thin pieces unlike the small thick coins of the Later (Maurya) 
Class. The obverse marks of the Older Class are conspicuously 
lacking in the distinctive Maurya symbols (‘hill and crescent’ 
as well as ‘peacock’). It seems to be generally agreed that some 
coins of the Older Class go back to the 4th or even the 5th 
century B.C 2 . On the other hand, it must be admitted that the 


1. On the above see Durga Prasad, Num. Supp. xlvii. p. 77 ; Walsh. 

JNSI., No. ii. p. 15-26 : JRAS. 1937, pp. 300-303. Walsh gives the 

average weight of the Paila hoard as 25 ratis , but see D. D. Kosambi, NIA. 
iv. p. 56. 

2. Thus Durga Prasad, Num. Supp. xlv. PI. viii and ibid, xlvii, pp. 78 — 9, 
takes some early silver punch-marked coins to go back to the kingdofti of 
Magadha shortly after Buddha’s time. According to Walsh ( JBORS . 1937, 
PP- 3°3'4) > some very old coins of the Taxila Hoard which were re-stamped 
for circulation may go back to 200 years or more before the date of the deposit, 
viz., c. 317 B.C. More recently D. D. Kosambi (op. cit., pp. 60-6) premising 
that the early coins of Taxila were imported from the east, assigns some select 
types on the basis of his interpretation of the obverse marks to &ai4un&ga and 
Nanda kings. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


281 


symbolism and metrology of the silver punch-marked coins are 
still an unsolved problem 1 . 

In circulation with the Older Class of silver coins just des- 
cribed, though probably dating from much earlier times, was a 
class of coins consisting of thick slightly bent bars of silver with 
‘the six-armed symbol’ on # the obverse and a blank reverse. 
Weighing from 165.8 to 173 grains, these salaka coins, as they 
have been called, have been sometimes identified 2 with the 
satamdna of 100 ratis. Specimens of this coinage have been found 
in denominations of one-half, one-fourth, one-eighth and one- 
sixteenth pieces. Other classes of coins of the same early type 
comprising (as they have been called) single and double karsha- 
panas or only half karshapanas have been found in deposits from # 
western India and an unrecorded provenance in northern 
India 3 . 

To the same period as the Older Class of silver punch-marked 
coins as well as the bent bar coins belongs, if we are to judge 
from their simultaneous occurrence in the same Taxila deposit 
of c. 317 B.C., a group of minute silver coins with a single 
obverse mark and a blank reverse 4 . They have been found 
not only on the site of Taxila, but also at Thathari in the 
Madhya Pradesh 5 . 


1. On different interpretations of the obverse marks, see Durga Prasad, 
JASB., N. S. XXX(i934), pp. 17 ff. : Walsh, Punch-marked Coins from Taxila , 
pp. 18-25 : D.D. Kosambi, op. cit ., pp. 2 ff. Regarding metrology A. S. Hemmy 
(JRAS, 1937, pp. 1-26) concluded after an elaborate examination that the 
silver punch-marked coins conform to the weight-standard of 54 grains, which 
is exactly one-quarter of the principal weight of the revised Indus system of 
weights, and nominally represents Manu’s standard of 32 ratis (58.56 grains). 
Criticising this view, D. D. Kosambi concludes (op. cit. pp. 58-9) that the 
system of Mohenjodaro weights was applied for the earlier TaxOan hoard, 
while in the Maurya period although the average remained the same, the 
variance increased enormously thus pointing to a far cruder system than before. 

2. See Durga Prasad, Num. Supp. xlvii, pp. 86-7. This view is con- 
tradicted by D. D. Kosambi, op. cit., p. 19. On the other hand, Mr. Charan 
Das Chatterji in his paper Numismatic data in Pali literature (Buddhistic Studies , 
p. 426 n) suggests that the bent bar coins were struck on the karsha of 100 ratis 
known to Yajnavalkya unlike the usual karsha of 80 ratis. 

3. See Allan Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British Museum (Ancient 
India), pp. xvii — xix : clxi — clxii. 4-10. 

4. According to Walsh ( Punch-marked coins from Taxila , pp. 3-4), these 
coins weighing from 2.3 to 2.86 grains were the silver papas or mdshas of two 
ratis . This view is criticised by D. D. Kosambi who provisionally calls them 
one-twentieth karashdpana (See Kosambi, qp. cit., p. 19). 

5. See Allan, op. cit. K pp. lxix and PI. xlvi. 



282 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURTAS 


We have an interesting glimpse of the condition of the 
currency in north-western India at the time of Alexander’s 
invasion in the casual observation of a classical writer. We are 
told by Quintus Gurtius that among the presents offered by the 
king of Taxila to Alexander were included thirty talents of 
signatum argentum (‘coined silver*). We may identify these coins 
either with the Older Class of punch-marked coins or with the 
class of bent bar coins above described. The reference to silver 
coins in tnis connection, as R. B. Whitehead 1 justly observes, 
probably signifies that silver was employed as the standard 
metal at that time. Of the currency conditions of the Maurya 
empire in ASoka’s last years, we have probably a valuable 
record in the shape of the Taxila hoard of punch-marked coins 
of the Later Class of circa 248 B.C. as above mentioned. 
These coins contain a considerable alloy of copper (75.3 p.c.) 
as compared with silver (40.3 p.c.) and in many cases are more 
than 54 grains in weight. 

Turning to the subsidiary copper coinage of these times, 
we may mention that the class of square Or rectangular cast coins 
bearing the characteristic symbols of ‘the hill and crescent*, ^ 
the hollow cross and the like has been held to have been issued 
by the Mauryas 2 . To the same period has probably to be 
assigned a class of punch-marked copper coins with Maurya 
obverse marks, of which a hoard was found at Bhagalpur in 
1925 3 . With the Mauryas again we may probably connect 
numerous specimens of the remarkable copper coinage of Taxila 
which extends over several centuries and is mostly unin^cribed 
and die-struck 4 . In a fragmentary stone-plaque inscription 


1. The Pre- Mohammedan Coinage of North-Western India , p. 42. 

2. On a hoard of such coins, excavated at Bulandibagh ( near Patna ) 
from the Mauryan level of 15 to 18 feet below ground-level and on two such 
pieces dug out from below the Aiokan level near the ASokan monolith at 
SSrnath, see Durga Prasad, Num. Suppl.. xlvii, pp. 62-6. Previously, Allan 
(op. «/., p. Ixxvii) had cautiously suggested the 3rd-2nd century B. C. as the 
date of the cast copper coins. 

3. See Allan, op. cit., lxxix. 

4. According to Allan (op. cit., cxxxix) the copper coinage of Taxila 
began late in the 3rd century B.C. when Taxila was under Maurya governors 
and ended with the Greek conquest before the middle of the 2nd century B.C./ 
On independent ground? Vincent Smith (Cat. of cions in the Ind. Mus., p. 147) » 
had previously held that the single die-struck pieces of Taxila began not later ’ 
than 350 B. C., while the double-die coins were prior to the coins of Agathoclcs 
and Pantaleon, c. 190-180 B. C. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


283 


of circa third century B.C., which was discovered some years ago 
at Mahasthan in the Bogra district of Bengal 1 2 , reference is made 
to f a coin of the value of four cowries’ called gandakd a . 

The downfall of the Maurya empire was not followed by the 
withdrawal of the imperial currency from circulation. From 
the finds of Indo-Greek coins in the same deposits at various 
sites, we may safely conclude that the punch-marked silver 
coins were in circulation down at least to the 2nd and 1st centu- 
ries B.C 3 . That their circulation was continued even down to 
the Kushan times is proved by a Mathura stone-pillar inscrip- 
tion of the twentieth year of Huvishka mentioning an endow- 
ment of 11,000 purdnas 4 . 


1. See Ep . Ind. xxi, pp. 83-91. 

2. It may be added that on a number of inscribed coins which had been 
read differently by previous scholars, K. P. Jayaswal ( JBORS . xx. pp. 279-308) 
claimed to have read the names of the Maurya kings Brhaspatimitra, S&tadhar- 
man, Daiaratha, Samprati, Devadharman and SaliSura. 

3. For references cf. theBajaur hoard of 1942 described by H. L. Haug- 
ton in JNSI t iv. part i, and the hoard at Bairat described by Daya Ram 
Sahni in Archaeological Remains and Excavations at Bairat (not dated.) 

4. Ep. Ind . xxi. pp..6o ff. 



CHAPTER IX 


RELIGION 

Literary Background 

There are unfortunately no definitely dated literary records 
of the Nanda-Maurya period. The epigraphic records that 
only date from the time of ASoka give a one-sided picture of the 
religion of the people. The Srauta and Grhya. Sutras which 
possibly belong to this period do not give a picture of the religion 
in practice but attempt at a systematisation of the orthodox 
Brahmanical traditions both social and ritualistic. They show 
Brahmanism on the defensive trying to safeguard its rights and 
privileges against the newly started religious movements such 
as Buddhism and Jainism. The now famous Arthasdstra of 
Kautilya is of suspected authenticity and may be used only 
as a source of secondary importance. The Astadhyayi of 
Panini is a compilation of this period and contains some impor- 
tant references to the religious institutions of the times. What is 
more important, it mentions the Mahdbhdrata . But it is not 
known which Mahabharata it was. It was certainly not the epic 
in its present developed form. Supposing it was the old Pandu 
story, it does not throw any light on the age of the present epic. 
The epic therefore cannot be used as a source of information 
for the religious history of the Nanda-Maurya period. 

The early Buddhist texts, in spite of the ecclesiastical violence 
of different ages, seem to have preserved some authentic tradi- 
tions of the pre-ASokan times. They contain, to a limited extent, 
the picture of the religion as practised in those days and also of 
the struggle that was going on between Buddhism and the oppos- 
ing sects. But this does not mean that the entire Buddhist 
canon in its present form can be used as a source of information 
for the period in question. The Buddhist traditions woqld 
have us believe that the first two collections of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka namely the Sutrapitaka with its five nikdyas and 
the Vinayapitaka were brought together in the council 
of Rajagrha, held immediately after the death of Buddha 
and that the third collection, the Abhidharmapitaka 



RELIGION 


285 


assumed its final form in the time of A£oka, in the third 
council held at Pataliputra. But this claim has been proved 
to be too exaggerated to be naively accepted. The A3okan 
edicts show that the Buddhist canon was then in the making and 
not a full-fledged Tripitaka. In the Bhabru edict, Aioka 
specially recommends to the Sangha a number of religious 
texts with the following instruction : *1 desire that many groups 
of monks and nuns, may repeatedly listen to these expositions of 
the Dharma {dhamma-paliyayani) and reflect on them. In the 
same way both laymen and laywomen (should act)\ 

The seven expositions of Dharma recommended by ASoka 
were the following : 

1. Vinaya-samukase (Vinaya-samutkar§a). 

2. Aliyavasani (Aryavamsani) 

3. Anagatabhayani 

4. Munigatha 

5. Moneyasute (Moneyyasutra) 

6. Upatisapasine (Upatissapraina) 

7. Laghulovade (Rahulavada) 

It is generally assumed that these Sutras were selections from 
the extensive Buddhist canon, which according to the tradition, 
had been constituted already before the time of ASoka. Under 
this assumption, all the texts except the first have been identified. 
Accordingly Aliyavasani has been identified with Anguttara 
II, 27, Anagatabhayani with Anguttara III, 103, Munigatha 
with Munisutta of the Suttanipata, Moneyasute with Nalaka- 
sutta of the same text, Upatisa-pasine with the Rathavinlta- 
sutta*of the Majjhima ( I, 146-51 ) and the Laghulovade 
with the Rahulavada-sutta of the Majjhima (I. 414). 

Asoka clearly says that these texts had been spoken by the 
Buddha himself ( bhagavata buddhena bhasite). They are called 
Dhamma-paliyaya or Dharmaparyaya which regularly means 
a Buddhist religious text according to the old tradition 
of the north. But their identification is doubtful as there 
is no clue in the inscription to their contents excepting in 
the case of Laghulovade. It is said that this text concerned 
falsehood ( musdvddam adhigicya) and in fact the Rahulavada- 
sutra as preserved in the Pali Majjhimanikaya and the northern 
Madhyamagama contains a warning to Rahula against falsehood. 



286 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 

But in which form was the text known to ASoka ? It was 
certainly not known in its present amplified form. It is probable 
that the ASokan text consisted of the gatha portions which 
contain the essentials of the Sutra. 

Then again the language in which they were known to ASoka 
was neither Sanskrit nor Pali. The titles of texts which A§oka 
mentions in his edict have marked Magadhi characteristics 
(cf. aliya for Pali ariya , Laghulo for Rahula , the termination e as 
in - sute y samukase, for Pali o ) . Admitting that Aioka was quoting 
the exact titles of the texts known to him, the conclusion is inevi- 
table that the form in which he knew them was Magadhi. This 
pre-A£okan Magadhi canon was not yet a well-constituted 
Tripitaka, as the Pali tradition would have us believe, but a 
literature still in the making. It should be remembered that 
although there was occasion for it, A£oka does not mention either 
the pitaka or the nikaya, words which occur on the Buddhist 
monuments within a century from Aioka’s time. It is therefore 
almost clear that the literature was not yet available in the time 
of Asoka in a tangible form and that the community was not yet 
much given to the scripture. But a lead had already been 
given in this direction either by Asoka on his own initiative or 
by Magadhan church and the Ad traditions had begun to be 
collected. Hence arose the necessity of encouraging the monks 
as well as the laymen to study them. Under these circumstances 
it is permitted to take some of the traditions embodied in the 
Buddhist canon as old and genuine. 

But the same thing cannot be said about the Jaina canon. 
The first systematic collection of the canon was made only in 
the 6th centuary A.D. apparently from old manuscripts but also 
from the mouths of the monks who could still recite them from 
memory. But the form in which the Aiigas have come down 
to us is admittedly later than that of the Pali canon which itself 
is post-Aiokan. Then again an important section of the Jaina 
community, the Digambaras, disown this canon and dispute its 
authenticity as true utterances of Mahavlra*. Under these 
circumstances, although the assumption that it contains some 
very old traditions of the Jaina church may not be wholly unjusti- 
fied, our scope of discrimination in using them is extremely 
limited. 



RELIGION 


287 


The contemporary Greek records, specially the fragments 
of the lost account of Megasthenes, contain some valuable refer- 
ences to the religious life of the Maurya age and confirm to some 
extent the information available from the Buddhist texts. 

A study of these sources shows that in the Nanda-Maurya 
period, Brahmanism was still mainly an aristocratic religion 
of which the principal supporters were the kings, the nobles, 
and the rich Brahmin householders. The real custodians of 
the religious lore were the priests who occupied the highest rank 
in the social hierarchy. There was also an ascetic class among 
the Brahmins which consisted of teachers advocating somewhat 
new ways of religious thoughts and practices which may be 
traced to Upanishadic origin. Those teachers had a more 
direct appeal to the common people and attracted people from 
other classes of society too to a life of renunciation. It was 
probably at the hands of this ascetic class that new theistic move- 
ments originated in the Maurya period. Closely allied to this 
ascetic class but with definitely distinctive features were the two 
religious movements, Buddhism and Jainism, which began to 
play a very important part in the religious life cf the country 
from the Maurya period. 

Brahmanism 

The Vedic and domestic ritual certainly occupied the most 
important place in the Brahmanical religion of this period. The 
account of Megasthenes bears clear testimony to it. Megas- 
thenes tells us (Frag. I. B : Diod. Ill, 63) that the philosophers, 
by which he means the priestly class, although inferior in number, 
were prominent over all the classes in point of dignity and that 
they were engaged by private persons to offer sacrifices. Anoka’s 
reference to the Deva -worshippers relates to this class of priests 
who were engaged in sacrifices and not to the popular religious 
movements which do not seem to have as yet gained any consi- 
derable importance. 

The references to the Vedic lore and ritualism in the canoni- 
cal Buddhist texts clearly bring out their importance in the 
Nanda-Maurya period. The Vedic Rsis such as Atthaka, 
Vamaka, Vamadcva, Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bhara- 
dvaja, Vasettha, Kassapa and Bhagu were popularly claimed to 



288 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


be the ancestors of the Brahmins and the seers of the Vedic 
mantras ( mantanam kattd). Some of these R§is were actually 
composers of the hymns. Vamadeva was the composer of the 
hymns of the fourth Mandala of the Rgveda , Bharadvaja 
of the sixth mandala, and Vasettha (Vasistha) of the hymns 
of the seventh mandala. The sage Atthaka ( Astaka ) is 
mentioned in the Aitareya Brdhmana ( VII, 17 ) and the 
Sdnkhdyana Srauta Sutra ( XV, 26 ) as one of the sons of 
Visvamitra. Vamaka and Bhagu (Bhrgu) appear as teachers 
and sages in the Satapatha Brdhmana (X. 6. 5. 9 ; VII, 
2, 1, 11). Yamataggi (Jamadagni) was a rival of the famous 
sage Vasistha. Angirasa is mentioned as a famous teacher 
in the Taittiriya-samhita (III, 1. 7. 3 ; VII, 1.4.1). It is further 
said in the Buddhist texts that the Brahmins of the period not 
only claimed descent from those ancient teachers but also were 
capable of reciting the ancient mantras . They were serious 
students and teachers of the sacrificial literature and were profi- 
cient in the three Vedas. Those who were engaged for the per- 
formance of sacrifices were famous for their knowledge of the 
Vedic lore and purity of origin. Purity implied purity in descent 
up to the seventh generation both on the father’s and the 
mother’s side, and proficiency in the Vedic lore not only meant 
proficiency in the three Vedas but also in the Nighandu 
(etymology), the Ketubha (ritual), Itihasa, Veyyakarana 
(grammar), Lokayata etc. ( Vedanam pdragu sanighandu-fafu - 
bhdnam sdkkharappabhaddnam itihasa-pancamanam paddko veyyakarano 
lokdyata-mahapurisalakkhanesu anavayo — Majjhima II, p. 210 ; 
Digha I, p. 128.) 

The Buddhist texts mention a class of Brahmins named 
Brahmana-mahasalas who used to receive revenues of lands 
granted to them by the king of the country. These Brahmins 
were rich and capable of undertaking for themselves the most 
expensive sacrifices. They also used to entertain a large number 
of students, sometimes 300 to 500, coming to them from different 
parts of the country and to impart to them the knowledge of 
the Vedic lore. These Brahmins were the most respected and 
are described as not only pure in descent but also as possessing 
a divine colour (brahmavanni) > a divine radiance ( brahmavac - 
cast) and of agreeable speech and language (kalydnavaco 9 



RELIGION 


289 


kalydnavakkarano ) . The names of some of these Brahmins are 
given in the Buddhist texts : Cariki, Tarukkha, Pokkharasati, 
Janussoni, Todcyya, Kutadanta etc. 

The Buddhist literature also knows the names of the various 
Vedas and the number of their iakhds . Thus in the Pali texts 
(Digha I, 237) there is mention of the Addharlya, the Tittiriya, 
the Chandoka and the Bavharija (Bahvrca). The Sanskrit 
Buddhist texts know more of the Vedic lore. In the Sardula- 
karnavadana (Divyava. xxxiii) there is a detailed description 
of the Vedic literature. Besides, it mentions the 21 iakhds 
of the Rigveda, 100 of the Yajurveda and 8000 (sic. 1000) of 
the Samaveda. The tradition is old as it is also recorded in the 
Mahdbhdsya of Patanjali (xv, 10, 11 : ekaiatam adhvaryusakhdh 
sahasravartmd sdmavedah ekavimsatidhah bahvrcyam). The principal' 
Vedic iakhds are also mentioned by names in the same 
text. 

The Pali canon mentions some of the Vedic sacrifices by 
names such as : Asvamedha, Naramedha, Sammapasa, Vaja- 
peyya and Niraggalam (Samyutta, p. 299). The same are 
mentioned in the Sanskrit Buddhist texts as Vajapeya, Aiva- 
medha, Purusamedha, Samyaprasa, Nirargadam and Sama- 
prabharam. It is not clear which sacrifices were meant by the 
Samyaprasa, Nirargadam and Samaprabharam. They were no 
doubt Srauta rituals as there is question of gains by the priests 
from those sacrifices. No big gain could be expected from the 
Grhya rituals. As they are mentioned along with the important 
Soma sacrifices such as Asvamedha, Vajapeya and Purusamedha, 
they seem to have been also Soma sacrifices which entailed 
large expenditure. 

But this ritual had also a darker side. The huge gains offered 
by them must have increased the greed of at least some of the 
priests. The large sacrifices required the immolation of a large 
number of animals of the herds and the felling of big trees 
possessed by the villagers. These meant a further taxation of 
the poor people by the nobles who were the real performers of 
the sacrifices. It is therefore impossible not to believe in some 
of the charges levelled against ritualism in the Buddhist texts. 
*The Buddhist attitude is well presented in the Brahmana-dham- 
mikasutta (Sutta-nipata p. 50). - 



290 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


‘The ancient Rsis were ascetics (tapassino) and practised 
self-control and avoided the five pleasures of the sense. Their 
riches consisted not of cattle, gold or grains but of learning 
and purity. They lived on food left at the door by the faithful 
and used the bed and clothes offered to them reverentially by 
the rich people. They were never harmed nor dominated, 
protected as they were by the dhaifima, and their access to any 
house was never barred. They spent 48 years of their life as 
brahmacarins in quest of knowledge and good conduct. Even 
after their marriage they lived a life of restraint. They held 
austerity, rectitude, tenderness, love and forbearance in high 
esteem. They performed sacrifices with rice, beds, clothes, ghee 
or oil, which they could collect by begging and never killed cows 
'in sacrifices. 

‘They possessed a noble stature and a tender and bright 
mien and remained always engaged in their own pursuits. In 
course of time, however, they began to covet a king’s riches and 
splendour and objects of pleasure such as women with ornaments, 
chariots yoked with stately horses. With an eye to these gains 
they approached king Okkaku (Iksvaku), persuaded him to 
celebrate agvamedha, purus. 1 . medha, Samyaprasa and vajapeyya 
and received as fees from him wealth, women and chariots, 
horses and cows, beds and clothes. Coveting more and more 
they again persuaded him to celebrate sacrifices by the offering 
of cows, which they said, constituted also the wealth of men as 
are land, gold or grains, and such were equally fit objects for 
offering. The slaughter of cows enraged the gods Brahma, 
Indra and even the Asuras and Raksasas and multiplied the 
diseases which were originally three, viz. desires, hunger and 
decrepitude, to ninety-eight and further caused to appear dis- 
cord among the people and within the household, and acts 
improper and impious among the various classes of men.’ 

In the Majjhimanikdya (I, pp. 342-44) there is the true 
picture of how sacrifices used to be performed. It is in way 
of explaining that kind of puggala (individual) which practises 
self-mortification, and for self-chastisement sacrifices animals 
and causes sufferings to other beings. ‘This kind of puggala’, 
the text says, ‘includes the king or the ksatriya noble whose head> 
has been anointed (muddhavasitto) as well as the wealthy Brah- 



RELIGION 


291 


mins (Brahmano mahasalo) . He gets a sacrificial shed (santha- 
gara) built outside the town, shaves his hair and beard, puts 
on deer skin, lubricates his body with mustard oil and enters the 
sacrificial shed, accompanied by his chief queen and his 
Brahmin priest, rubbing his body with an antelope horn. He 
then prepares his own bed on the bare ground and lives on cow’s 
milk. The queen and the priest also live on milk. A part of 
, the milk goes to the sacrificial fire and the rest goes to the calves. 
He then orders : kill so many bulls for the sacrifice, kill so many 
he-calves, so many she-calves, so many goats, so many rams, 
all for the sacrifice ; fell so many trees for the yupa, pluck so much 
ku£a grass for the barhis. His servants, messengers, workers, 
all make the preparation either with tears in their eyes or weep- 
ing for fear of punishment or chastisement.’ The confirmation 
of this account is found in the Srauta manuals. They clearly 
show that the Pali description is a true and objective picture of 
the Srauta ritual as practised in those days. 

But this aspect of the Vedic religion was confined, as we 
have already said, to aristocratic classes, the nobles and the 
wealthy Brahmins. The intellectual aspect of the Vedic religion 
was also not without its force. The Upanishadic ideal of life 
still moved the hearts of many people and they lived up to it. 

The life of the forest-dwelling Brahmin philosophers has 
been described by the contemporary Greek writers. It was, 
we are told, a life of great simplicity and hardship. The philo- 
sophers had their cottages in front of the city within an enclosed 
space. .They lived in simple style, used beds of rushes and deer 
skins and abstained from animal food and sexual pleasures. 
They passed their time in listening to serious discourses and in 
imparting their knowledge to those who would follow them. 
In the story of Mandanis, as told by Megasthencs, wc get the true 
picture of a Brahmanical sage of those times. The story runs 
that Alexander while in India was attracted by the reputation’ 
of a sage named Mandanis and sent a messenger inviting him 
and promising him great reward. But Mandanis, although 
threatened with death, refused to accept his invitation and sen t 
the following reply : 

^od, the supreme king, is never the author of insolent 
wrong, but is the creator of light, of peace, of life, of water, of 



292 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the body of man, and of souls and these he receives when death 
sets them free, being in no way subject to evil desire. He alone 
is the god of my homage, who abhors slaughters and instigates 
no wars.... Know this, however, that what Alexander offers 
me and the gifts he promises, are all things to me utterly useless ; 
but the things I prize, and of real use and worth, are these leaves 
which are my house, these blooming plants which supply me with 
dainty food, and the water which is my drink, while all other # 
possessions and things which are amassed with anxious care, 
are wont to prove ruinous to those who amass them, and cause 
only sorrow and vexation, with which every poor mortal is fully 
fraught. But as for me, I lie upon the forest leaves, and having 
nothing which requires guarding, close my eyes in tranquil 
slumber ; whereas had I gold to guard, that would banish sleep 
. . . .Should Alexander cut off my head, he cannot also destroy 
my soul. My head alone, now silent, will remain but the soul 
will go away to its Master, leaving the body like a torn garment 
upon the earth, whence also it was taken. I then, becoming 
spirit, shall ascend to my God.* (cf. Megasthenes, Frag. LV ; 
also Frags, xli, xliv, xlv.). 

The account doubtless had a real basis as we come across 
such types of Brahmanical sages not infrequently in the Bud- 
dhist texts. The true Brahmins are distinguished from the false 
ones by Buddha and are well spoken of by him. Such Brah- 
mins were expected to observe the five dhammas : truthfulness 
(saccam), austerity (tapam), continence (brahmacariyam), 
study (ajjhenam) and gifts (cagam) . These alone could qonduce 
to the attainment of the Brahma-sahavyata or the attainment 
of the world of Brahman (Majjhima ii, 199 ; Sutta Nipata, 
p. 79). 

This makes it clear that in the Nanda-Maurya period both 
the Vedic ritual and Upanishadic thought were active forces in 
the religious life of the country. There were the kings, nobles 
and wealthy Brahmins who believed in the efficacy of sacrifices 
and used to perform them with the help of hired priests. These 
priests who formed a class by themselves were the custodians 
of the Vedic lore. Many of them were attracted by the fees 
for officiating at the sacrifices and had become almost profes-^ 
sional. But there were others too who saw no attractions in such 



RELIGION 


293 


gains and lived a simple life of austerities, far away from the 
inhabited localities, in the forests, striving hard to realise the 
Brahman through tapasya or asceticism. 

The ascetic movement 

The ascetics were known under the general name of Sramana. 
Although the Buddhists alone appropriated this title to them- 
selves in later times, the order of the Sramanas originated in the 
Brahmanical fold. It assumed a distinct shape in the Nanda- 
Maurya period. Already in the Upanishads there are references 
to the Brahmacarins and the Yatis besides the sacrificers and 
the hermits. For the first time in the law books there is mention 
of a full-fledged order called either Vaikhanasa or Vanaprastha 
(Gautama, III, 2 ; Apastamba, III, 9, 21, 1 ; Vasistha, VII, 2)\ 
This is the third among the four orders ( aframa ) in which a house- 
holder in his ripe old age is required to retire to the forest after 
leaving the family duties to his son. In this stage he lives like an 
anchorite, wears the bark of trees, eats fruits and passes his days 
in higher thoughts. The origin of the Sramanas goes back to 
this order of the Vaikhanasas. 

The Greek writers also give the same account of the Sramanas 
whom they call either Sarmanes or Sramnai. The mostrespected 
among them were the Hylobioi (vAoPios), ‘the forest- 
dwellers’. It has been said about them : ‘They live in woods, 

where they subsist on leaves of trees and wild fruits, and wear 
garments made from the bark of trees’ (Megasthenes, Frag. 
XLI, # 60). They observed the vow of chastity and abstained 
from drinking wine. They were so much esteemed that even 
the kings communicated with them through messengers in order 
to ascertain the causes of things and to get divine favour. 
These forest-dwellers were the same as those included in the 
Vaikhanasa order. 

Besides the Vanaprasthas, the Vasistha Dharmasutra (loc. 
cit.) mentions another order of ascetics called Parivrajaka. In 
the Buddhist texts they are depicted as wandering teachers who 
had specialised in ethics, philosophy, nature-lore and mysticism. 
Their only difference with other forest-dwellers probably con- 
sisted in their travelling from place to place and in enlightening 
the people on various matters concerning religion and philo- 



294 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sophy. In the early Buddhist texts there are frequent references 
to them and to special houses called paribbajaka-arama provided 
for them near the towns. The villagers and town-folk also 
provided them with meeting places called kotuhalasdlds (Digha, 
III, pp. 36, ff., Divyavadana, p. 143). 

The Greek writers seem to have included them within the 
class of Sarmanes and philosophers. Speaking of some of 
the philosophers in one place Megasthenes says : ‘To the people 
of India at large they render great benefits ; when gathered 
together at the beginning of the year, they forewarn the assem- 
bled multitudes about droughts and wet weather, and also about 
propitious winds, diseases, and other topics capable of profiting 
the hearers’ (Frag. I, 40). The physicians also belonged to the 
Sramana class. Megasthenes tells us that they were engaged 
in the study cf the nature of man and that they were simple 
in their habits. They had as their food either rice or barley 
meal which they would get either by begging or from those who 
entertained them as guests. They like other Sramanas practised 
asceticism. 

The Greek accounts as well as the Buddhist texts tell us that 
among the Sramanas there were also the diviners, sorcerers, and 
adepts in the rites and customs relating to the dead. They 
lived on begging in the villages and towns . Megasthenes informs 
us that there were also female ascetics in some classes of the 
Sramanas. Such female ascetics are mentioned in the Buddhist 
texts too. They are referred to as paribbajika and a special 
class of them as molibaddkd paribbajika who used to go about 
in the company of male ascetics (Megasthenes Frag. XLI, 60; 
Majjhima, I, p. 305 ; Samyutta, III. pp. 238-240). 

There is no doubt that the order of the Sramanas and Pari- 
vrajakas was open to the people of all castes but there is no clear 
evidence as to whether they used to give up their caste distinc- 
tions and obligations after joining that order. Buddha is once 
decried by a Brahmin not so much for becoming a Sramana 
but for giving up his caste distinctions and thus becoming a 
vrsala (Vasalasutta, Sutta Nipata, p. 21). In the Buddhist texts 
four kinds of Sramanas are spoken of according to their religious 
conduct. They were : Maggajino — those who had reached 
the end of the way and attained Nirvana, Maggadesako — 



RELIGION 


295 


those who show the way to the highest goal, Magge Jlvati — 
those who live according to the way and Maggadusi — those who 
are vain, talkative, devoid of self-restraint and although wearing 
the dress of religious men destroy the good name of the line of 
their own teachers (Gundasutta, Sutta Nipata, p. 16). 

Closely allied to the general order of the Sramanas and 
Parivrajakas, there were some communities of religious men 
which claimed their origin from some well-known teachers 
contemporaneous with Buddha and followed some distinct 
religious beliefs. They were the sophists or Tirthikas (vadasila 
titthiya), the Ajivikas and the Niganthas (cf. Dhammikasutta, 
Sutta Nipata, v. 381). The famous Tirthika teachers in the 
time of Buddha were Pur ana Kassapa, Pakudha Kaccayana, 
Ajita Ke£a-Kambala, Sanjaya Belatthiputta, Makkhali Gosala 
and Nigantha Nataputta. Of the religious orders founded by 
them only those of the last two teachers had lived up to the 
Nanda-Maurya period ; the followers of the first four teachers 
had probably merged into the general Sramana order 
for want of strong leaders. The religious order of Makkhali 
Gosala was the Ajlvika and that of Nigantha Nataputta, the 
Nigantha (Nirgrantha). 

The Ajivika and Nirgrantha movements 

Although the origin of these two religious movements goes 
back to the times of Buddha, nothing precisely is known about 
their progress before the Maurya period. The word Makkhali 
which Js used as a part of the name of Gosala, the founder of the 
Ajlvika order, was probably the name of the order. It corres- 
ponds to the Sanskrit word Maskarin. Panini in one of his 
Sutras (VI, 1, 154) refers to the Maskarin as a class of parivra- 
jakas who carried a bamboo-staff (maskara) in their hands. 
They were also styled for this reason Ekadandin. While com- 
menting on the Sutra, Patanjali in his Mahdbhdsya , refers 
to their fatalistic belief. The Buddhist and Jain texts too ascribe 
to them a fatalistic creed and say that they held that there is no 
cause either ultimate or remote, no reward or retribution, no 
such thing as power or energy and that all *are bent this way 
or that by their fate, by the necessary conditions of the class to 
which they belong, fry their individual nature* (Samafifiaphala- 

\ 



296 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

sutta, Dialogues of Buddha II, p. 71 where all the references to 
the principal Buddhist and Jaina texts have been collected) . 

The Ajivikas appear to have attained some importance in 
the time of Asoka as the latter mentions them side by side with 
the Buddhists and Nirgranthas and says that his Mahamatras 
had been asked to look after their welfare and progress as wel 1 
(Pillar edict VII). In the 12th year of his reign, Aioka made 
gifts of two caves in the Barabar hills to the Ajivikas. The order 
seems to have maintained its importance throughout the 
Maurya period as one of the grandsons of Aioka, Da£aratha, is 
also known to have dedicated some caves in the Nagarjuni hills 
to the Ajivika order. 

The Ajivikas, as we have already seen, belonged to the 
Sramana class. Their order had assumed a distinct shape 
in later times but they must have inherited many of the Sramana 
traditions. As such they had among them both Brahmin and 
non-Brahmin recluses but there is no evidence of their having 
two different orders, Brahminical and non-Brahmanical. 

The Nirgrantha was also a Sramana order closely connected 
with the Ajivika. The later Jainism which claims descent 
from this ancient order has foisted many traditions on it but 
in spite of them, the ancient Nirgrantha order does not seem to 
have been a religious movement of any considerable importance 
in the Nanda-Maurya period. We learn from the Buddhist 
texts that the founder of the Nirgrantha order was Mahavira 
otherwise known as Nataputta (Jnatrkaputra) who was called a 
Nirgrantha because he belonged to that order of Sramanas. 
The name of the order meant ‘those who have destroyed the 
worldly ties’ and also ‘those who have given up their clothes.’ 
In the first sense they were pravrajita or the houseless ascetics 
and in the second sense, the naked ascetics. They were thus 
the same as the acelakas who are often mentioned in the Buddhist 
texts. In fact a slightly doubtful fragment of the account of 
Megasthenes, speaks of a sect of philosophers who used to go 
naked throughout their life and to say that the body had been 
given by God as a covering of the soul. They abstained from 
animal food and all food cooked by fire, being content to live on 
fruits picked up when they had dropped to the ground (Fragm. 
LIV). These few points of their doctrines have a good deal of 



RELIGION 


297 


similarity with the doctrines ascribed to the Niganthas in the 
Buddhist texts. They believed in the existence of soul and 
desisted from killing animals and destroying even plants which 
according to them were endowed with life. They were besides 
naked ascetics. We may therefore consider the naked ascetics 
referred to in the account of Megasthenes as identical with the 
Nirgranthas. Megasthenes,* however, calls them Brahmin and 
not Sramana. This might have been due to their standing near 
to the Brahmin philosophers in point of purity of conduct and 
religious beliefs and distinguishing themselves from the peripa- 
tetic monks who were also recruited from the lower classes. 

Except in the Buddhist texts there are not many references 
to the Nirgranthas in the contemporary literature. In the seventh 
pillar edict, ASoka mentions them along with the Ajlvikas and 
the Buddhists to state that his Mahamatras were also occupied 
with their welfare. 

The tradition as embodied in the late Jain books, has, how- 
ever, a more connected history of the church to present. The 
Nirgrantha community was confined in the 4th century B. G. 
to Magadha and the heads of the church were in chronological 
order Sayambhava, Yasobhadra, Sambhutivijaya and Bhadra- 
bahu. Bhadrabahu was a contemporary of Ghandragupta 
Maurya and had converted the latter to the Nirgrantha religion. 
While Bhadrabahu was the head of the church, a terrible famine 
broke out in Magadha and it became difficult for the monks to 
get alms. Bhadrabahu then decided to leave the country with 
a part of the community. Accordingly Sthulabhadra who was 
the son of Sakadala, the minister of the Nanda king, was 
appeinted head of the Magadhan community. Bhadrabahu 
took a part of the community with him to the South where they 
settled down at Sravana Bejgoja in Mysore. It is further said 
that Chandragupta also abdicated the throne at this time and 
followed his teacher to Sravana Bejgoja where he died of volun- 
tary starvation, as prescribed by the Nirgrantha religion. Sthula- 
bhadra for fear that the ancient traditions might be lost 
convoked a council of the monks at Pataliputra in which the 
^ sacred literature consisting of the 11 Angas and 14 Purvas was 
recited and fixed. Bhadrabahu returned to Magadha after 
twelve years, when the famine had passed away, with a section 



298 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of his followers. He found that the sacred texts collected in the 
Council of Pataliputra did not contain the authentic traditions 
of the church and so he turned them down as spurious. The 
Magadhan monks had in the meantime begun to put on clothes 
and this practice was also declared by him as contrary to the 
original teachings of Mahavlra. This denunciation however 
did not lead to an immediate schism in the church. The succes- 
sor of Sthulabhadra in the Magadhan church was Mahagiri. 
He remained in power till the end of the Maurya period. It 
was in his time that Samprati, the grandson and successor of 
Asoka, became a convert to the Nirgrantha faith and tried to 
imitate his grandfather in the matter of the propagation of the 
faith which he professed. 

The Kalpasiitra (translation, S.B.E. XXII, pp. 288 ff.) gives 
a list of the Ganas and Sakhas that originated in the 4th and 3rd 
centuries B.C. within the Nirgrantha community. According 
to it, one of the disciples of Bhadrabahu, named Godasa founded 
the Godasa-gana which divided itself into four Sakhas namely : 
Tamraliptika, Kotivarsiya, Pundravardhanlya and Dasl- 
kharbatika. The first three are well known names of places S 
in Bengal. The tradition would thus have us believe that the 
Nirgrantha religion, in the beginning of the 3rd century B.C., 
had spread to Bengal to such an extent as to lead to the formation 
of local subsects. The Kalpasiitra further says that Mahagiri 
had eight disciples, two of whom, Uttara and Balissaha, founded a 
a Gana named Uttarabalissaha. This Gana also divided itself 
into four Sakhas namely : Kausamblka, Sautaptika, Kau^umbini 
and Candanagari. 

Another tradition recorded in the Niryukti of the Avasyaka - 
sutra speaks of a certain number of schisms in the Church. The 
leaders of the schismatic monks arc said to have maintained 
philosophical views different from those taught by Mahavlra. 
Three such schisms occurred in the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C. 


The first of these was led by one Asadhasena who, we are tpld, 
carried the doctrine o isyadvada to an impossible extreme and also 
maintained that there was no difference between accomplished 


ascetics and gods. The second was led by ASvamitra who 
refused to admit the doctrine of ksanika , and the third by Ganga 


who admitted the perception of two sensations simultaneously. 



RELIGION 


299 


Confirmation of these traditions is however lacking. Two 
inscriptions of Sravana Belgoja, of course, refer to Bhadrabahu 
and Chandragupta but they belong only to the I Oth century 
A. D. A£oka does not take any special interest in the religion 
of his grandfather except ordering his officials to look after them 
as after the Ajivikas and other religious communities. It should 
also be remembered that although ASoka and his grandson make 
gifts of cave dwellings to the Ajivikas they do not do anything 
of the kind to the Nirgranthas. As to the spread of the Nir- 
grantha religion to Bengal, the Divyavadana speaks of their 
presence in Pundravardhana (North Bengal) in the time of 
Asoka but only as parivrajakas and not as members of an orga- 
nised church. As to the schisms, it may be noted that the esta- 
blished Jaina philosophy does not bear the stamp of the new’ 
philosophical doctrines which their leaders are said to have 
introduced. Besides the doctrine of ksanika, which Asvamitra is 
said to have opposed, was not a Jaina doctrine but belonged 
to Buddhism. Under these circumstances it is impossible to 
accept the traditional story as historical. 

It therefore appears that the two religious orders, the 
Ajivika and Nirgrantha, were still small local communities of 
Magadha, not powerful enough to demand that protection 
from the state which Buddhism enjoyed. The Nirgrantha 
order was even less important than the Ajivika but it managed 
to survive the latter up to later times and to rise into greater 
importance. 


Buddhism 

Although originally a Sramana movement, Buddhism had 
emerged out of it in the 4th century B.G. as a distinct and powerful 
religion endowed with great potentiality for expansion. 
But the extent of this expansion before the time of the Emperor 
A$oka is still a matter of conjecture. Its activity in pre-A$okan 
times seems to have been confined to Kosala and Magadha but 
small communities of brethren had probably come into exis- 
tence in the west in Mathura and Ujjayinl. The traditional 
| account of the second Buddhist council which is said to have 
taken place 100 years after the Nirvana of Buddha at Vaisali, 
refers to invitations sent to the patheyya monks and to the 



300 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

communities in such distant places as Avanti, Kau£ambi, Sankafya 
and Kanauj. Patheyya meant the western monks including 
probably the community of Mathura. The A^°han legends 
attach great importance to the monastery of Natabhata on the 
Urumunda hill at Mathura, as Upagupta, the spiritual guide of 
the Emperor, and Sanavasa, the teacher of Upagupta, both 
belonged to that institution. The legends at least show that 
Mathur& had attained some importance in the Buddhist church 
already before the time of ASoka. 

The most outstanding events in the history of the church 
in this period were the two councils, the second and the third* 
The second council was held, according to all traditions, one 
hundred years after the Nirvana, at VaiSall. It is said to 
have originated on account of some difference in points of monastic 
discipline. The monks of Vaisall had declared as admissible 
ten new points viz. : 1. storing of salt in a horn, 2. the 

taking of the midday meal when the sun’s shadow shows two 
finger-breadths after noon, 3. the going to some village and there 
eating fresh food, 4. residing in the same parish and yet holding 
the uposatha separately, 5. sanction of a solemn act in an in- 
complete chapter, 6. (unconditional) following of a precedent, 
7. the partaking of unchurned milk, 8. the use of unfermen- 
ted toddy, 9. the use of a mat without fringes (not conforming 
with the model prescribed), 10. to accept gold and silver. 

This action was not however approved by other monks and 
hence a council was called at Vaisall. This council after a long 
deliberation appointed a committee cf eight elders, four of them 
hailed from the east and the other four from the west. Among 
the former was Sabbakami, thera of Vaisall who, it is said, had 
received his ordination 120 years earlier and among the latter 
was Sambhuta Sanavasa of Mathura who was probably the 
same as the teacher of Upagupta. The ten points of the monks 
of Vaigali were declared to be against the rules. In a plenary 
session of the council, the Vinaya was rehearsed. The Bh^ksus 
who were excommunicated are also said to have convened 
another meeting which was a great council (Mahasangiti). 
Henceforth the followers of the wrong views who were then most 
probably more numerous came to be known as the Mahasan-V 
ghika. 



RELIGION 


301 


* So far, the story seems to be generally reliable but the diffi- 
culty arises when the question of chronology comes in. The 
tradition says that the council was held in the time of Asoka, 
or Kalasoka, the son of Sisunaga. But history does not know of 
any such king. Attempts have been made to identify Kalasoka 
with Kaka varna who is mentioned in the Puranic lists as the son 
of Sisunaga but the identification is based on unconvincing 
grounds. The Pali as well as Sanskrit Buddhist sources say that 
Asoka flourished one hundred years after the Nirvana and that 
until he embraced the Buddhist faith he was living a life of black 
and sinful deeds. He was then a Candasoka or a KamaSoka 
but after his conversion he became a Dharmasoka. It is this 
Asoka then who is contemplated in the traditional account of the 
second council. Some of the monks who took a leading part 
in the conference seem to have been contemporaneous with 
the Maurya emperor whereas others belonged to one generation 
earlier. 

Although the story of the second council in its present form is 
a garbled version and does not give a faithful picture of the 
event, it, however, seems that it had a historical basis. A 
Vinaya council had certainly been held at Vaisall and its ses- 
sion might have been necessitated by the arbitrary conduct of 
the local monks, but the time when it was held cannot be fixed 
with any amount of certainty. It is not impossible that it was 
held during the earlier part of the reign of Asoka. This council 
led to the first schism in the church and the foundation of the 
Mahasarighika school. 

The account of the third council which was held at Patali- 
putra is still more confused. It was not a general council but a 
party meeting of the Elders — the Theravadins. The Ceylonese 
tradition says that it was held 18 years after the coronation of 
A£oka but there is no confirmation of this fact in the edicts of the 
emperor. As it was a meeting of the Theravadins, the Mahasan- 
ghikas were excluded from it. The Ceylonese account of the 
council runs as follows : 

‘When 236 years had elapsed after Nirvana, sixty thousand 
monks dwelt in the Asokarama. Sectarians of different des- 
criptions, all of them wearing the kasaya, ruined the Doctrine 
of the Jina. It was* then that Tissa Moggaliputta convoked a 



302 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


council, attended by 1000 monks. Having destroyed the false 
doctrines and subdued many shameless people, he restored the 
true faith, and propounded the Abhidhamma treatise Kathd - 
vatthu. It was from him that Mahendra, the future apostle of 
Buddha, learnt the 5 nikayas, the 7 books of the Abhidhamma 
and the whole Vinaya.’ 

The account, as may be seen, has a pronounced sectarian 
tendency and tries to prove the originality and superiority of the 
Theravada or the Vibhajyavada school. This clearly shows 
that it was a party meeting of which the historicity may not be 
disputed, but the story of the compilation of the Kathdvatthu , 
which again presupposes the existence of the entire Pali canon 
consisting of the Vinaya, the 5 nikayas and six other Abhidhamma 
>vorks must be made an exception. 

The history of the Buddhist church in this period was not 
in all appearance an undistrubed one. The church was gra- 
dually losing its unity on account of its expansion and for want 
of regular communication between the various distant commu- 
nities. Local influences were slowly affecting their conduct 
and shaping them in different ways. These tendencies ulti- 
mately gave rise to different Buddh\st schools. The community 
of VaiSall, as we have already seen, formed itself into a school 
either before the time of ASoka or in a period when Asoka had 
not yet taken up the cause of Buddhism. Under Asoka’s patro- 
nage, the Buddhist community of Pataliputra, which pretended 
to be more loyal to the teachings of Buddha, reorganised itself 
and tried to check the schismatic tendency in the church . It 
is probably under their influence that Asoka advised his officials 
to see that nobody might destroy the unity of the Sangha. The 
Sarnath Pillar edict contains the following order of the emperor 
to his officers at Pataliputra : 

‘....the Sangha cannot be divided by any one. But 
indeed the monk or nun who shall break up the Sangha should 
be caused to put on white robes and to reside in non- 
residence.’ 

The same instruction was also issued by the emperor to the 
Mahamatras of KauSambl. In the Sanchl version of the edict, 
the instruction is given in a slightly different form : ‘The Sangha 
of both monks and nuns is made united as long as (my) sons 



RELIGION 


303 


and great-grandsons (shall reign) and as long as the moon and 
the sun (shall shine).’ 

The compelling of a monk or a nun to put on white robes 
and to reside in non-residence meant expulsion from the com- 
munity, a punishment prescribed in the Vinayas for the offence 
of Sanghabheda. ASoka certainly did not issue the edict to 
give publicity to the already»existing Vinaya rule concerning 
Sanghabheda. The church must have shown serious symp- 
toms of disintegration and this was a special measure to safeguard 
its unity. The tradition confirms that Ascka’s fears were justi- 
fied. It is said that during the third century of the Nirvana, 
a number of schools such as Sarvastivada, Mahisasaka, Dharma- 
guptaka etc. made their appearance within the orthodox section 
of the church (Theravada) . The Mahasanghika school which 
had long separated from it was also split up into a number of 
schools. 

The greatest event in the history of Buddhism in this period 
was the conversion of Asoka. The legendary accounts, although 
marred by many exaggerated claims of the community, enable 
us to give a connected picture of ASoka as a Buddhist. The 
traditions are confirmed by the inscriptions and both have 
been reviewed in the account of the reign of ASoka given 
above. 

Asoka’s patronage must have contributed to the spread of 
Buddhism not only within the empire but also to distant lands 
even in his lifetime. We learn from the edicts that he himself 
had given a lead in this direction. Throughout his empire he 
had circulated instructions on the Dhamma, and caused them 
to be inscribed on rocks and pillars overlooking the highroads 
so that they could attract the notice cf his subjects. We have 
seen that he had specially advised his officials to afford facilities 
to his subjects and to encourage them so that they might follow 
the Dhamma. When he says that he had achieved the conquest 
by law (dhamma-vijaya) both within his empire and outside, 
he probably means that he had entrusted his officers with this 
mission within his own empire and deputed missionaries to the 
foreign countries. 

I The credit of the initiative in this^ direction is attributed by 
the Ceyloncss chronicles to Tissa Moggaliputta. In the inscrip- 



304 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


tions Asoka speaks of the missions as his own. To whomsoever 
the initiative might have been due, either to Tissa Moggali- 
putta, as the tradition claims, or to Asoka himself under the 
inspiration of the Sarigha, it is quite conceivable that after the 
reorganisation of the Magadhan church in the third council 
and with the co-operation of the emperor himself, efforts were 
made to carry Buddhism to distant countries. The success 
of the first missionary activity might not have been very large so 
far as the foreign countries were concerned but within the Maurya 
empire they must have been crowned with immense success. 
The epigraphic records and Buddhist monuments of the post- 
Asokan times bear clear testimony to it. 

Theistic Movements 

The rise of some of the new theistic movements which later 
on became the religion of the people may be placed in this period. 
The absence of any noteworthy references to such movements in 
the early Buddhist texts probably shows that they were far from 
being established religions in this age. The Brahmanism repre- 
sented in the texts was a Vedic cult. Hence it seems probable , 
that the theistic movements were started only when Buddhism 
had become an established religion of the country. Buddhism 
was on the way to becoming a religion of Bhakti. Buddha 
had been made the object of profound devotion and his relics 
and symbols had begun to be worshipped. In this form the 
Buddhist faith had a direct appeal to the common people who 
had so long been only the uninterested spectators of the occa- 
sional sacrifices performed by the nobles and the unwilling 
workers for them. 

The first trace of the existence of such a movement is found 
in the grammar of Panini. In his Sutra iv. 3. 98 Panini states 
that ‘The affix vun is affixed to the name of Vasudeva and 
Arjuna in the sense of the worshipful one* ( Vasudevarjunabhyam 
vun). Thus the derivative forms, Vasudevaka and Arjunaka 
mean respectively : ‘the devotee of Vasudeva* and ‘the devotee 
of Arjuna*. While commenting on this aphorism Patanjali 
points out that in this case the names are probably not to be 
taken as the names of the Kshatriya heroes but as the designation * 
of the tatrabhavat — ‘the adorable one.* 



RELIGION 


305 


It is therefore almost certain that the cult of Vasudeva and 
Arjuna were current at least in the Punjab in the age of Panini. 
It is now recognised that Panini was acquainted with the Maha- 
bharata story, as he refers not only to the heroes depicted in the 
story but also to the epic itself. This epic was the Pandu story. 
The two heroes, Vasudeva and Arjuna, must have been deified 
in it. 

Vasudeva or Krishna is mentioned by the Greek writers 
under the name Heracles. Megasthenes (Frag. XLI) tells us : 
‘Heracles was worshipped by the inhabitants of the plains, 
especially by the Sourasenai, an Indian tribe possessed of two 
cities, Methora (Mathura) and Kleisobora (Krishnapura ?) 
and who had a large navigable river, the Jobares (Jumna) 
flowing through their territories . 5 Curtius informs us that 
‘an image of Heracles was carried in front of the enemy of Porus 
as he advanced against Alexander . 5 

The epigraphic records of the second century B.C. amply 
confirm that the cult of Vasudeva was being widely followed 
. not only by the people of the country but also by some foreign 
settlers. The famous Besnagar inscription records that Helio- 
dorus, the ambassador of a Greek king named Antialcidas, 
was raising a Garuda pillar at Vidisa in honour of Vasudeva, 
‘the god of gods 5 . Almost in the same period and in the same 
place, another devotee of Vasudeva named Gautamlputra 
erected a Garuda column in front of the temple of the Bhagvat. 
The Ghasundi inscription speaks cf a pujd stone wall for 
the worship of Bhagavat Samkarsana and Vasudeva. 
Samkarsana and Vasudeva are also mentioned in the Nanaghat 
cave inscription among the objects of adoration. 

It is therefore permissible to think that the cult of Vasudeva 
must have originated at least a century earlier in order to enable 
its followers to carry the faith to distant parts of the country. 
Vasudeva was no longer a hero-god like Arjuna, as he seems 
to have been in the time of Panini, but the greatest god, the god 
of gods, as Heliodorus would have us believe. This evolution 
in the conception of the god must have taken a fairly long time. 
•1 As to the cult of Samkarsana, it is difficult to say whether it 
Had originated in the earlier period along with the cult of Vasu- 
deva. Samkarsana was the elder brother of Vasudeva and a 



306 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


member of the Vrshni race. But he does not play the same impor- 
tant role in the Great Epic as his younger brother. He appears 
as a hero, endowed with great power which he seldom exercises, 
his sole concern being wine. In the Arthatdstra there is men- 
tion of the votaries of Samkarsana. It is said : ‘Spies disguised 
as ascetics with shaved head or braided hair and pretending 
to be worshippers of god Samkarsana, may mix their sacrificial 
beverage with the juice of madana plant (and give to the cowherds) 
and carry off the cattle’ (translation, p. 485). This might 
arouse a suspicion that the cult of Samkarsana was in vogue 
among the cowherds or the Abhiras but the inscriptions of the 
second century B.C. already referred to do not allow any such 
suspicion as Samkarsana is ranked there with Vasudeva and 
is an object of adoration even with the higher classes. 

The contemporary Greek writers speak of a god named 
Dionysus along with Heracles. Megasthenes tells us that the 
Oxydrakai claimed descent from Dionysus, ‘because the vine 
grew in their country, and their processions were conducted 


with great pomp, and their kings on going forth to war and^, 
on other occasions marched in Bacchic fashion with drume . 


beating’ (Frag, XLVI). Megasthenes also informs us that tl 
worshippers of Dionysus lived on mountains and observed 
tain customs which were Bacchanalian. They dressed in muslin, 
wore turbans, used perfumes and arrayed themselves in gar- 
ments dyed of bright colours (Frag. XLI). The cult of Dio- 
nysus with its Bacchanalian features reminds us of the cult 
of Samkarsana. 

Asoka refers to pashamdas in the sense of religious sects. They 
include the Brahmanas, Sramanas as well as other sects but 
it is not clear if they included the followers of these new cults 
as well. In the ninth pillar edict, Asoka speaks of the various 
mamgalas or auspicious rites performed by the people in sick- 
ness, marriage, birth of offspring and at the time of undertaking 
a journey. These mamgalas were evidently domestic-* rites 
and no religious cults are meant by them. ASoka, we have seen, 
had introduced certain edifying shows for the instruction of the 
people in the Buddhist law. It is probable that similar oth^r 
shows for the edification of the non-Buddhist popular cults were 
also known in the country. We have already discussed the 



RELIGION 


307 


reference made by Curtius to the image of Heracles being carried 
in the front of the army of Porus. A curious passage of the 
Mahabhasya of Patanjali mentions the images of gods ( arced ) 
set up by the Mauryas to obtain gold. All this shows that 
images of gods and their cults were known in the country in the 
Maurya period but on a very limited scale and among the com- 
mon people. They were stilf looked down on by the aristocratic 
followers of the Vedic cult. 



CHAPTER XI 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

LANGUAGE 

By 600 B.C., a little before Buddha, the Aryan speech would 
appear to have spread from Gandhara to Videha and Campa 
in Eastern India, and to have been the common language of 
Indian Aryandom of the times that embraced the Mahajana- 
padas. The hill and forest tracts of Central India just to the 
south of the tracts watered by the Ganges were unquestionably 
Austric and Dravidian in speech ; also Bengal and Assam and 
' Orissa ; and within the Ar yandom of the upper Gangetic area 
and the Punjab, particularly within the former, there were 
still large areas, or small pockets, of non-aryan speech which 
were fast becoming smaller and smaller. In the Jatakas for 
instance, we read of Candala villages where they spoke the 
the Candala speech, and we are told of an incident in which 
a Candala masquerading as a Brahmin was discovered when he 
unconsciously cried out giligili in the Candala language when 
he put some very hot rice-milk within his mouth in a Brahman 
feast which he had joined. 

For the linguistic situation in India during the Nanda and 
Mauryan periods, we have literary evidence only for the Nanda 
period, and both literary and epigraphical for the Mauryan 
period. The Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads, the 
dates of which cannot be satisfactorily determined, cover at least 
600 years, from800B.G. to 200B.C. ;and the Buddhist and Jaina 
canonical literatures also, in their substance, refer to the period 
immediately before the Nandas ; and conditions during the Nanda 
age not being very different from those obtaining a few 
centuries earlier, the evidence from the Brahmanas and other 
works mentioned above can be regarded as equally applicable 
to it. The Brahmanical Sutras, Yaska, Panini, Katyayana, 
Patanjali, Kautilya, Vatsyayana, probably Bharata, and above 
all, the Mahabhdrata and the Ramayana — all these belong 
either wholly or partly (as in the case of the two epics) to the ^ 
Nanda and Mauryan periqds. On the epigraphic side, we have 



LANGUAGE 


309 


to take note of the earliest Brahml inscriptions which are few 
and very small, and Brahml legends on the early coins and seals, 
some of which may be pre-Maurya ; and the inscriptions of 
A£oka and his successors. Post-Maurya inscriptions for a couple 
of centuries after the extinction of the Maurya dynasty also 
have some value for these periods. 

The Aryan speech during the Nanda and Maurya periods 
would appear to have been current, in its various local or dia- 
lectal forms, as the language of the land, from the Punjab to the 
eastern boundary of Bihar, which thus became the true home of 
the Aryan speech in India, the land of the great Aryan states : and 
from this area, where Brahmanism was developing as the result 
of a synthesis of the worlds of the Aryan and the non-Aryan, 
the Aryan speech was spreading south, mainly along the west* 
through Rajputana and Malwa and Sindh ; and it had already 
been established in Gujarat ; and colonies of Aryan speakers 
would seem to have been formed in what is now northern Maha- 
rashtra, as far down as the Godavari. The belt of forest land 
in the east, corresponding to present day Eastern Madhya Pra- 
desh and Chota Nagpur, harboured rather backward groups 
of Non-Aryan tribes, the ancestors of the present day Kol 
(Munda) peoples and of Dravidian tribes like the Gonds, the 
Oraons and the Maler, and effectively checked, though only for 
a time, the penetration of the Aryan language into these tracts. 
Although the conquest of Kalinga (corresponding to Orissa of 
the present day) by ASoka in the third century B.G. opened up 
this area to the Aryan language, it was some time before the 
latter could establish itself in Eastern India — in Bengal proper, 
and then (by a double current from Bengal and from Kosala 
or Eastern U. P. through Mahakosala or Eastern Madhya Pra- 
desh) into Orissa. The main line of North Indian Aryan 
linguistic expansion into South India thus from the second half 
of the first millennium B.C. has always been along the west — 
from the Midland through Rajputana and Malwa ; and 
subsequently North Indian Muslim expansion into the Deccan 
carrying with it the Hindi speech followed the same route, in 
both pre-Mogul and Mogul times. 

From the Brahmanas we find that probably a century 
or two before Buddha, North Indian Aryandom included the 



310 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

following ten states — Gandhara, Kekaya, Madra, USInara, 
Matsya, Kuru, Pancala, Kaii, Kosala and Videha. These 
included practically the entire Aryan-speaking world of say 
700 B.C., and these states fell under three groups — Udicya or 
Northern (including Gandhara or the northern part of the present 
N. W. Frontier province and probably also the continuous parts 
of Eastern Afghanistan, Kekaya or* North-Western Punjab east 
of the Gandhara country including part of the Sind Sagar Doab, 
and the Jeep and Rechna Doabs and Madra in two groups — the 
Uttara or Northern Madras probably in Kashmir and the 
Dakshina or Southern Madras in North Central Punjab consi- 
sting of part of the Rechna and Bari Doabs), Madhyadeiiya or 
the Midland (comprising USInara in the west and north, corres- 
ponding to N. E. Punjab and N. W. Uttar Pradesh, Matsya 
or N. E. Rajputana, and Kuru and Pancala or Western U. P.) 
and Pracya or the Eastern (Kosala or Oudh, KaSi or Eastern 
U. P., and Videha or Northern Bihar). Other States within 
this Aryan tract also came to be established quickly enough, 
Salva, connected with Matsya, and Magadha and Anga in 
Bihar to the South of the Ganges. It would appear that the 
division of Aryan India into these three tracts, Udicya , Madhya - 
desa and Pracya , had some basis in dialectal differences. They 
correspond roughly to the three-fold division of the Indus valley 
and the upper Gangetic valley which is still prevalent — 
Punjab , Pachaka , and Purab , corresponding roughly to the 
Hindki or Lahnda or Western Punjabi, and Eastern Punjabi 
tracts, to the Western Hindi area, and to the tract of the country 
in the east where Kosali or Eastern Hindi and the Bihari 
speeches are spoken. Northern, or North-Western, Midland 
or Central, and Eastern — these formed the three dialect areas 
of the Aryan tract by 500 B. C., and to these three we shall have 
probably to add a fourth — the Dakshindtya or Southern, which 
at this ancient period was probably not much different from 
the dialect area of the Midland from where the Aryan language 
was spreading through Rajputana and Malwa into Gujarht 
and the trans-Vindhyan tracts. 

About the speech of the Udicya tract, the popular opinion 
in the Midland in the age of Brahmanas has been thus expressed 
in the Kaushitaki Brahmana ( vii 6 ) : tasmad udicyam prajHa - 



LANGUAGE 


311 


tatard vag udyate : udancau eva yanti vacant sikshitum ; yo vd tata 
dgacchati , tasya vd susrushante ‘therefore speech is uttered in 
the North with mere discernment ; they go to the northern 
lands to learn speech ; and people like to listen to him who comes 
from there. 5 Thus the people of the other tracts acknowledged 
the Aryan language as spoken in the north-west as being the best 
and purest form of it. About Pracya or the east some stray and 
rather obscure references in the Brahmanas would suggest that 
the Aryan speech was becoming altered or debased there : it was 
the land inhabited by the Vratyas, who did not follow the Vedic 
religion — they were adlkshitas or uninitiated people, but spoke 
the language of those who were dikshitas or followers of Vedic 
rites and customs, and at the same time declared words or 
sentences not articulated with difficulty as being articulated 
with difficulty ( a-durukta-vakyam duruktam dhuh , a-dikshita 
dikshita-vacam vadanti). This statement about the speech of the 
Vratyas of the East would appear to suggest the presence 
already of Middle Indo-Aryan or Prakritic habits of speech, 
which found the characteristic consonant combinations of the 
old Aryan speech difficult, and brought in consonant assimilation 
and cerebralisation on a large scale. In the Brahmanas there 
is no hint about a Dakshinatya or southern land as being 
largely inhabited by Aryan speakers, and nothing about any 
dialectal or linguistic speciality there. 

The assumption is quite allowable that by the time of 
the Buddha, the spoken Aryan language had deviated con- 
siderably from the Old Indo-Aryan norm as presented by 
the speech of the Rigveda, and had developed at least three 
distinct dialects — a Northern or North-Western, a Central, 
and an Eastern. This last was already fairly in the Middle 
Indo-Aryan or Prakrit stage ; but the North-Western was 
conservative, and was regarded as the purest form of the 
Aryan speech, the well of Aryan undefiled — and it was ex- 
ceedingly likely that in the Udicya as the nidus of the 
Aryan people in India there was the largest settled Aryan 
population, and consequently the language was better preser- 
ved ; the more Aryan speakers were penetrating further into 
the East, among masses of non -Aryans, the more they were 
getting to be smaller in numbers compared with the surround- 



312 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


in g non-Aryans, and the Aryan language, in a non-Aryan en- 
vironment that was growing stronger and stronger, was sus- 
ceptible to a more rapid change and to change along new lines 
than in the North-west. 

Epigraphical records of the 4th-3rd centuries B.C. bear 
out the occurrence of the situation as deduced from literary 
references — only some new developments had in the meanwhile 
taken place. The oldest Brahml inscriptions including of 
course those of Asoka give us a sufficiently clear idea as to the 
linguistic conditions for Aryan India ; Anoka’s inscrip- 
tions, giving the same texts in as many as three distinct local 
dialects have been aptly described as the first ‘Linguistic Survey 
of India’. In the Asokan documents, we have : (i) a Prakrit or 
Aryan speech of the North-West, as in the edicts at Mansehra 
And Shahbazgarhi. This is based on the Udicya dialect of 
the earlier period, and its phonetics even in the 3rd century 
B.C. shows that it had deviated the least from the Old Indo- 
Aryan norm, and it thus bears out the encomium of the earlier 
author of the Brahmanas that speech here was prajndta-tara , 
more discerning. Northern and North-Western Punjab thus 
showed a great deal of conservatism in its language, even as late 
as the 3rd century B.C. We may even say that it was still in 
the Old Aryan stage (at least in its phonetics, retaining as it did 
a good many conjunct consonants, and the three sibilants 
j, j, s), while the speech of the East had deviated most, (ii) 
There is a Prakrit of the East, found in Eastern ins- 
criptions of Asoka and elsewhere. This form of Indo- Aryan 
speech has deviated exceedingly from Old Indo- Aryan 
norm, and besides it shows phonetic peculiarities (e.g. use 
of only l and no r) and some forms (e.g. - e from - ah 
rather than -0 in the case of masculine nouns ending in - 0 ) 
which are not found in the other dialectal areas. It is exceed- 
ingly likely that this Prakrit of the East was the language 
of Anoka’s court at Pataliputra, and the edicts of A£oka 
were first written at Pataliputra in this dialect, and sent 
to the provinces for publication by being engraved on stone at 
prominent places. Where the local dialect differed so appre- 
ciably from this court speech as to make the latter not easy to 
follow locally, as for example in the North-West (Mansehra and 



LANGUAGE 


313 


Shahbazgarhi) and in the South-West (Girnar), the edicts were 
rendered in the local dialect ; but this rendering was not very 
careful, but rather haphazard as a good many forms and expres- 
sions from the court dialect were allowed to find a place in the 
versions in the North-western and South-western dialects. 
Where the local dialect did not differ so much as to make the 
Pracya court dialect unintelligible, it would appear that the 
latter was employed, as much as in the home districts in Eastern 
India. Thus in Rajputana, in Western U. P., in North-western 
U. P. (Kalsi), and in Central U. P. (Allahabad), the Eastern 
dialect is employed as much as in Eastern U. P., Benares (Sar- 
nath) and Bihar (Lauriya, Rummindei, Barabar caves). A few 
special characteristics may occasionally be noted, e.g., at 
Kalsi ; the exact reason for this is not known. It would appear 
that the use of Eastern Prakrit, the Court dialect of Bihar and 
Benares, was like that of the use of Hindi (a form of Western 
Hindi of Western U. P.) in Eastern U. P. and Bihar. 
Generally it has been the language of the Midland that has 
prevailed in the East, but in the Asoka inscriptions, 
owing to the political importance of Magadha as the home 
province of the empire, for the first and last time we have 
an Eastern speech established as the official language in the 
Midland. 

In tracts far away from Arya-land, where Dravidian and also 
probably Kol (Munda) languages were spoken, the edicts were 
published in this Eastern official speech, e.g. at Dhauli and 
Jaugada in the Kalinga country, which was both Dravidian 
(old Telugu, old Kannada) and Kol in speech, and atSiddhapur, 
Maski and Yerragudi where the language was equally Dravidian 
(Old Kannada). 

This Eastern speech was unquestionably the same for the 
upper classes in Kosala, KaSI, Videha and Magadha ; it was the 
language of the Buddha, who called himself a Kshatriya of Kosala 
(Kosala Khattiya), and of Mahavira also ; it was the language 
of ASoka and also of Chandragupta and the Nandas. The 
oldest Buddhist canon, as Sylvain L£vi and Heinrich Liiders 
amply demonstrated, was composed in this Eastern Prakrit, and 
notin Pali. The Pali canon appears not yet to have been 
known — at least, sufficiently known, in Magadha. ASoka, when 



314 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


he quoted from the Buddhist texts, quotes from a version in 
this Eastern dialect, and not from the Pali. 

Epigraphical evidence from the 4th century B.G. shows 
that in Magadha had appeared a local form of this Eastern 
Prakrit which deviated in two of its sounds from what may be 
called the standard Pracya or Eastern Prakrit ; it had palatal 
i for the dental s of the latter (</, sh , s of old Indo-Aryan), 
and probably it had developed a palatalised ky from k after a 
palatal vowel. This specialised Magadhan form of Pracya was 
in all likelihood current among the masses of the people, of less 
exalted ranks, and the s pronounciation was evidently looked 
upon as something vulgar and uneducated, judging from the fact 
than in later times in the Sanskrit drama the s dialect was rele- 
gated to the least exalted characters. 

(iii) The third dialect of ASoka is that of the South-west 
as in Surashtra or peninsular Gujarat (Girnar). This is well- 
established there, and if the Gujarat speech of the 3rd century 
B.G. is derived from that of the Midland, then in ASoka’s Girnar 
edict we can see a form of the Midland speech, slightly modified 
perhaps from the genuine Midland dialect of the Mathura area, 
given a recognition far away from its own home district — for, 
as we have just seen, in the Midland proper the Eastern official 
language was used in inscriptions. 

This roughly is the situation for the spoken dialects of Aryan 
India during the Nanda and Maurya periods. Asoka employed 
them in his inscriptions as already the Eastern speech appears 
to have attained a certain literary position through the Buddhist 
and Jaina canons being redacted in it ; and the use of the'North- 
Western and South-Western speeches was just a concession to 
two distant and important dialects the speakers of which would 
find difficulty in following the Pataliputra court speech. We 
know that the Greeks when they first came to India were con- 
fined to the area of the Udlcya or North-Western dialect, a dia- 
lect which Anoka’s officials employed in the inscriptions at 
Mansehra and Shahbazgarhi. That this North-Western 
dialect retained some archaic or old Indo-Aryan characters is 
born e out not only by the evidence from the Brahmanas and from 
the inscriptions of Aioka, but also from the Greek transcriptions 
of Indian names heard from speakers of this dialect. Thus 



LANGUAGE 


315 


names like Sandrakottos, Sandraphagos, Prasioi, Eronnaboas, 
Brachmanes, Ottorakorrhas, Amitrokhat^s or Amitrokhad6s and 
Palibothra are Greek renderings of * Chandrakupta (a genuine 
North-Western form for Candragupta, with for - g - charac- 
terising the Darada or Pisaca Prakiit of the North-West), 
Candrabhaga, Pracya, Hiraiiyavaha, Brahmana, Uttarakuru, 
Amitraghata and *Pallibutra for *Pad’liputra = Pataliputra as 
heard in the north-west, where, as partially indicated by the 
Mansehra and Shahbazgarhi and later North-western inscrip- 
tions, groups like pr , tr 9 kr , br 9 dr 9 gr 9 did not assimilate the r . 

The relationship between the Asokan dialects and the later 
forms of Indo-Aryan can be tentatively indicated as follows : 

1 . The Ncrth-Western dialect — from this originated Hindi, 
Lahnda, or Western Punjabi, Eastern Punjabi (the latter strongly 
influenced by the Midlands peech) and Sindhi. This N. W. 
dialect was taken by Indian settlers to Chinese Turkistan 
where it was in use for some centuries as an official speech, in the 
southern part of the country. 

2. The Midland dialect : Not represented in the Asoka 
inscriptions, but the Girnar dialect is probably a form of Midland. 
From this originated the Western Hindi dialect (partially influ- 
enced by the North-Western dialect), and Rajasthani-Gujarati. 

We do not know anything about an Aryan speech being 
current in the Deccan, but evidently from Malava and Gujarat 
and Varad (h)a-tata (Varhad or Berar) Aryan dialects, mostly 
from the Sauraseni area, were spreading into Maharashtra. 

3. The Eastern dialect. The standard form of it, at first 
current all over Eastern U. P. (Oudh etc.) and Bihar, differen- 
tiated into Eastern Pracya (Magadhi) and Western Pracya 
(Ardha-Magadhi). The latter came strongly under Midland 
influence, and became finally transformed into the Kosali or 
Eastern Hindi dialects (Awadhi, Bagheli, Ghattisgarhi) . The 
former, Magadhi, spread into Bengal and Assam and Orissa, 
and it is the source of Bhojpuri, Magahi-Maithili, Bengali- 
Assamese and Oriya. 

There is no evidence from the Nan da and Maurya documents 
about the spread of the Aryan tongue into the Himalayan regions. 
Probably the Dardic speaking Aryans (Khasas and other tribes) 
were penetrating into the Central Himalayan areas (the present 



316 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Western Pahari and Eastern Pahari regions), and their Dardic 
Khasa speech was later overlaid by Indo-Aryan from the Mid- 
land. 

As for literary Indo-Aryan of the Nanda and Maurya periods 
we have to reckon first with classical Sanskrit, which became 
fully established as the language of Brahmanism and Brahman 
organisation before the Nanda regime. It was at first confined 
to the Brahman schools, and as a language, in the 5th century 
B. C. when Panini flourished in the Udicya region , it was suffi- 
ciently near to the spoken dialect of Panini’s home districts as 
to merit from him the name Laukika i.e. ‘popular or current’ 
as differentiated from the elder Vedic dialect which he called 
Chandasa or Chandas i.e., ‘poetic speech 9 which was tanta- 
mount to ‘archaic speech*. Classical Sanskrit was not the 
creation of the Udicya people only ; just as the modern literary 
forms of the Hindi or Hindustani language of Delhi, viz. High 
Hindi and Urdu, are the creation not only of High Hindi and 
Urdu writers of Delhi and Agra and Meerut, but also of Lahore 
and Lucknow and Haidarabad and Mathura and Allahabad 
and Benares. The sishtas or learned men, i.e. Brahmans, in the 
Midland, in the Pracya, and also in the Dakshinatya, also helped 
to build it up ; and it came to be closely connected with the Mid- 
land as here the Brahman synthesis of Aryan and non -Aryan 
cultures into Hindu culture and religion seems to have started. 
Because of its archaic character and the clarity of its forms, 
it obtained the homage of the Buddhists and the Jains as well, 
just from the end of the Maurya period. 

The Eastern Prakrit became an important vehicle of reli- 
gious culture when the message of Buddha and Mahavlra was 
delivered in it in the 6th-5th centuries B.C. and although it 
was a very much advanced or degenerate speech from Old Indo- 
Aryan standards, it obtained some pre-eminence in the Nanda 
Maurya periods both as the language of the Buddhist and Jaina 
faiths and official language of the court or of the empire. But 
this pre-eminence seems to have died out with the passing away 
of the Mauryan empire. 

Pali as a literary language associated with the Theravada 
school of HInayana Buddhism appears not to have been pro- 
minent during the Nanda and Maurya periods, if it had come 



LANGUAGE 


317 


into existence at all. Buddha gave a great charter to all the 
languages of mankind when he declared that people were to study 
his message in their own languages : and we may presume that 
as a result of this great pronouncement, translations into different 
dialects were encouraged. There is evidence that the teachings 
of Buddha were first written in the Eastern Prakrit. But this 
form of Aryan speech, in spite of its being the official language 
of the empire was not a central dialect, but belonged to the 
easternmost extretnity of the empire, and it was most deviated 
from the norm of the rest of Aryandom. As such it was 
not much intelligible to the rest of India. The Midland 
forming the real heart of Aryavarta, had a dialect which could 
be understood by the Udicya people, as well as by the Pracyas 
and the Dakshinatyas. It was the precursor of the SaurasenI 
apabrahmSa of late medieaval times (c. 600-1200 A.D.) and of 
Brajbhakha (c. 1500-1700) and the Khariboli Hindi or Hindus- 
tani of the present day. Buddha’s discourses were rendered into 
the Midland dialect, as current in Mathura (and extended from 
Mathura into Ujjain and Malwa) : after the death of the 
master, some of his disciples who were from Mathura had a hand 
in redacting the canon — at least one version of it ; just as they 
were rendered into the North-western Prakrit, as fragments 
in this dialect recovered from Central Asia show. The same 
process was repeated in later times : Kabir ( 1 5th century A.D.) 
spoke and composed in the Bhojpuri dialect current in his native 
city of Benares, and yet his writings are found in a mixed 
variety of Western Hindi, Brajbhakha and Khariboli of Delhi 
with plenty of Awadhi (Eastern Hindi) forms and a few 
Bhojpuri forms occurring as palimpsests. Mahendra, the son of 
Asoka born and brought up in his mother’s city of Ujjain, 
according to the Ceylonese tradition, took the Pali canon to 
Ceylon. It is likely that Mahendra studied his Buddhist 
texts not in the Eastern version as his father evidently did, 
but in the Midland one (which was Pali) as it was current 
in Ujjain. 

Pali does not at all agree with the Magadhi and Ardha- 
Magadhi dialects, later variants of the Pracya speech — it agrees 
rather with Sauraseni, which is the Midland speech as we find 
it in its later Prakrit form. Pali can only be looked upon 



318 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


linguistically as a literary form of the Midland speech as it was 
current in the centuries immediately before Christ. The Mid- 
land speech in its literary form thus was taken to Ceylon by 
MahendrafromUjjain via Pataliputra and Tamralipti and from 
there brought back again into North India with the Theravada 
doctrine by Buddhaghosha. In the meanwhile, it was coming 
into prominence from about the tiriie of Christ, as an important 
and the best cultured form of a Middle Indo-Aryan speech, as 
Sauraseni Prakrit, the earliest use of which we find in the drama 
fragment from Asvaghosha discovered in Central Asia, and pos- 
sibly also in Sudraka’s Mriecchakatika, a Prakrit which Bharata 
noted some time during the early centuries after Christ and which 
Rajasekhara lauded as the most elegant form of speech in the 
8th century A.D. 

The Aryan speech was taken out of India by Indian mis- 
sionaries or military adventurers who went out of India during 
the time of the Nandas and Mauryas. In Sin-Kiang, the city 
of Khotan ( Ku-stana in Sanskrit) was colonised by Indians from 
Taxila in the 3rd century B.C., and the Indian community in 
the Khotan territory became quite numerous and strong, and 
although they lost their separate existence among the surround- 
ing Iranian and Tibeto-Burmese speaking peoples, the Indian 
North-Western Prakrit taken by them continued to be used 
(in a form much influenced by the local languages) as an official 
language in all state documents. Indian troops were found in 
the armies of the Achaemenian emperors and in Xerxes’ army 
there were Indian troops. At the battle of Gaugamela or 
Arbela where Alexander finally overthrew Darius, the last 
Achaemenian emperor, Indian troops fought very stubbornly. 
The Indians came in touch with the Greeks through the Persian 
empire, and this must have taken place by 500 B.C., when the 
old form of the word Iones (Ionians, the Greeks of Asia Minor 
who came to be best known in the East) viz., Iawones or Iavones 
came to India as Tavana . Indian elephants with Indian mahouts f 
were in the army of Pyrrhus when he fought the Romans in the 
3rd century B.C. and in the Carthagenian army led by Has- 
drubal and Hannibal in Italy, Indian elephant drivers also came 
into prominence. Indian philosophers and learned men, and 
later Buddhist missionaries sent by A$oka, found their way 



LANGUAGE 


319 


into Greece, and we have mention in Greek records of at least 
one Indian philosopher who came to Athens and with whom 
Socrates had a conversation (before 400 B.G.). There was a 
good deal of intellectual and cultural intermixture both through 
the Achaemenian empire and the Greek empire of Alexander 
and his successors, and the Indian languages (including the 
newly formed literary speech," classical Sanskrit) came to acquire 
a number of Iranian (Persian) and Greek words (e.g. mudrd , 
dipi or lipi 3 nipista. ‘written’, asavari , kshatrapa , karsha in karsha 
pana> tashta-tast, pusta etc., and dramma from Greek drakhme y 
suranga from surinks or syrinx , samida from semidalis 9 khalina y 
and astronomical terms which came in later). The languages 
of the West, Greek specially, similarly obtained a number of 
Indian words. Connection with China though commerce may. 
have commenced from the 4th century B.C. by way of Assam 
and South-West China (Yun-nan), and probably before Christ 
a few Chinese words came to be admitted into Indian languages 
(e. g. the name China — China, kichaka — £ a kind of bamboo’, 
musdra — ‘a kind of precious stone’.) There were persons in 
India speaking Iranian dialects and Greek, and the Persian 
official language as in the cuneiform inscriptions appears to have 
exerted some influence on the style of the inscriptions of Asoka. 
The presence of different languages side by side in India, Indo- 
Aryan, Dra vidian, Austric and the foreign Persian and Greek, 
gave rise to what I have called ‘Translation compounds’ in 
Indo-Aryan, in which words of same or similar meaning from two 
languages are combined to give a single word in Indo-Aryan 
(e.g. Iranian Karsa ‘a monetary unit’ and Indo-Aryan pana 
of non-Aryan Austric origin-‘computation on the basis of four’ 
gave karshapana in Sanskrit, kahapana in Pali, meaning ‘a coin’; 
Austric sata , sdda^>sali ‘horse’ and non-Aryan of unknown 
origin* ghutr a,* hotr a whence we have ghota ‘horse’ gave Sanskrit 
iali-hotra ‘horse’ etc.) 

The rapprochement between the Indo-Aryan and the Dravi- 
dian and Austric speeches was going on intensely during this 
period when the fusion of the diverse elements of the popula- 
tion into a common Hindu people under the intellectual domina- 
tion of the Brahmans was in full swing. The Aryan language 
was being transformed from its purer Indo-European character 



320 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


into something different under the impact on Non- Aryan, 
through a larger and larger number of non -Aryan speakers 
turning into speakers of Indo-Aryan. In Middle Indo-Aryan, 
the Old Indo-Aryan accent had changed from a free pitch to a 
fixed stress. Vowel length became dependent more on speech 
rhythm than on etymology, a tendency towards an open rather 
than closed pronunciation of syllables became established (this led 
to widespread assimilation of conjunct consonants ’ushering in 
the Middle Indo-Aryan stage e.g. dhar-ma , sah-ya , bhak-ta , of 
earlier Old Indo-Aryan became dha-ima y sa-hya , bha-kta , etc. 
which were soon assimilated to dhamma, sajjha , bhatta ), and there 
was an increase in the cerebralisation of t y th y d y dh y n y to t y th y d y 
dh y n and of l to l ; also the voicing of the intervocal unvoiced 
stops and aspirates started by which loka became loga , atavl 
became adavi and alavl etc., and in morphology we note a ten- 
dency towards reducing all declensions and conjugations of Old 
Indo-Aryan to a single type, and the commencement of the use 
of post-positional help words after case inflexions of the noun ; 
besides, the inflected tenses and moods of the verb were reduced, 
and there was a larger use of participial adjectives, present, past 
and future, to express the time idea of the finite verb ; further, 
the conjunctive participle or gerund in the -tva (- tvi ) and -ya 
became an exceedingly popular form. The vocabulary changed 
its character : a great many Old Aryans words were dropped, 
and their places were taken either by new Indo-Aryan formations, 
or by borrowings from the non- Ary an languages which entered 
the Aryan language through the back-door (i.e. without scholars 
admitting that they were non-Aryan words) and by the score. 
The entire spirit of Indo-Aryan was during the second half of 
the first millennium B. C. being changed fundamentally, and 
Aryan was more and more approximating the spirit of Dravi- 
dian and Kol (Austric). 

Probably a good deal of the masses, in the Northern Indian 
plains, particularly among the lower classes, were bilingual, 
but the fast disappearing non-Aryan was not getting anybody’s 
sympathy. The situation is like what one still sees in certain 
parts of India like Ghota Nagpur and Assam, where 
the non-Aryan speeches are being steadily pushed out by 
Aryan. 



LANGUAGE 


321 


In the Deccan and South India, except possibly in the 
Western Deccan right down to the early course of Godavari 
where Aryan settlements were taking place, the non-Aryan 
languages were reigning supreme. Vidarbha or Varad(h)a- 
tata (present day Varhad or Berar), and ASmaka on the Goda- 
vari, were Aryan states in the peccan prior to 400 B.G. The 
Aitareya Brdhmana , anterior to Buddha, mentions the Andhras, 
the Savaras, the Pulindas and the Mutibas as dasyu or non-Aryan 
(probably Dravidian) tribes in the Deccan (of these the Savaras, 
probably also the Pulindas were Kol tribes), and North Indian 
Aryans before the Buddha do not seem to have known much 
about the Southern Dravidian states. Sindh, from the evidence 
of the Baudhayana Dharma-siitra, was, like Bengal, still outside the 
Aryan pale during the closing centuries before the Christian era; 
Sindh was probably still Dravidian, a language allied to Brahui 
being current in it : and the Greeks say that a tribe named 
Arabitai lived in south Sindh. But there cannot be any doubt 
that throughout the whole of southern and eastern Deccan 
and South India, the ancestors of the Telugus, the Kannadas 
and the Tamil-Malayalis were flourishing as independent states 
with their distinctive South Indian or Dravidian culture which is 
best represented in the ancient Tamil literature ascribed to the 
centuries immediately after Christ. But unfortunately no 
authentic specimen of a Dravidian language is available before 
the early centuries of the Christian era. 

The Dravidian language-family is now confined to India: 
but if the original Dravidian speakers were a Mediterranean 
people, then Dravidian must be relegated to a common stock 
with the language of the ancient Aegean and Asia Minor peoples 
who were living in Greece and the Islands and Asia Minor before 
the Indo-European Hellenes came to Greece. I have suggested 
that a tribal name of this people was * Dr (a) mil- or *Dr(a)miZ , 
which is found in one branch of them in the Island of Crete in 
the Hellenised spelling as Termilai , and in another branch of it 
in Lycia in Southern Asia minor as Ttmmili. Various tribes 
with their different names naturally made up these Mediterranean 
Evaders of India, and *Dramiz was evidently one of 
them. This name was Aryanised as Dramida or Drami\a and then 
as Dravida , certainly earlier than the* Christian era. Round 



322 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


about the time of Christ, the name became *Damizin the mouth 
of the people who bore the name, and they had by this time been 
fully settled and had built their culture and founded their states 
iii the extreme south of India. The ancient Sinhalese Aryan- 
speaking settlers from Gujarat and Sindh, heard this name and 
wrote it in Pali and Sinhalese as Dami[a ; and Greek and Egyptian 
traders similarly heard the name as * Damir and called 
the country the native name of which was obviously *Damirakam 
Damiriki in Greek. Then certain wide-spread phonetic changes 
swept the language of the * Dramiz-Damiz (and probably also 
of the Kannadiga) people, among which was the unvoicing of the 
voiced stops gj ddb to kc\t p ; and in a few centuries after 
Christ, the language entered a phase which we find in the 
oldest Tamil texts now found (the Sangam texts), and the 
name became Tamiz or Tamil which is the form still obtaining 
in the Tamil language. 

Although both Dravidian and Kol influenced the evolution 
of the Aryan language in the North — this influencing was at, 
its height during the second half of the first millennium B.C 
during the Nanda-Maurya period — and although culturally 
and politically highly advanced Dravidian states were flourish- 
ing in South India, states which had relations with Asoka 
Maurya, it is carious and almost inexplicable why any of the 
Dravidian speeches did not manifest a literary life during the 
period under review. The finished character cf the old Tamil 
porul or artha i.e. matter of poetry, and of old Tamil literary 
ideas and ideals (dividing, for instance, poetic subjects into 
two categories of aham and puram, roughly corresponding to 
love and war, subjective and objective), took some centuries to 
develop, and it can be reasonably expected that during the 
Nanda and Maurya periods, the cultivated South Indian 
languages, particularly old Tamil and old Kannada were essay- 
ing their first footsteps in the direction of sophisticated or ad- 
vanced poetic composition, as opposed to purely popular poetf'y 
about love and war which we find orally among all peoples in 
the earlier stages of their history. 

The advancement of a language is not possible witholfr 
writing, and the Aryan speech came to be written down in all 
likelihood at a time when it made it possible for the Veda books 



language 


323 


to be compiled ; and this may well have taken place during the 
10th century B.C., which is the date of the Mahabharata battle 
and of Vyasa, according to F. E. Pargiter and Hemchandra 
Raychaudhuri. The discovery of the Mohen-jo-Daro and 
Harappa script, with characters seemingly the pictorial proto- 
types of the Brahmi letters o£ the 4th-3rd centuries B.C., now 
enables us to discard the theory of the Phoenician origin of the 
ancient Indian alphabet. The Brahmi script in its oldest form — 
the proto-Brahml of the 10th century B.C. showing but an 
intermediate stage between the Mohen-jo-Daro script of c 2500 
B. C. and the finished Brahmi of 300 B.C. — could not be, as is 
natural in a similar situation, the finished alphabet with a scienti- 
fic and etymologically sound orthography which we see in the 
Maurya and post-Maurya times. It was at the best a make- 
shift script, acting rather as a mnemonical writing than a proper 
and a complete alphabet. The orthography of Brahmi as used 
for Prakrit in the 3rd century B.C. is not yet complete ; thus, 
e.g. certain consonant combinations are cumbrously made, 
_ and double consonants are not indicated at all ( vassa being 
written as vasa or as vasa ). It was still a rather stumbling 
medium for the Prakrit dialects ; it was much more so for 
Sanskrit. The KharoshthI script current in the Udicya country 
during the period 400 B.C. — A.D.400 is admittedly of Semitic 
origin, a legacy of the Syrian scribes in the employment of the 
Achaemenian sirkar in India ; and its existence in India was an 
isolated episode, as isolated as the phenomenon of Gandhara 
art. The name would appear to be a folk-etymology in India 
(whether khara+oshtha or ‘ass-lip’ character as advocated by 
Sten Konow, or Khara-ushtra or ‘ass-and-camel country’ 
character, as sought to be established by Sylvain L£vi, it is 
not necessary to take sides) of a Semitic word for ‘writing’ which 
we find in Hebrew as Xarose0 (Kharosheth) . The discovery 
of an inscription of the 4th-3rd century B.C. in Aramaic (Syriac) 
at Taxila, which has been read by Herzfeld, giving the name of 
‘our Lord PriyadarSi’ ( mr’n prydrs ) is a direct proof of the contact 
of India with Aramaic writing, and helps us to envisage the 
^jrigin of KharoshthI. 

The Indian Brahmi alphabet is in all likelihood a derivative 
of the Mohen-jo-Daro script. But it i! strange that a knowledge 



324 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

of writing should have been obtained by the later Dravidians 
from the North Indian Aryan speakers round about the time of 
Christ, if the Mohen-jo-Daro people were really the ancestors 
of the Dravidians. It is likely that the Mohen-jo-Daro script 
of c . 2500 and later was a very complicated thing, and when 
the Aryan alphabet was evolved out of it as a simpler system 
of writing after the Mohen-jo-Daro civilization had become 
moribund through Aryan impact as well as internal decay, and 
the people probably scattered, the simpler alphabet associated 
with a new and a vigorous people of a composite origin such 
as the ancient Hindus, descendants of both Aryans and non- 
Aryans, won the day, — making the more complicated, syllabic 
script of early Mohen-jo-Daro obsolete ; and this alphabet, 
as well as the Aryan language of which it was the vehicle, be- 
came a conquering force in the South — the old script being no 
longer current among a probably dispersed people — during the 
closing centuries of the first millennium B.G. 

II. LEARNING, LITERATURE AND POPULAR LIFE 
Brahmanical Learning 

Though Buddhism gained the support of royalty and cap- 
tured the hearts of sections of the people, Brahmanism conti- 
nued in this period to be a great force in society. Neither the 
output of Brahmanical literature nor the patronage of Brahma- 
nical scholars was impaired in any great degree. It is signi- 
ficant that the notices of the Greek writers of the times contain 
no mention of the Buddha or the popularity of his new faith, 
except the solitary reference of Clemens of Alexandria to philo- 
sophers who followed the precepts of Boutta 1 . Even the edicts 
of ASoka call upon people to honour Brahmans. The Arja- 
manjusrimulakalpa records that Nanda was a great patron of 
Brahman Tarkikas, proud of their learning, to whom he gave 
large sums of money 2 ; the tirade of the same text against 
Chanakya shows the extensive patronage enjoyed by Brahmanism 
and Brahmanic learning under Chandragupta and Bindusara, 
and Kautilya on his part does not conceal his animosity towards 
Buddhism and Jainism and levies a fine of a hundred pieces onj 

i. McCrindle-il/ifHnf India as described in classical literature , p. 67 n. 

a. K. P. Jayaswal — Imperial History 0 f India , p. 31, Sanskrit text. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 325 

) one who deceitfully brings to a dinner in honour of the gods and 
manes any of the gudra ascetics of the Sakya or Ajlvaka sects 1 . 
In fact every page of Kautilya’s work confirms the thoroughly 
Brahmanical mode of life dominating these times ; Kautilya 
speaks of the minister as one qualified in the Vedas and their 
six angas (auxiliaries), mentions the Vedic sacraments and 
sacrifices, and prescribes Vedjc rites and rituals to ward off every 
kind of evil and to procure success and prosperity to thepeople and 
the king ; he refers to free Brahmadeya lands given to Ritvigs, 
Acaryas, Purohitas and Srotriyas (II, i; III, 10) ; the work is 
also replete with references to tapasas and tapovanas ; so much 
so that it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that, far from 
affecting adversely the hold of the Vedic way of life, the rise of 
Buddhism and Jainism had given only a fillip to Brahmanical 
activity in the various departments of life and literature. 

Sanskrit Language 

Though the nascent faiths of the Buddha and Mahavira had 
attempted to by-pass the Sanskrit language and contact the 
, - masses through the vernacular tongues, Sanskrit did not lose 
the position as a spoken language or the medium in which sub- 
jects of theoretical and practical value were cultivated by the 
Brahmanas in the several centres of learning. Among such 
centres Taxila in the north-west and the Mauryan capital 
Pataliputra itself in the east were the most renowned. The 
Brhatkatha and the Buddhistic tradition make Panini, connected 
with Salatura in the north-west, a friend of a Magadhan Nanda, 
and bring Chanakya of the Taxila college to Pataliputra in quest 
of a scholarly disputation ; and Brahmanical tradition recorded 
by Raja£ekhara speaks of a court of learning at Pataliputra 
where Upavarsha and Varsha, Panini and Pirigala, Vyadi, 
Vararuchi and Patanjali attained fame by passing their tests 
in Sastras. 

The appellation Bhasha which Panini gives to his language 
and many of the rules laid down by him are not intelligible 
except as having reference to a spoken language. Such 
evidences of Sanskrit being a spoken tongue do not grow less 


i. III. 20 



326 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


in Katyayana or Patanjali, both of whom mention local and 
other variations and popular corruptions. That Katyayana 
was a southerner, that southerners delighted in using derivative 
forms (Taddhita) and that in the South, a big lake or saras was 
referred to as sarasi are statements of Patanjali showing the 
inclusion of the southern regions in the provenance of Sanskrit 
speech. The well-known dialogue in Patanjali (under Panini 
II. 4. 56) between the grammarian and the charioteer, suta y 
involving a grammatical subtlety bears out the fact that Sans- 
krit speech was not confined to either the academic circles or the 
learned classes of society. The use of Sanskrit in literature 
was so securely established that even Buddhism and Jainism 
which began with using the Prakrits had to line up early with 
Sanskrit literary tradition. 

In this period the abundant variety of the Vedic morphology 
had got simplified considerably on both the declensional and 
conjugational sides and this process of simplification could be 
seen in progress through the Brahmanas and the older Upani- 
shads. It is such a Bhasha which Panini codified in order to 
render it more handy. Even after him a certain amount of 
fluidity persisted, as evidenced by the necessity for the work 
of the many Varttikakaras, but at the close of the period of our 
study, Patanjali’s work finally fixed the language as the unchang- 
ing Samskrta. The language had become sufficiently distant 
from that of the Vedas to be characterised as classic Sanskrit, 
through its employment all this time in a growing body of epic 
and poetic literature. The Vedic accent had changed and the 
free use of verbal forms had given place to what may be called 
the nominal style characterised by participles; a small loss of 
vocabulary is to be seen, as also some amount of semantic change ; 
a few new word forms were also added to the language in this 
period. 


Sanskrit Grammar 

The legends in the Sanskrit versions of the Brhatkatha intro- 
duce Panini and Vararuchi as contemporaries of the Nandas; 
the AryamafljaJrmulakalpa also refers to Panini as a friend of 
the Nanda. On the basis of the Brhatkatha legends it was held 
by Max Muller, Weber and others that Panini flourished about 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


327 


315 B.C.; but as has been proved by several writers from Gold- 
stiicker onwards, Panini and Katyayana could not have been 
contemporaries in view of the changes that the language had 
undergone in the days of the latter, and Panini could at the latest 
be assigned only to 500 B.C., and in this respect, Taranath whose 
account puts Panini a generation earlier than Katyayana is less 
faulty. In the period of the Nandas and Mauryas, there was 
indeed a great deal of grammatical activity. The Pratisakhyas 
are to be referred to the post-Paninian age, and between Panini 
and Patanjali, there appeared a number of Varttikakaras who 
appended their vdrttikas or addenda et corrigenda (i uktd-nukta - 
durukta-chintana) to Panini’s aphorisms. 

The foremost of the post-Paninian grammarians is Vyadi, a 
descendant of Panini himself removed from him by at least 
two generations, as we learn from his matronymic Dakshayana 
derived from DakshI, the gotronymic of Panini’s own mother. 
Vyadi followed his ancestor’s system and produced the grand 
work (fabhana as Patanjali describes it) called Samgraha in 
100,000 verses. Patanjali held Vyadi in as much respect as 
Panini himself. In fact, Bhartrhari says at the end of the second 
book of his Vdkyapadiya that the Mahabhashya is based on the 
Samgraha . Vyadi’s view that vyakti or dravya constituted 
paddrtha , as expounded in his Samgraha is cited by Katyayana, 
Patanjali (I. ii. 64), Bhartrhari and others. A grammatical 
tradition noted in the Laghu-paribhashdvrtti ascribes the 
Paribhashas or the rules for interpreting Panini’s Sutras to 
Vyadi, and some manuscripts, Vyadiparibhashd and Vyadipari - 
bhdshavrtti 1 , support the tradition. Besides these a lexicon named 
Utpalini , containing a reference to Buddhism, is also remembered 
as a work of Vyadi. As other grammarians of this time like 
Katya and Katyayana Vararuchi are also quoted in the lexi- 
cons, we have to suppose that besides writing grammatical 
treatises, the authors compiled, somewhat after the manner of 
the older Nighantu, lists of words as accessories to their gram- 
matical treatises. The story in the initial book of the several 
versions of the Brhatkathd would make Vyadi and Vararuchi 
class-fellows and friends ; Vyadi is however, as we have 


i. Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum I. p. 6i8b. 



328 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


seen, one of the authorities quoted by Katyayana 
(I. ii.64). 

The mention in these Brhatkathd legends of an Indradatta 
in a group of which the two others, Vyadi and Vararuchi, are 
grammarians may lead us to surmise that he too might have 
been a grammarian, not necessarily a contemporary, and though 
there is no evidence, it may be suggested that the Aindra gram- 
mar mentioned in the traditional accounts as having been super- 
seded by the Paninian and as being the basis of the Tamil system 
of the Tolkdppiyam and of the Sanskrit Kalapa, may in reality 
be a work of this Indradatta. 

The Varttikakaras of grammar belonging to this age are 
headed by one whom Patanjali refers to with reverence as 
Bhagavan Katya (III. ii. 3) and correspondingly his vdrttikas 
. are known as Mahavarttikas in contrast not only to the other 
miscellaneous vdrttikas but to those of Katyayana Vararuchi 
himself. In his Bhashya (IV. ii. 65), Patanjali gives the illustra- 
tion ‘Mahavarttika’ meaning ‘one who has studied the Maha- 
varttika’ and in the encyclopaedic tirrigara Prakasa of king 
Bhoja we actually get quotations of two vdrttikas from the Maha- 
varttikas under Panin i II. i. 51 and I. iv. 21. Katya like Vyadi 
added a lexicon to his grammatical contribution. 

As distinct as the Mahavarttikas, are the metrical dicta of a 
Varttika character quoted by Patanjali, which, as can be made 
out from Bhartrhari, Kaiyata and Nagoji, formed part of a work 
called the Slokavarttika. Coming chronologically after Vyadi 
were the followers of the grammar of Gautama (VI. 2. 36). The 
other Varttikas referred to by Patanjali are Bharadvajiya, 
Saunaga, Kroshtiya, Saura Bhagavad and those of Kuni Vadava 
or Kunaravadava, all of these being later than the vdrttikas of 
Katyayana on which they have bearing. It is not known if the 
Mathuri Vrtti mentioned by Patanjali under IV. iii 101 is 
another Varttika. 

The most important of these Varttikakaras is the one known 
generally as the Varttikakara of grammar, viz., Katyayana 
alias Vararuchi. From the literary traditions referred to, 
we may take him to be a contemporary of the Nandas. tie 
is also the author of the Vajasaneyiprdtisakhya , where he deals with 
the language and the gramm ar ofthe Vajasaneyisamhita , and the * 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


329 


Kathasaritsagara story too makes mention of his proficiency 
in the PratiSakhya taught by Vyadi (I. 2. 38). In this Prati- 
Sakhya, Katyayana gives a number of criticisms of the relevant 
sutras of Panini. In his Varttikas which number about 4,000, 
he subjects about 1,500 sutras of Panini to his critical obser- 
vations, these comprehending on the whole about 10,000 
grammatical points. Katyayana was neither hostile to Panini 
nor rash in his criticism as one might be led to believe from 
the way Patanjali handles him ; the natural phenomena of 
linguistic change necessitated the compilation of Katyayana’s 
corrections and additions. Besides the dicta, Katyayana some- 
times made his grammatical observations in verses which 
Patanjali quotes as bhrajah slokah and Kaiyata identifies as 
Katyayana’s. As noticed already Patanjali speaks of him as a 
southerner fond of Taddhita forms, while the Brhatkatha' 
story makes him a native of Kausambi, an all-round scholar, 
sometime minister of Nanda at Pataliputra and an incarnation 
of a Sivagana known as Pushpadanta. The Buddhistic Marl- 
jusrimulakalpa too mentions him as a minister under Nanda. 

The Pratisakhyas are a class of works designed to preserve 
Vedic texts correctly, as handed down in their several Sakhas 
or groups of sakhas (Prati-sakha) ; and these treatises may 
generally be assigned to the period between Panini and Patanjali 
according to Goldstiicker, say between 600 B.G. and 200 B.G. 
Mention has already been made of the Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya 
of the Varttikakara Katyayana. As VyatT is several times 
quoted in the Rigveda Prdtiidkhya ascribed to Saunaka, we may 
assign that PratiSakhya too to our period. To Vyadi himself 
is ascribed a treatise on Veda lakshana 1 . 

Classical Sanskrit Literature and Fine Arts 

The Sanskrit versions of the Brhatkatha , the Jaina Brhat- 
kathd Kosa of Harishena and the Buddhistic Manjuhmlllakalpa 
speak of a Subandhu as a Brahman minister of Nanda, Chandra- 
gupta and Bindusara. In Abhinavagupta’s commentary on the 
Natya Sastra, Abhinavabharati , there is more than one reference 
to a Subandhu as a Mahakavi who composed a unique variety 


i. Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum III part. 



330 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of dramatic composition, emboxing one act within another, 
and making the characters of each preceding act the spectators 
of its successor ; the work was called the Vdsavadattd Ndtya- 
dhdrd or the dramatic series of Vasavadatta 1 . This Vasavadatta 
is the Ujjain princess figuring in Udayana’s story 2 , with which 
Subandhu wove one of Bindusara himself. It is this drama of 
Subandhu that Vamana quotes in his Kdvydlankdrasutravrtti> 
where we have the suggestion of Chandragupta’s son having 
difficulties and being helped by wise ministers like Subandhu, 
a circumstance which is confirmed by the Manjuhimdlakalpa 
referring to Bindusara succeeding to the throne as a boy. A 
verse on poet Subandhu and his composition featuring 
Bindusara and Vatsaraja, found in a manuscript of the Avanti - 
sundarl has reference only to this Subandhu whom we may take 
•as the minister under the last Nanda and the first two Mauryan 
emperors. 

The Jain Brhatkathdkosa while mentioning Subandhu along 
with Ghanakya (story 143), refers to a third minister Kavi, 
which too may be a reminiscence of a literary figure of these 
times. Of the literary activities of Katyayana Vararuchi, we 
can say something definite. Patafijali’s Mahdbhdshya opens 
our eyes to the rich crop of classical literature produced in these 
times. Among literary productions mentioned by Patanjali 
with the author’s name is a poem by Vararuchi, Vdrarucham 
Kavyam (IV. iii. 101). In Bhoja’s Srngara Prakasa , a half 
verse in the Vasantatilaka metre from a poetic composition of 
Katyayana is quoted 3 . 

The other Kavyas presupposed by Patanjali must have all 
been produced in this period : we have thus a good number of 
Akhyanas and Akhyayikas on the stories of Yayati, Yavakrlta, 
Priyarigu, Sumanottara, Bhimaratha, Vasavadatta and the 

1. See I HQ. XIX, 1943, pp. 69-71. 

2. Kautilya’s Arthai&stra has two references to Udayana’s story; one 
in IX. 7, his return to power after a flight and another in XIII. 2. where the 
ruse of capturing one fond of hunt with the aid of an alluring elephant in the 
ndgavana reminds us of Udayana’s capture by Pradyota. 

3. Madras Ms. Vol. I Ch. I p. 45 tatha ca Katyayana^ : ‘ uttdraridya 

jagatah prapitdmahena tasmat paddt tvamasi rajjuriva pravrittd. This *is 
evidently a praise of the Ganges, the celestial river that descended from 
the heavens, and we know from the Bfhatkatha versions that Vararuchi was 
a great devotee of Ganga whom he propitiated and who appeared befoie 
Vararuchi every day to make him a present of gold. 41 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


331 


Daivasura and Rakshosura on the wars of the Devas and the 
Asuras (IV. ii. 60 ; IV. iii. 87-8). 

Perhaps more value is to be attached to the many citations 
of verses and parts of verses embodying a highly evolved poetic 
expression and metrical finish which Patanjali makes in his 
Mahabhashya , and which should clearly convince us of the high 
development of Kavya in this period. We have specimens 
here of verses of erotic, lyric, panegyric and gnomic poetry ; 
of lines belonging to a poem on the Mahabharata theme and of 
metrical varieties like Anush tubh, Upajati,Praharshini, Pramita- 
kshara and Vasantatilaka ; the grammatical karikas disclose 
even greater metrical advancement, these employing even rarer 
metres, Vaktra,SalinI, VamSastha, SamanI,Vidyunmala, Totaka 
and Dodhaka. This metrical material surely points to the exis- 
tence of prosodial treatises in these times, and we may not be* 
wrong in assigning Pingala’ s Chhandas-sutras to this period. 
In a verse in RajaSekhara’s Kavyamimamsa enumerating the 
Sastrakaras examined at Pataliputra, Pingala figures between 
Panini and Vyadi 1 , and Haraprasad Sastri has drawn attention 
to a tradition recorded in the Divyavadana that Bindusara put 
his son Asoka to school under Pingala Naga 2 . In the Abhina - 
vabharati of Abhinavagupta we have quotations from an anu- 
shtubh treatise of Katyayana on metres, in which Katyayana 
examines the emotional and thematic appropriateness of parti- 
cular metres. 3 

Whatever the date of the present text of the Ndtya Sastra 
of Bharata, we know that his text incorporates within itself and 
cites passages and verses handed down to him from the past, 
anuvamsya . That the histrionic art was not in a crude stage at 
this time, but was highly developed can be gathered not only 
from the Vasavadatta Ndtyadhara of Subandhu, but also from 
the sure evidence of Panini’ s sutras (IV. iii. 110-1) which say 
that even so early, the actors’ art had been codified into two 
texts of aphorisms (Natasutras) by two different authors Silalin 
and Kr£a£va. More important than Patanjali’s reference to 
Sobhanikas who show Kamsavadha and Balibandhana is his 

1. Kavyamimamsa ", GOS, p. 55. 

2. Magadhan Literature , p. 36. 

3. Journal of Oriental Research, Madras vi pp. 222-3. 



332 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


reference to the actor who feels the rasa which he acts rasiko 
nafah (V. ii. 59). The repeated mention in the Arthasastra of 
accomplished courtezans, natas and nartakas , supports the 
view that dance and drama prevailed as popular and evolved 
forms of art at this time. The ancillary art of music too is spoken 
of by Kautilya both in its vocal and instrumental form. Gita y 
vadya, kusllava „ silpakarikdh , Silpavatyah striyah ( I. 12 ), 
atodya (I. 21), natas , nartakas , gayanas , vadana ( II. i), pathya y 
nrtta 9 ndtya , i find, venu , mridanga , rafigopajivinis (II. 27 ) 
and the specific mention of preksha or dramatic show seen 
by the king (XIII. 2) — these in Kautilya picture a time and 
society which delighted in the arts of music, dance and drama. 
The fine art of painting occurs in chitralekhya (I. 16) ; and the 
numerous references to the images of gods ( devapratimas ) give 
a glimpse into sculptural art of these times. 

The dramatic variety called Vlthi as described by Bharata 
involves a good deal of verbal ingenuity, wit and foiling of one 
another in repartees. That such an art of verbal skill was culti- 
vated in these times is shown by the frequent mention by Kautilya 
of a social entertainer called vagjlvana (II. 1 ; II. 27 ; 
III. 14). 

Not only had much poetry been produced by this time, 
but factors of poetic appeal and appreciation had also come to 
be analysed ; already in Yaska we find several classes of simile 
or upama and several words expressive of similarity (upama- 
vachakas) ; in Panini, in addition to several rules involving simile, 
we have the actual mention of Upama and Samanya-Sabda. 
In the chapter on the writing of Sasana or a royal document, 
Kautilya enumerates and defines in his Arthasastra excellences 
or gunas pertaining to calligraphy and literary composition ; 
arthakrama or the proper order of ideas, sambandha or cogent 
development of the theme, paripurnata or fulness in respect 
of idea, expression, arguments and illustrations, these being 
adequate and at the same time not superfluous, madhurya or 
sweetness and charm of words and ideas, audarya or dignified 
utterance and spashtatva or the use of well-known words ; in 
the same context, Kautilya speaks of doshas or defects of writing 
and composing, vyaghata or mutual contradiction, punarukta*, 
(redundance) and apa§abda (grammatical flaw). 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


333 


Religious literature , Purana, Dharma, Srauta and Grhya Sutras 
Kautilya defines Veda as Tray! but immediately adds that 
Atharvan and the Itihasas also are Vedas (1.3) ; in the subsequent 
chapters very large use is made of the Artharvanic practices of 
Santi, Pushti and Abhichara ;the separate mention and juxtaposi- 
tion with Itihasa shows however that the Artharvan had not 
yet become completely canonised and that this was the time 
when it was coming into increasing prominence and acceptance. 
Confirmation of this may be had from the Apastamba Dharma 
Sutra which defines Veda primarily as the three Vedas but says 
at the end that all the popular arts and lores which are current 
among women andsudrasare to be brought under the Atharvan. 
(11.11.29.11-12.) The six Vedangas ( Arthasastra I.3., 1.9) and 
Itihasa-Purana (i^.1.5, V.6) are mentioned. That some Puranas ' 
had already come into being is proved also by the Apastamba 
Dharma Sutra which besides referring to Puranas quotes verses 
from Puranas(I.6.19.13 and II. 9. 23. 3), the metrical imperfection 
of a few lines here indicating their antiquity. A Bhavishyat 
Purana is expressly mentioned by Apastamba II. 9. 24. 6. Kau- 
tilya refers to Itivrtta and Purana (I. 5.) and to Dharma Sastra 
(I. 5 and III. 1) ; he speaks of Arthasastra (I. 5) and Asrama- 
dharma (I. 12). These as well as the numberless references to 
Yajana, Prayascitta, Santi, Homa etc., in the Arthasastra show 
that by this time the Dharma, Srauta and Grhya Sutras had 
come into being and were in full force. The Varttikakara 
Katyayana also knows Dharmasastra (I. 12. 64). According 
to MM.#Kane, to the Nanda-Maurya age could be assigned the 
Dharma-sutras of Gautama, Baudhayana, Apastamba, Vasish- 
tha, Vishnu in part, Harita and Sankha-Likhita. Biihler also 
considers the Apastamba Dharma Sutra to have been produced 
in the five centuries before Christ 1 , and that both Gautama and 
Baudhayana were earlier than Apastamba. These Dharma 
sutras form one part of the Kalpa sutras and deal with the duties 
of varnas and aSramas. The other two parts of the Kalpa 
sutras are the Srauta and Grhya sutras, and we may take it 
that where we have Srauta, Grhya and Dharma sutras by the 
r *iame author, as for instance Apastamba, they were all of identical 
authorship and formed part of one integral kalpa or manual of 
i. Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 2, Introduction. 



334 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


ritual and conduct of that school. According to the ideology 
of these sutras, life is not something to be lived as the body and 
mind please, but a disciplined activity towards sublimation 
through a series of sacramental acts, Vedic and domestic rites, 
and personal samskaras from the time of conception to death. 
Human nature is here smelted and purified in these acts of 
Karman and Dharma, or as Kalidasa puts it, the raw stone of 
man is ground, polished, and cut into a gem of a Dvija by these 
processes ( Raghuvamia III. 18). 

Philosophy 

The Dharma sutras speak of four stations of life (aSramas), 
student, householder, ascetic and forest-dwelling hermit. The 
last two stages were devoted to a life which stood in contrast 
to that of the first two. While the former emphasised a life of 
Karma or ordained acts, the latter showed the path of content- 
ment, renunciation and the seeking of the knowledge of the soul 
or atman as the means to the supreme welfare. The older 
Upanishads must have certainly come into being by this time 
and the path of atmajnana declared by them greatly prized. 
We know from Panini that there were already in his days codi- 
fied Sutras bearing on the life and conduct of Bhikshus or mendi- 
cants by two different authors Parasarya and Karmanda (IV. 
iii. 110-1). These Bhikshus were also known as Parivrajakas 
and Maunins as the Dharma Sutras show (Apast. II. 9.21 ; Baudh. 
II. vi. 14;Gaut. III. 2). Gautama (III. 10. 11) refers to Upani- 
shads and Vedanta and in the Adhyatmapatala (I. 8. 22-23) 
of the Apastamba Dharma Sutra we have an epitome of the 
doctrine of Atmajnana as taught in the Upanishads. However 
the general teaching of the Dharma Sutras was in favour of combi- 
ning an observance of Dharma with Jnana as can be seen in 
Apastamba (II. 9. 21) who refutes the doctrine of Jnana as the 
sole means of welfare. The Vanaprastha of these texts is identi- 
cal with Strabo’s Hylobioi or forest dwellers, a subdivision 
of the Sramanas (Greek sarmanes) ; their mode of life wds 
regulated by the institutes of their school, and Baudhayana 
(II. 6. 14) defines Vanaprastha as one who follows the institute^ 
of the Vaikhanasa Sastra which was thus a text in existence at 
that time. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


335 


These evidences show that when Buddhism arose and even 
earlier still, Brahmanism had within its fold its own class of 
mendicants and ascetics, and that the term Sramana need not 
refer exclusively to the Buddhist ascetics. In Kautilya* s Artha - 
iastra too, references are only to these Brahmanical ascetics. 
Kautilya mentions Parivrajaka, Tapasa, Munda and Jatila 
(1. 10, 11, 12),Sramanas (1. 12), Vanaprastha and Yati (III. 16), 
Tapasas,Tapovanas, Tapasvins, and Asramas (11.2,11.35,36, 
III. 9 and IV. 3), and Mundas and Jatilas with pupils inhabiting 
mountain caves (XIII. 2). Kautilya imposes punishment on 
those renouncing life without making proper provision for their 
family (II. 1, 28) which is understandable as a stricture passed 
on the easy increase in the Buddhistic ascetic fold. 

It is remarkable that Kautilya refers more than once to' 
female ascetics (I 12; III. 3, 4). That Brahmavadinls were 
not taboo within the Brahmanical fold is proved not only by 
the Brhaddranyaka Upanishad but by an illustration of Patanjali 
as well. Patanjali speaks of women studying the Mlmamsa of 
Kasakrtsna (IV. i. 14), and as Kasakrtsna is an author cited 
by Badarayana in his Vedanta Sutras , we may take it that the 
Mlmamsa of Kasakrtsna referred to by Patanjali was an Uttara- 
mimamsa text current in that time. But such women ascetics 
or students of philosophy must have been few. 

A certain amount of metaphysical discussion on even such 
topics as the exact nature and identity of the import of a word 
(padartha) is seen from Katyayana’s reference to Vyadi holding 
vyakti Or dravya to be padartha. Apastamba twice refers to 
Vedic interpretation as being decided by principles of Nyaya, 
and as Buhler has pointed out, we have here nearly the Purva 
Mimamsa Sastra. Upavarsha, whom the legends in the Brhat - 
katha assign to Pataliputra of this period and whom Raja£ekhara’s 
verse also connects with Pataliputra, is known from later refe- 
rences as an old author on Purva and Uttara Mlmamsas. More 
definite is Kautilya’ s reference to philosophical branches of 
learning and study, Anvikshiki (I. 2) which, according to him, 
comprised Sankhya, Yoga and Lokayata. The last is a school 
of material philosophy ; Sankhya is to be taken as knowledge 
in general, and Yoga as observance of ordained Dharma, or 
other purificatory practices or ftetuvidya. In Baudhayana 



336 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


(II. vi. 30) there is an interesting discussion on a$ramas ; it is 
said that the fourfold classification of aSramas is not authorita- 
tive, that the householder’s is the only aSrama and that one 
Kapila, an Asura, son of Prahlada, devised this fourfold divi- 
sion. It can be seen that the four asramas fall into two groups 
of two, Brahmacharin and Grhastha observing the ordained 
Dharmas ; and the Vanaprastha, who retired from home to 
forest, and Bhikshu who was not particular about a life of Karma. 
The Dharmasutrakaras as believers in Karma are, it is to be 
expected, always for upholding the Grhastha, while the philo- 
sopher will denounce the Grhastha’s futile routine and hold up 
the latter asramas as capable of bringing real solace to the soul 
and* reedom from the threefold distress. Now Kapila, author 
of the Sankhya, is one of our earliest philosophers who belittled 
Karma and advocated Jfiana or Viveka. As this path of know- 
ledge gained greater popularity, its adherents had to be 
approved of and assigned a place in the accepted scheme of 
things, and thus probably did the asramas amplify themselves. 

That philosophical debate and systematic investigation of 
subjects had advanced in this period is borne out by the thirty- 
two topics of methodology in the exposition of a system of thought, 
called Tantrayuktis, which Kautilya enumerates, defines and 
illustrates at the end of his woik, and most of which became 
later part of the Nyaya system of Akshapada. 

Arthasastra 

The entire Mauryan age is dominated by two remarkable 
records, one of literature and the other of epigraphy, viz. the 
Arthasastra of Kautilya and the edicts of Asoka. It is needless 
to add anything here on the Arthasastra which has received full 
treatment in the historical sections. It is enough to point out 
that Kautilya refers to his own work as a critical compendium 
based on the Arthasastras, prevalent at his time, and that he 
refers to works of nearly a dozen writers, Bharadvaja (Kaninka), 
Visalaksha (Siva), Parasara, Pisuna (Narada), Kaunapadaj>ta 
(Bhishma), Vatavyadhi (Uddhava), Bahudantiputra (Indra), 
the Manavas, the Barhaspatyas, Ausanasas and Ambhiyas. 
This active exercise of thought on polity, echoes of which are 
to be heard in the epic Mahabharata 9 might well have been 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


537 


> occasioned by the intense political activity of the times which 
were full of Sahghas of different description and numerous small 
monarchies. That leaders of thought such as the Brahmans 
took a leading part in the political life of the country is shown 
by the evidence of Greek writers like Plutarch who say that the 
philosophers gave Alexander no less trouble than the mercena- 
ries by reviling the princes who declared for him and encouraged 
the free states to revolt from his authority. The mercenaries 
referred to by the Greek writers were the Ayudhajivi Kshatriya 
Sahghas, just as the robbers referred to by them were the Arattas 
(Arashtras) or republicans. The genius of Chandragupta and 
Chanakya saw the danger of these numerous small free states, 
communities and kingships, and not only consolidated an empire 
and a centralised power but also set forth the scheme of the 
detailed working of such a huge centralised authority in a new 
Arthafdstra. 


Kama-Sdstra 

While the Dharma, Srauta and Grhya Sutras are concerned 
y^with one side of life as a round of sacramental rites, performance 
of rituals and sacrifices, and observance of social, religious and 
spiritual codes of conduct, quite another side of it, the gaiety 
and joy of life, is represented by the numerous references to the 
courtezan and her milieu in the Arthasdstra . The courtezans 
were so popular that they could be effectively employed in the 
machinery of state. Silpakarikas and iilpavatyah striyah 
(I. 12), veSyas (II. 6), ganikas who served the king with their 
ku&lavakarman, singing, (II, 27); rahgopajivinis (II. 27), kauii- 
kastriyah, gayanas, and nariakis (XI. 1) — all formed such a vital 
part of the polity that a special superintendent was appointed 
to look after their organized management (Ganikadhyaksha). 
Not only was their life regulated by a government department, 
but the art of love was also codified by an eminent authority 
on erotics. The Mauryan capital, Pataliputra, was renowned for 
its courtezans and Vatsyayana tells us in his Kama Sutra (II. 
i. 1 1 ) that at the request of the courtezans of Pataliputra, Dattaka 
who must have lived at this time codified the courtezan’s art, 
VSiSika. Kautilya also mentions the VaiSikakala (II. 27) . The 
gay side of life is to be seen also in the dictum of Kautilya that 



3S8 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


one ought not to deny oneself pleasures (na nissukhah syat, I. 7) 
and by his allotment to the king of the sixth part of the day for 
1 enjoyment (svaira-vihara, I. 19). The cities had halls and 
gardens intended for recreation (vihararthah £alah aramah, 
T II. 1) ; gambling was in vogue especially in the republican com- 
munities to a dangerous extent (VIII. 3) ; gambling and drink- 
ing halls were provided for (II*. 26, 36) ; people went to the 
festivals and gatherings for entertainment, utsavas, samajas 
and yatras (II, 26. XIII. 2. 3), and water-sports and sylvan 
games were also indulged in (XIII. 2, V. 2). 

Popular Worship 

There were temples where people worshipped images, and 
Kautilya names a number of popular deities in worship in his 
« time. The temples (koshthas) were in the north-west part of 
the city for gods and goddesses like Aparajita, Apratihata, 
Jayanta, Vaijayanta, Siva, VaiSravana (Kubera), Asvins and 
Sri (Lakshml) (II. 4) . Deities of Vastu (site) and Dik (quarters) 
were adored (II. 4), and to ward off natural calamities or to 
invite natural benefits, people made offerings and oblations 
and incantations of peace, worshipping Fire. Rivers, Indra, 
tGanga, Seashore, Forests (Vanayaga), Mountains, and 
'' Gaityas of Rakshasas (IV. 3). People went on pilgrimages to 
holy places, Punyasthanas (II. 35-36, III. 9-10) and Tirtha- 
yatanas (II. 35). Naga-pratimas or Snake-images and Dhvaja- 
pratimas or flag-staffs standing for some deities were objects of 
' worship. Persons who practised inferior magical arts invoked 
Bali, iSambara, Vairocana, presiding deities of several Narakas, 
sages like Narada, Devala, Savarni and Galava, Manu, Devas 
and Devalokas, Vedic scholars, Siddhas, Tapasas, Brahma, 
Brahman!, Paulomi, Tantukaccha a great Asura, and others 
of his class (XIV. 1). 


Popular lores 

A notice of works of literature, grammar or philosophy does 
not exhaust the branches of knowledge and lore which pre- 
vailed at this time and played an important part in popular life. 
Other arts and lores are reflected in the ArthaJastra. Kautii^ 
speaks of astrologers ai?d experts in omens, mauhurtikas and 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


339 > 


naimittikas (I. 9, 12 ; IV. 4 ; V. 3.), readers of fortune from 
physical features, Lakshana (I. 12) and Angavidya (XIII. 1),. 
magicians and sorcerers (Jambhaka-vidya, Maya and Maya** 
yoga, I. 12 and IV. 3), snake charmers (Jangalivids), adepts 
in black magic (krtyabhicara§ilas IV. 4, XIV), minstrels (totas* 
and magadhas), oracles (praSna-vidya) , and readers of dreams; 
and birds’ voices (svapna-pakshi-vyahara, XXIII. 1). The lore 
of the serpent, (IV. iii. 13) mentioned even in the Upanishads, 
is noticed by Arrian too. 

Of ipore important subjects, Kautilya speaks of a highly 
developed art of healing, producing and counteracting diseases 
poisons, etc. (XII), maternity and care of the child (1.17, 
kumarabhrtya and garbhabharman) and of the profession of 
the doctor, cikitsaka (I. 18). He refers to the lapidary art 

(II. 2), to the science of agriculture (krshitantra, II. 25) and the 
science of plant-life (vrkshayurveda) and to the astronomical 
factors favourable for cultivation. He speaks of reading others’ 
minds, perfumer’s art, garlanding and shampoo (II. 27). 
There was an advanced veterinary science pertaining to the 
elephant and horse (II. 30, 31). Mineral science, dhatu- 
£astra, is also mentioned in Kautilya (II. 12). 

Architecture 

The development of architecture is seen in Kautilya* s elabo- 
rate description of the fort and the palace and their various 
parts including mechanical manipulations (yantras). Secret 
passages within walls (gudha-bhitti-sancara) and underground 
ways (surangas) were devised (I. 20). In the same place fire- 
proofing is also mentioned. Sulba$astra is referred to expressly 
(II. 12 and 25). Special buildings with suitable features are 
described for elephants and horses ; pleasure-halls (viharaSalas 
II. 1), drinking halls with rooms, seats, couches, garden etc. 
(panagara II. 26, III. 8), gambling halls (dyutavasa II. 36) and 
hospitals (II. 6) are other special types of buildings mentioned 
by Kautilya. The architectural magnificence of the Mauryan 
capital is borne out by the testimony of the Greek writers and 
by excavations. It has already been pointed out that the Artha- 
idstra contains numerous references to temples and images 
(I. 6. 18, II. 1. 4. II. 6, 33, 36, III. 9, 10, 16, IV. 10, V. 2 



MO AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

XIII. 1,3.). Idols for worship were highly popular and Deva- 
•danas and Deva-dravyas were guarded by village elders (I. 18, 
-II. 1), a superintendent looking after all temples (1 1. 6), andfrom 
5a reference in Patanjali we know that the Mauryas probably 
augmented their revenues by a share in the fees forthcoming in 
the popular worship of images. 

Prakrit, Buddhistic and Jain literature 

The earliest literature of Buddhism and Jainism which arose 
and grew in Kosala and Magadha adopted the Prakrit as its 
vehicle of expression. Tradition which is late and which receives 
support from some citations in works like the gloss of Malayagiri 
on a Jain work and from a reference in Bhoja’s Srngdra Prakdia , 
ascribes a Prakrit grammar to Panini himself, but this is only 
a late attempt to invest Prakrit with a status equal to that of 
Sanskrit. Equally undependable is the ascription of the Prd- 
krtaprakdsa on the Maharashtrl and other dialects to Vararuchi, 
the Varttikakara, for the languages dealt with here are of later 
form. The early Ardhamagadhl originals of the Jain canon 
have not survived, what we now have being later redactions. 

The Buddhistic canon was in Pali which had close affinities 
with Paisaci. Pali-Paisaci, and in fact all the later Prakrits, 
owe their origin, according to Hoernle 1 to the ways in which 
the non-Sanskritic populations of the different localities spoke 
the Sanskrit tongue. Konow 2 draws attention to the fact that 
according to a Tibetan tradition the Sthaviras or Theras had 
their books in Paisaci, and that according to Pischel these 
Paisaci books may be the Pali canon. Pali-Paisaci dialects 
with slight local variations were current in wide parts of India 
from the north-west to the Deccan, and it is this language 
which influenced or bore affinities to the Dravidian. 3 

Any considerable or authentic Prakrit material of this time 
that we possess is confined to the edicts of ASoka. The language 
of these edicts is in three dialects, closely related to one another 
and exhibiting only slight differences, one of these the eastern, 
prevalent in Magadha and the language of the capital, give 

1. ZDMG. 64 (1910) pp, 103-4, 1 18. 

2. Ibid. p. 103, 

3. Ibid. pp. 107-118. 



MAURYAN ART 


371 


Imperial Majesty King Asoka presenting himself with quiet 
dignity before the people of Kaliriga. The Sarnath quadri- 
partite is on the other hand an exhibition of imperia 1 pomp, 
power and authority before the Buddhist monks that ha^. aiosen 
the site of the First Turning of the Wheel as their place for the 
quiet pursuit of the religion gf Sakyamuni. Compared to the 
Dhauli elephant the Sarnath quadripartite and its Sanchi counter- 
part are bombastic in style. 

The Sankissa elephant is on a lower level of artistic concep- 
tion. In spite of an appearance of movement the huge and 
plumpy animal is plastically speaking comparatively static, 
though there is some evidence of movement in the modelling of 
the muscles and of the volume of live flesh of the hind portion , 
and the legs. The front legs are however treated pillar-like 
though the intended effect was presumably one of tension, since 
the animal appears to shrink backwards with the body-weight 
pressed in that direction. This attitude of the body, by the 
way, fails to harmonise with the abacus and the capital below. 
From Dhauli to Sankissa there is a steady direction, it seems, 
towards a stylised treatment of the plastic volume, of muscles 
and body-flesh. This is evident in the treatment of the upper 
but more in the lower portion of the chest and abdomen of the 
Sankissa elephant, but nowhere increasingly more and more 
than in the lion- figures. 

Compared to the Basarh-Bakhira lion, the Lauriya-Nandan- 
garh example is more tense and tight without doubt ; the surface 
treatment* is also more clear and precise. On the whole the 
stylisation of the treatment of veins, muscles and flesh is on the 
increase, the form and treatment tends to be more conventional. 
In visualisation and realistic presentation of volume there is 
however hardly any advance, nor is there any attempt to har- 
monise the animal form with the component parts of the 
columns below. 

From the Lauriya-Nandangarh specimen to the Rampurva 
lion there is a decided advance in the clear and precise cutting 
of the stone, in general finish, in the feeling for form and in 
Jj^ear rhythm. There is also an evident advance in modelling 
which is powerful and vigorous, specially in the muscle and thews, 
but the entire artistic conception is. conventional and treatment 



S72 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


stylised which is nowhere more evident than in the schematic 
treatment of the manes and the almost lifeless and conventional 
presentation of the legs and paws. Yet, compared to the Sarnath 
quadripartite the Rampurva lion as a piece of independent 
sculpture must be considered artistically superior, though the 
former, architectonically speaking, is more cdvanced since no- 
where else in the Maurya columns has been achieved a better 
and more efficient harmony with the abacus and the capital. 

The Rampurva bull is architectonically less advanced than 
the lion from the same place since ‘it fails to harmonise with the 
capital on which it stands’ 1 . Marshall argues that it is not 
‘so well-executed as the (Rampurva) lion’. If he means that it 
is not as tense and tight in formal appearance or does not show as 
conventionally powerful and modelled treatment or stylisation 
of form he is undoubtedly correct. But at the same time it has 
to be recognised that the artist responsible for this piece of sculp- 
ture had a remarkable sense of form as well as of plastic volume 
and of the quality of the flesh. Here is indeed realistic vision 
and close observation of nature and full understanding of the 
character of the object ; nothing stylised or conventional or 
abstract has blurred the mental image of the artist or stood in 
the way of his execution. The animal is supposed to stand with 
full weight on earth in quiet and restrained dignity, and the 
artist has rendered that idea with remarkable clarity and perfect 
realism. Here too the modelling is vigorous but not conven- 
tional, plastic and linear sense fully mature but not schematised ; 
the energy and vitality that are within express themselves in 
restrained but powerful dignity ; a dynamic naturalism gives 
it potency and strength. 

A comparison with the vigorously striding bull on the abacus 
of the Sarnath column is at once suggested. Here the bull is 
rendered with all the tension and accentuation of muscles, 
veins and bones that a vigorous movement brings into play ; 
the sense of linear rhythm and plasticity of volume are also fully 
in evidence ; the execution is clear and precise, but it Is at the 
same time hard to deny that the entire treatment is conventional 
in as much as the muscles are unduly exaggerated, the tensi^i 

*• J* & A . S 1908, p. fo88. 



MAURYANART • 


373 


in movement overemphasised and the modelling coagulated. 

A different aesthetic vision and tradition are indeed at work 
here. 

The Sarnath quadripartite is on a most superior level and 
must be admitted to be a very successful solution of a problem 
the Maurya artists grappled with from the very beginning. Of 
all Maurya sculptures it is the best known, most highly spoken 
of and reproduced on most occasions. Marshall is justified in 
saying that ‘the Sarnath capital, though by no means a master- 
piece, is the product of the most developed art of which the world 
was cognisant in the third century B.G. — the handiwork of one 
who had generations of artistic effort and experience behind 
him. In the masterful strength of the crowning lions, with 
their swelling veins and tense muscular development, and in # 
the spirited realism of the reliefs below, there is no trace of 
primitive art. So far as naturalism was his aim, the sculptor 
modelled his figures direct from nature, and has delineated their 
forms with bold, faithful touch .... Equally mature is the techni- 
que of his relief work .’ 1 But at the same time it must not be 
lost sight of that the entire conception and execution is conven- 
tional from beginning to end. Compositionally the accumula- 
tion of form of the four semi-lions is schematic, though from 
consideration of technique clever and efficient. The veins and 
muscles are overemphasised, and with all their seeming tenseness 
and bold delineation appear lifeless and conventional. The 
heads with gaping mouths and curved moustaches treated con- 
ventionally are more decorative and ornamental than endowed 
with reaUife ; the same is true of the manes treated convention- 
ally and arranged schematically. The extravagance of form 
saps the life out of the object that it represents, though from the 
point of view of technique the art is fully developed and civilised 
and its appearance conscious and conventional. 

The animal reliefs on the abacus are all worked almost in the 
round showing deep contrast of light and shade. Technically 
therefore they are far in advance of the row of pecking geese 
that decorates the Rampurva lion abacus, though the latter is 
vefy realistically treated and imparts a sense of movement that 


i. C. H. /, I, p. 620. 



374 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


comes from life itself. One of the four animals of the Sarnath 
abacus is a galloping horse very spirited in movement, and 
the modelling and treatment of its plastic volume partake 
of the same conventional attitude and execution as those of the 
lions discussed above. This is equally applicable to the two 
other animals on the abacus namelv the vigorously striding lion 
and the humped Indian bull, thq forms and types in each case 
having been already fixed by convention, as we shall see later 
on. The only animal on the abacus that is treated in a different 
manner and viewed from a different attitude is the elephant 
slowly striding forward. It is much less conventional and the 
modelling shows a more realistic feeling for plasticity of volume, 
though the form has been but inadequately realised. Com- 
pared to the Dhauli elephant the elephant of the Sarnath abacus 
looks like a wooden toy. 

The Sanchi counterpart of Sarnath belongs to the same stvle 
and is equally conventional and stvlised. The manes of the 
lions are rendered with increasing schema tisation which is per- 
haps an indication of a date later than Sarnath. Architectoni- 
cally it conforms to the solution already achieved at the latter 
place, but the Sanchi abacus which is decorated like the Ram- 
purva lion capital with a row of pecking reese done in higher 
and bolder relief, is narrower than the Sarnath one, and is 
aesthetically more in harmony with the capital below and the 
crowning lions above. 

It is somewhat curious that the lions in Mauryan art are 
always and invariably done in a manner that seems already to 
have been fixed by convention. Their formal pose arfd appear- 
ance, the rendering of their volume, bold and vigorous but 
stylised, their plastic conception in one word, and the sense of 
form as revealed in them are on the whole the same and already 
pre-determined. The trend of the style is already evident in 
the Basarh-Bakhira lion and it is within the limits of the given 
trend that the style evolves and advances in treatment and execu- 
tion. The aesthetic vision and imagination and the attitude 
and outlook of the artist do not mark any definite change** This 
is partly true as well of the lion, the horse and the bull on the 
Sarnath abacus. It raises the presumption that this style aqjl 
convention came from outside where they were already fixed and 



MAURYAN ART 


375 


well established. The horse on the SSrnath abacus in its move- 
ment and modelling recalls the two horses in the relief on the 
Sarcophagus of the Amazons 1 ; the vigorously striding lion and 
the bull recall well-known Achaemenian prototypes of the same 
style and convention 2 . Even the elephant on the abacus has a 
distant kinship with the horned elephants on the early coins 
of the Seleucids, though the Sarnath elephant is much less 
conventional and shows somewhat a different sense of form and 
treatment. 

The aesthetic vision and imagination and the conventional 
style and fixed expression just spoken of are most evident in the 
crowning lions. Compared with later figural sculptures in the 
round of Yakshas and their female counterparts or the relieft of 
Bharhut, Sanchl and Bodhgaya, the art represented by these 
crowning lions belongs to an altogether different world of concep- 
tion and execution, of style and technique, altogether much 
more complex, urban and civilised. They have nothing archaic 
or primitive about them, and the presumption is irresistible 
that the impetus and inspiration of this art must have come from 
outside. Did it come from the Achaemenian west ? This 
seems to be very doubtful, for the modelling of there sculptures 
has nothing in common with Achaemenian sculptures, nor does 
the powerful feeling for volume and preference for rourded forms 
have anything in common with Achaemenian Iran. Moreover 
West-Asiatic art, especially Iranian Art during the Achaemenian 
period came heavily under the influence of Hellenistic Art ; 
further, ‘the few attempts made in Iran in the domain of free 
plastic a# bear an entirely different stamp in their preference 
for angular forms’ 3 . Marshall therefore argued for Hellenistic 
plastic tradition as practised by Graeco-Bactrian artists. 
From what we know of the Hellenistic colonies in West Asia 
and the part they played in Mauryan India, it is possible, nay 
highly probable, that Hellenistic art and culture played also a 
very dominant role in Mauryan Art. The Mauryan lions 
indeed in their aesthetic conception and plastic vision, in their 

i. Carotti, A History of Art , I, p. 218, fig. 298. 

1 2. Perrot & Chipiez, History of Art in Persia } p. 407, fig. 195 ; C. H. /., 
Jjfp. 463, PI. II, figs. 1 and 2. 

3. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculptun , I p. 6 — 7. 



376 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


conventional modelling, advanced visualisation, feeling for 
volume and sense of form invariably recall conventional and 
decadent colonial Greek works of the same art-form and design. 
It is here that we can trace the source of the impetus and inspira- 
tion of the conventional art of the crowning lions of Mauryan 
columns. Here then, in a tradition familiar with lions and bulls 
and horses, was the convention fixed and determined. 

These remarks are however hardly applicable to the Dhauli 
elephant or the Rampurva bull which both seem to belong 
to a somewhat different aesthetic vision and outlook, perhaps 
to a different art-tradition. True, indeed, so far as feeling for 
volume and its reproduction are concerned they belong to the 
same fully developed stage of art as the crowning lions discussed 
above and that there is nothing archaic and primitive about 
them ; but it is equally true there is nothing conventional about 
them as well, and the plastic sense and method of treatment is 
altogether different. The modelling betrays a full knowledge 
of the softness of the flesh and of the flowing current of life that 
is within ; it is also restrained and is not contaminated by any 
conventional exaggeration or localised emphasis. Nor is there 
any evidence of schematisation of form. Indeed these 
two examples (with the Sankissa elephant as a close third) 
represent a different aesthetic outlook, a different art-tradi- 
tion than those of the crowning lions and the lion, horse and 
bull reliefs on the Sarnath abacus. This difference in outlook 
and tradition is clearly brought to the fore when the Rampurva 
bull is compared with the relief of the same animal from the 
Sarnath column ; the two bulls belong to two different worlds 
as it were. It is, I think, permissible to as ume that it is Indian 
aesthetic vision and imagination and Indian ?rt- tradition that 
are here largely at work, so far as art-style at least is concerned. 
The same plastic conception and quality of modelling consti- 
tute the pivot round which early Indian art moves, and the same 
restraint and quiet dignity are the qualities that Indian art 
ideal has sought to achieve in higher art from the very beginning. 
Moreover, if the Dhauli and Sankissa elephants, particularly 
the former be compared with the figures of elephants in bold 
and high relief in the frieze of the facade of the Lomaia Rishi 
cave, it will at once be seen that they belong to the same style 



MAURYAN ART 


377 


and tradition of art. This cave may not be of Mauryan date, 
but it cannot be very much later also ; all scholars recognise 
that the entire facade of this cave is the exact and literal transla- 
tion in stone of a wooden prototype. It may be assumed there- 
fore that figures of elephants in the same style and tradition as 
we see them on the stone-facade were already being rendered in 
wood for generations before they came to be transferred on 
stone. It is not unlikely th3t in the Dhauli elephant, the Ram- 
purva bull and partly in the Sankissa elephant, all of which are 
decidedly Indian in feeling, appearance and spirit, we but witness 
the traditional Indian conception of these objects and the older 
or contemporary Indian art-style and tradition transferred into 
stone in terms of the requirements of that particular material 
and according to the dictates of bolder designs and bigger 
dimensions. The mastery of the third dimension, in other words 
the solution of the difficult problem of free figure as revealed 
in them, is the only lesson the artists seem to have learnt from 
Graeco -Bactrian art-tradition. But here too it is possible to 
present the counter-hypothesis that there must have existed in 
pre-Mauryan India an art of wood-carving and clay-modelling 
that carved and modelled free and round figures of men and 
animals out of wood and clay, and perhaps also of big dimensions. 

It is difficult to say anything about the nationality of the 
artists of the Miurya court ; there is no evidence on the point. 
But from what has been said above, it is permissible to assume 
that the Dhauli elephant, the Rampurva bull and perhaps also 
the Sankissa elephant are works of Indian artists working in 
contemporary Indian style and tradition, and having a thorough 
mastery of the third dimension and a full consciousness of the 
Indian outlook. The drowning lions of the early phases, namely 
the Basarh-Bakhira and Lauriya-Nandangarh examples, are 
also works of Indian artists but tutored in the style and tradi- 
tion of contemporary Western art; this is marked in the grappling 
with the problem of form and its precise execution evident in 
these sculptures. There is decided advance in the RampurVa, 
Sarnatli and Sanchl specimens ; this may have been achieved by 
the same Indian artists working increasingly in the direction of 
contemporary Western art, or by colonial artists of the Hellen- 
istic Orient imported by the Maurya Court. In any case, there 



378 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


are in these specimens a strong and undeniable Hellenisticstamp 
that may not have been imprinted by Indian hands. 

V 

Alleged Mauryan Sculptures 

Besides the animal sculptures described anddiscussed above, 
quite a considerable number of independent figure sculptures 
in the round and of various size and proportion and a few frag- 
ments of reliefs have been ascribed to the Maurya period 1 mainly 
on the ground of their having the so-called Mauryan polish 
on them and their being carved out of grey sandstone from 
Chunar. These are insufficient grounds indeed. The art 
of giving a lustrous polish to the stone, the Maurya artists learnt 
evidently from the Achaemenians and once they practised it in 
large scale and made it current, it is only in the nature of things 
that the practice would continue for some time at least, and at 
least in stray instances even when the power and authority of 
the Maurya court had vanished and Maurya court art that 
apparently found in this polish an expression of imperial glory 
and splendour had become a thing of the past. Nor is the 
argument of a common place of origin so far as the material 
is concerned more potent. Stone as the material par excellence 
for sculptural work was a sort of a new learning with the Mau- 
ryan court artists, and this material was quarried at Chunar. 
It was handled for at least a few generations and found to res- 
pond very well to the hammer and chisel of the stone-sculptor. 
It is only likely therefore that later sculptors would continue 
at least for some time to have their material imported frgm the 
same quarry until they struck at other quarries and found their 
stone good enough to meet their requirements. It is therefore 
on the arguments of conception and style that we must take 
our stand to argue whether they can be labelled as Mauryan 
or not. 

The two Patna Yakshas almost identical in form and appear- 
ance, conception and treatment, dress and ornament, and now 
in the Indian Museum come first in the list of alleged Mauryan 

I. Marshall, Chanda, Kramrisch, Coomaraswamy, Bachhofcr, indeed 
all authorities have so far ascribed these sculptures to the Maurya period. 



MAURYAN ART 


379 


sculptures. It .deserves consideration that both the statues 
have on the scarf of their shoulder a line of Brahmi inscription 
that has paleographically been dated round about the beginning 
of the Christian era, and that helps to identify the statues as 
those of Yakshas. No reason is adduced why the statues should 
not be considered as belonging to the same period as that of the 
inscriptions. The so-called Mauryan polish on which the 
main argument for a Mauryan date rests is conspicuous only 
on the upper half of the bodies, which may be taken to point 
to the fact that the practice of Maurya court art was already 
on the wane. While there is nothing peculiarly Mauryan 
about this couple there are elements that seem to connect them 
with some of the sculptures on the eastern gate of the Great 
Stupa at Sarichi on the one hand and the Kushana school of 
Mathura on the other. The heaviness, the almost archaic 
stolidity and weighty volume, the conflict between fully rounded 
and modelled volume as seen in the arms, breast and abdomen 
on the one hand and flat surface at the back on the other seem 
to suggest a close parallel with the huge heavy and ‘primitive* 
Boddhisattvas of the Mathura school. The treatment of the 
garment when it does not cling to the body as volumes separate 
from the body is a particular characteristic of the Kushana 
school of Mathura. The same remark applies to the treat- 
ment of ornaments. Where the garment clings to the body 
it is treated as a wet cloth and is almost invisible except for the 
parallel ridges that indicate the folds. A similar treatment 
of the garment characterises the Didarganj Yakshi also, to be 
considered later. On the other hand so far as general shape 
and appearance of the upper part of the body and the quality 
and character of the Modelling are concerned, a kinship with 
the art of the bigger reliefs on the eastern gate of the Great Stupa 
at Sanchi seems to be admissible. 

Much less known than either the Patna Yakshas or the two 
other colossal polished sandstone standing statues from Parkham 
and Didarganj are the two torsos of naked Jaina images, both 
recovered from Lohanipur near Bankipur, Patna, and now 
in the Patna Museum. The larger torso, a free and round 
sculpture carved, out of Chunar sandstone, has the high 
Maurya polish on it ; while the smaller one, identical in appear- 



380 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


ance and style and of the same material has no polish on it. 
They have both been found together on the same level under- 
ground along with a silver punch-marked coin which Jayaswal 
says ‘precedes Maurya coinage*. He ascribes the larger torso 
to the Maurya period and the unpolished smaller one to the 
‘Suhgan or later’, on what grounds he does not state 1 . If one 
is to go by style and appearance, both the torsos must belong to 
the same period which may not be lar out of date from the Patna 
Yakshas on the one hand and the Parkham Yaksha on the other. 
In their tight and stiff modelling, in their fully rounded arms 
and thighs and in their general earthy heaviness of form they 
have a kinship with the Patna statues ; both pairs are character- 
ised by a smooth and lifeless inertia, and by a comparatively 
flat surface treatment of their backs. The Lohanipur statues, 
moreover, are more primitive and archaic in outlook and appear- 
ance, heavy and a little bit unbalanced in proportion which 
seem to link them with the Baroda and Parkham Yakshas to 
be discussed later. 

The same conflict in a rather accentuated form of fully 
rounded volume and flat surface, the same complex relation of 
ornaments and garments to the body, the same heaviness and 
archaism, rigidity and lifeless smoothness, characterise what 
remains of the colossal sandstone statue of a Yaksha 2 recovered 
from Baroda near Parkham and another slightly smaller but 
comparatively well-preserved Yaksha statue from Parkham 
itself (both now in the Mathura Museum), the latter having 
the same polish as that on the Mauryan columns. There can 
.be no doubt that in all these statues we have a clear expression 
of the weighty and imposing earthiness that traditional Indian 
imagination connects with its Yakshas and Yakshinis, gods 
and goddesses of material plenty and physical welfare. The 
lightly bent knees and the comparatively thin legs of the stand- 
ing Parkham figure have some kinship with those of the Mani- 
bhadra Yaksha statue from Pawi.ya near Gwalior 3 , while the 

1. Jayaswal, ‘Jaina Image of the Maurya Period’, J. B. 0 . R. S ., XXII, 
pp. 130 — 32 and plates. 

2. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian & Indonesian Art , p. 17, fig. 15 \ 
Vogel, ‘Mathura School of Sculpture*, A. S. /?., 1909 — 10, p. 76, PI. XXVIII, al 

3. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture , I, plate 62. 



MAURYAN ART 


381 


frank and unconditional frontality of both Baroda and Parkham 
statues, attaching little or no importance to the back reminds 
one again of primitive Bodhisattvas of the Mathura school. 
Compared to the Patna Yakshas the Parkham specimen is more 
stiff and archaic in appearance, more rough and crude in execu- 
tion ; but in the relation of ornament and dress with the body 
and in the quality of the fight and stiff modelling it betrays 
the same essential characteristics. In its upper part it shows no 
doubt a tendency towards flattened surface treatment, but in 
the lower half fully rounded and powerfully modelled mass is in 
full evidence giving the legs a lively form and appearance in 
strong contrast to the torso with a protruding and deformed 
abdomen that is possibly an individual characteristic. The 
flowing drapery which is treated as transparent where it 
clings to the body, and as separate though in thin and 
flat volumes where it is gathered together, is indicated 
at the front by incised wave lines as in Bharhut and 
at the ends by a single rounded ridge. It seems that 
such treatment of drapery as we see in the Parkham image 
can in no way be dated earlier than Bharhut, and similar shape 
and modelled form of the legs cannot be earlier than the first 
century B.C. In any case the Baroda and Parkham statues 
constitute what we may call the earliest Mathura primitives 
and the initial chapter of the Mathura school of sculpture. They 
have hardly anything to connect them with Mauryan 
sculpture of known date and locality, and are perhaps later 
than even the Patna Yakshas discussed above. # 

Artistically the Didarganj Yakshini is the best of the series 
and can in no way be* considered as archaic or primitive. In 
the easy and light stoop and forward movement of the upper 
part of the body helped by a slight bend of the right knee-joint, 
the narrow waist and full round breasts with the necklace hang- 
ing rhythmically along and between the breast-lines, the broad 
hips, the shapely legs gradually tapering down to the thin 
ankles decorated by heavy and fully jewelled ornaments, the 
style of doing and decorating the hair, and not the least in the 
sensitiveness of flesh as revealed in what remains of the model- 
ling of the abdomen, the chin and the region round the eyes, 
but more fully and clearly of the back— one witnesses here per- 



382 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


haps an earliest urban, conscious and sophisticated female type 
and form immortalised in later Indian art and literature. The 
fact that the treatment of its ornaments and drapery, especially 
of the latter, is the same as that of the Patna Yakshas is no reason 
why it should be labelled as primitive or considered as belong- 
ing to the same period or phase of early Indian art. The statue, 
plastically fully round, is bound by no ‘law of frontality* and is<^ 
meant to be seen from all sides — it has no primitivity whatso- 
ever about it. Its heavy but loose mass of hair, its full 
soft bosoms and the firmness of the flesh at the back, and 
its attenuated waist with soft abdominal muscles and 
the broad hips at once recall the still daintier and more 
lively Yakshinis of the Mathura reliefs of the second century 
A.D. which are characterised by fully round and lively 
modelling of their limbs, scarfs and anklets. Indeed the Didar- 
ganj Yakshini cannot be very much earlier than the latter, in 
spite of so-called Mauryan polish or its material which is Chunar 
sandstone. 

These life size, plastically round statues belong thus to 
different aspects and phases of Indian art. They are all Indian 
in form and appearance ; and in style and treatment they have 
hardly any relation with the court art of the Mauryas. The 
third dimension was already mastered by the courtly Indian 
tradition, in the Dhauli elephant and the Rampurva bull for 
example, so that the conception and execution of either the 
Didarganj Yakshini or perhaps the Patna Yakshas presented 
• them with no new problem. Indeed they belong to tfcie same 
line of evolution, but at later stages, reflecting on themselves the 
currents of the flowing tradition and fashions of contemporary 
practice. The Baroda and Parkham statues along with a seated 
Yakshini (now in worship as Manasadevi) from Mathura 1 on 
the other hand belong perhaps to a different conception and 
tradition altogether, a primitive folk tradition much older and 
more rooted to the soil, that was current and co-existent with 
the Maurya court art lj>ut of which the latter knew nothing. 
The fixation of that art in permanent materials is first to be 

i. Chanda, ‘Mathura School of Sculpture,’ A. S. R. 192* — 23, p. 164 ; 
A. S. R. 1920—21, PI. XVIII. • 



MAURYAN ART 


383 


seen at Bharhut and later in various other places where it slowly 
and steadily grappled stage by stage and with varying measure 
of success with the problem of the third dimension. The 
Baroda and Parkham statues along with others of still later 
date represent the different stages in that direction. 

Two male heads and three small fragments of head, of the 
same material and similarly polished, all from Sarnath, have 
usually been assigned to the Maurya period for no other reason 
than that they are carved out of Chunar sandstone and have 
the so-called Mauryan polish on them. It is very likely as 
Goomaraswamy surmises on the ground of their ‘extraordinary 
actuality* and ‘marked individuality’ that these are ‘parts of 
portrait- figures, and presumably portraits of donors’. Their 
head-dress consisting of either a fillet with a laurel wreath or .a 
mural crown is certainly reminiscent of Hellenistic motifs . 
Similar fragments of stone heads with identical head-dresses hail 
also from Bhita and Mathura which along with the Sarnath 
examples constitute a ‘well-marked stylistic group’, but there 
is nothing to connect them definitely with Mauryan art. All 
that they — together with some terracotta heads and figures 
from Mathura, Sarnath, Basarh, Bulandibagh, Kumrahar, 
and other places with Greek motifs on their head-dress and some- 
times even foreign facial types — prove is that Greek motifs and 
types along with Hellenistic provincial art had migrated as far 
east as the Ganges valley 1 2 . Since Hellenistic contacts were 
potent and effective even after the fall of the Mauryas, migration 
and adoption of Hellenistic art forms and motifs at later period* 
of history cannot be ruled altogether out of consideration. 

A few other fragmentary reliefs have also been assigned to 
the Mauryan period, again without sufficient reason. Intensely 
lyrical and qualitatively of a very subtle significance is the figure 
worked in high relief out of the fragment of an arch, of a young 
sorrowing lady*. The soft and delicate modelling of the nude 
upper body nowhere so sensitively rendered as in the back and the 
fresh young breasts, the soft linear rhythm and the composi- 

1. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture , I, pp. 12 — 14, plates 12 and 13 ; 
Coomaraswamy, History of Indian & Indonesian Art , pp. 19 — 20, figs 18, 19, 
20, 22, 23. Fig. 21 of Coomaraswamy is much later still. 

2. Kramrisch , GrunduzUge der Indischen Kunst , Indian Sculpture, p. 12, fig. n. 



384 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


tional unity has no parallel in early Indian art. Indeed its 
plastic and linear expressiveness does not fit in against the back- 
ground of either Maurya or Suhga art. The style and treat- 
ment of the hair, ornaments and garment have indeed a primi- 
tive heaviness of form but the modelling and linear composition 
are very much in advance. Another relief from Bhita 1 2 also shows 
decided advance in general appearance, pose and movement, 
and from the character of relief composition, facial type and 
surface treatment it cannot be dated earlier than the reliefs of 
Bodhgaya and Sanchl. 

A considerable number of terracottas said to have been 
recovered from *the lowest, or nearly the lowest, levels at several 
widely separated sites, extending from Pataliputra to Taxila 5 * 
have sometimes been assigned to the Maurya period, mainly 
on grounds of style and appearance. Kramrisch and Gordon 
have drawn pointed attention to the hazards of trying to date 
terracottas — moulded or modelled — on ground of style or that of 
appearance 3 . Moreover, excavation methods pursued in India 
till very lately were not such as to make level or stratification 
a dependable argument for determining chronological sequence, 
so far as terractottas at least are concerned. Mcst terracotta 
pieces, except perhaps a few from the ancient site of Pataliputra, 
that had originally been labelled Mauryan, are now being 
ascribed to the Suhga, Kushana or early Gupta periods 4 . 

VI 

Cave Architecture 

<i 

Of the architectural remains usually ascribed to the Maurya 
period very few are artistically significant. Tradition ascribes 
a large number of stupas and chaitya - halls to the building activi- 
ties of ASoka, but none of them exists today in their original 
form and plan except the excavated chaitya- halls, bearing 
inscriptions of ASoka and Dasaratha, in the Barabar caves. The 
monolithic rail at Sarnath in grey and polished Chunar sand- 
stone may have been erected under the direction and patfonage 

1. Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 20, fig. 13* 

2. Coomaraswamy. op. cit., pp. 20 — 21, figs, 16, 23, 57, 60, 

3. Kramrisch, J. /. S. 0 . A., VII pp. 89-110. Gordon, J. I. S. 0 . A . 
XI pp. 136-95- 

4. Ibid, Kramrisch. 



MAURYAN ART 


385 


of Atoka himself. Its architectural form is exactly that of the 
rails of Bharhut, and must have been literally transferred into 
stone from contemporary wooden originals without possibly 
any understanding of its constructional characteristics. The 
plinth or the dlambana , the uprights or the stambhas , the horizontal 
bars or the suchis and the coping or the ushnisha have all been 
just carved out of what must have been a huge slab of stone ; 
an understanding of the constructional characteristics would 
have certainly made the task easier by piecing together the 
constituent parts of smaller slabs of stone exactly in the same way 
as we see them done at Bharhut or Sanchi or Bodhgaya . 
The altar or the bodhimanda at Bodhygaya is also traditionally 
associated with Atoka. It is permissible to assume that it 
was perhaps much like the bodhimanda as we see it on one of 
the Bharhut reliefs 1 bearing the inscription in Brahmi 
characters ‘Bhagavato Sakya Munino Bodho.* The point 
of architectural interest is that the Bharhut altar consists of 
four pilasters the forms of which were evidently derived from 
wooden prototypes and had nothing to do with the monumental 
Atoka columns. 

The Barabar and Nagarjuni caves of which the Sudama 
seems to be the earliest are lineal descendants of similar rock- 
hewn caves that must have been in use by peoples of rude 
primitive tribes and recluses. They are the earliest examples 
of the rock-cut method, and are exact translations in stone of 
existing wood and thatch structures. The exterior walls and 
roofs of these simple cells, including that of the Lomato Rishi 
cave of*the same Barabar-Nagarjuni series have all received the* 
high polish so typical pf Mauryan art. The earliest of these 
caves is presumably the one bearing an inscription dated in the 
twelfth year of Atoka’s reign — the Sudama — and saying that 
it was dedicated to the monks of the Ajivika sect. This rock- 
hewn cave consists of two chambers ; a rectangular antechamber 
with barrel-vaulted roof and a doorway with sloping jambs — 
an indication of adoption of wooden prototypes — in the long 
side of the chamber at the end of which there is a separate cir- 
cular cell with a hemispherically domed roof. The two chambers 


i. Coomaraiwamy, op. cit., fig. 41 



386 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


are connected by a central interior doorway. At the 
outer side the circular cell has overhanging eaves which are 
but transference in wood of thatch construction ; moreover 
the live rock walls are marked by irregular perpendicular grooves 
which are but translation on live rock of upright wooden or 
bambco planking 1 2 3 . 

Furgusson states that a second of this series of caves ‘called 
the Karna Chaupar, bears an inscription which records the 
excavation of the cave in the nineteenth year after the corona- 
tion of A$oka. It is simply a rectangular hall and except 

in an arched roof. . . .has no architectural feature of importance. 
At the right, or west end is a low platform as if for an image ’* 

In the granite Nagarjuni hill are three more caves, each 
bearing an inscription of the Maurya king Dasaratha that 
purports to dedicate them to the same Ajivika sect. Two of 
these are very small, consisting of a simple rectangular cell 
each, each entered from the end, and having a barrel- vaulted 
roof. The largest is the one known locally as Gopi or Milk- 
maid’s cave which is a long rectangular hall with a barrel-vaulted v 
roof and with circular ends. It is entered through a doorway 
in the centre of the south side 8 . 

Chronologically the latest and architecturally the best of the 
series is undoubtedly the Lomasa Rishi 4 which though bearing 
no inscription may be taken to belong to the Maurya period. 
In ground plan and general design it is much like the Sudama, 
and consists similarly of a rectangular antechamber with barrel- 
vaulted roof entered by the long side through a doorway with 
sloping jambs ; this antechamber is connected at the end through 
a central doorway with a separate cell which is oval and not 
round as in the Sudama. But the most interesting architectural 
element in the LomaSa Rishi is its facade which is frankly an 
exact translation of the gable end of a wooden structure in the 
language of stone. The carpenter’s handiwork has been copied 
in stone in every little detail. From this facade can easily be 

1. Fergusson, History of Indian & Eastern Architecture , I. pp. 130 — 31 > 
Brown, Indian Architecture : Buddhist & Hindu > pp. 12 — 13. 

2. Fergusson, op. cit. p. 130. 

3. Ibid, p. 132 ; Brown, op. cit. p. 13. 

4. Fergusson, op. cit. p. igi — 32 ; Brown, op. cit. p. 13. 



MAURYAN ART 


387 * 

reconstructed the wood-built structural chaityas of this period 1 *. 
The finial that surmounts the gable of the facade also seems to. 
be translated from either terracotta originals or from wooden* 
copies of them. 

These caves or rock-cut chaityas represent about half-a-century 
of building activity, but unlike Mauryan sculpture these almost 
primitive architectural essays show no process of evolution . From 
the Sudama to the LomaSa Rishi there is no doubt an 
elaboration, but the three caves of Dasaratha do not fit in along 
the line of any supposed or actual evolution. Indeed these 
caves do not represent, except in their high polish, any conscious 
attempts towards architectural achievement. The architects 
of the Maurya court, so far as these caves are concerned, merely 
copied in stone what they saw before them constructed of wood 
and bamboo and clay. But the facade of the LomaSa Rishi 
proves once for all that even here in these primitive caves there 
was no slipshod work permitted in the actual cutting of the stone ; 
every little detail is sharply and precisely chiselled. 
Whatever their architectural quality these rock-cut chaitya 
halls represent the earliest extant remains of and perhaps the 
second stage in the evolution of this type of Indian monuments. 
The history of later chaitya architecture is roughly the history 
of the evolution of the ground plan and elevation of the Sudama 
and the Loma§a Rishi. 

VII 

Concluding Remarks 

. • 

With all its urban, conscious and civilised quality, its advanced 

power of visualisation and full knowledge and comprehension 
of the third dimension, Maurya court art constitutes only an 
interlude, in the history of Indian art. Kramrisch rightly 
hits the point when she says, c in the organism of Indian art 
Mauryan sculpture has only marginal importance’ 2 . It was 
indeed a hot-house plant reared up by the will, care and patro- 
nage of a court heavily under the influence of foreign culture 
and ideology. In course of time the glass walls fell to pieces 

1. Ibid. 

2 . Kramrisch, Indian Sculpture, p. ii— 12. 



388 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and the plant withered. Maurya court art failed to make any 
notable permanent contributiqn to the growthof Indian art except 
that it directly helped the fixation of the latter in permanent 
material. A most important exponent of Maurya court ideology 
in sculpture are the crowning lion figures which, we have seen, 
were conditioned by a plastic vision and artistic convention 
already fixed and determined within a foreign art tradition. 
They raise the presumption that they for the first time introduced 
into the realm of Indian Art a highly advanced power of visuali- 
sation and a fuller comprehension of the problem of the third 
dimension. But here a counter-hypothesis, I have already 
pointed out, presents itself. It is quite permissible to assume 
that these two essential qualities of high art were not unknown 
to Indian artists who used to work in wood and clay and 
shape images in fully rounded form. This assumption seems 
to find strong support not only from the spirit and appearance 
but also from the general conception, treatment and execution 
of the Dhauli elephant and the Rampurva bull which 
undoubtedly belong to a different art tradition. I have tried 
also to point out that the Patna Yakshas, the Didarganj 
Yakshini, and the Lohanipur Jaina images to an extent belong 
to the line of evolution of this tradition, though it must be 
admitted that the Maurya elephant and the bull belong qualita- 
tively to a higher aesthetic level. This court art does not seem 
to have taken cognisance of another tradition of art, a more 
primitive, perhaps folk tradition of presumably some significance, 
that was hardly conscious of the third dimension and fully 
rounded form. This tradition came to be fixed in 
permanent material for the first time in Bharhut where already 
the conflict between round volume and flat surface makes its 
appearance and gradually shows itself not only in the Baroda 
and Parkham Yakshas and the so-called ManasadevI of Parkham 
still in worship but also in the Patna Yakshas, the Lohanip. r 
images and some of the huge primitives of the early Mathura 
school. 

No less important an exponent of Maurya court art is the 
independent column standing free in space. The idea and 
impetus persisted even after the Maury as, but the form under 
went considerable change. It was never adopted as part of any 



MAURYAN ART 


389 


larger architectural entity in which case pillars and pilasters 
invariably show and evolve other forms directly derivable from 
wooden prototypes. Already in the first century B.C. the 
Garuda column from Besnagar 1 raised by the direction and 
patronage of a colonial Greek converted to Bhagavata 
Vaishnavism, shows form and features that are different from 
those of ASokan columns. The lowest third of the shaft is octa- 
gonal terminated by eight half-lotus designs; the middle third is 
sextagonal which is terminated by an octagonal band, each side 
of the band being decorated by a stylised full and round lotus 
design ; the upper third is round and is super-imposed by a bell- 
shaped capital that in its shape, form and appearance is related 
not so much with the ASokan capitals as with the typical Perse- 
politan ones with a ring of pointed lotus petals at the upper end* 
of the base. The crowning adornment is not that of an animal 
but consists of a high cube supporting a stylised cluster of palmyra 
branches which again recall similar motifs in West Asiatic art. 
The fact that this column was raised by a colonial Greek probably 
explains this emphasis on Achaemenian and west Asiatic motifs , 
but the fact remains that post-Maurya art and architecture 
discarded the type and form of columns made current by the 
Maurya monarchs. This is further supported by the shape and 
form of pilasters met with at Bharhut and derivable from wooden 
prototypes. 

In the realm of architecture also Maurya court art failed to 
make any impress. The Mauryan palaces and the Pillared 
Hall brought into existence directly by the impetus and inspira- 
tion of Achaemenian architectural form and ideal do not seem 
to have captured the imagination of Indian builders and 
architects, and there is no evidence in later Indian art to show 
that $uch plans and designs were ever adopted. On the other 
hand the few rock-hewn chaitya-cells patronised by the Maurya 
monarchs reveal that they were exactly and literally translated 
from wooden prototypes. The evidence of civil and religious 
architecture furnished by the early Indian reliefs of Bharhut, 
Safichi, Amaravatiand other places also points to that conclusion 2 . 

1. Bachhofer, op. cit. plate, 14. 

2. Fergusson, op. cit. chaps. IV — VI. Brown, op. cit. chaps. II and III ; 
Smith, History of Fint Art in India & Ceylon^ pj*. 91 — 28. 



390 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


Here also the Indian style, form and tradition made them- 
selves felt. 

It is true, that early Indian- art knowsof certain motifs, patterns 
and designs made current and popular by Maurya court art — 
this without any reference to the question of art-style, and that 
quite a large portion of this repertory of motifs and designs belongs 
to the art of Asiatic west which was for a time dominated by 
Achaemenian and later by colonial Greek imperialism ; but 
it would be short-sightedness to assume that ‘the whole group 
of motifs of western Asiatic aspect was introduced by ASoka’s 
Persian craftsmen en bloc\ There can hardly be any doubt 
that quite a few of such motifs were made current even before 
the Mauryas, while those that are definitely Hellenistic came in 
during and after the Maurya period. 

The imperialism of the Maurya monarchs, especially of 
Asoka, was a synthesis of Indian, Achaemenian and Hellenistic 
ideals. It was the expression of an individualistic taste and 
ideology, not of collective social will. Asoka’s personal religion, 
his conception of Dhamma and his policy of Dhammavijaya also 
reflect the individual ideology and preference of a resolute but 
intelligent and benevolent autocrat who dominated the Maurya 
court and administration. Maurya court art also was no excep- 
tion to this basic and fundamental factor. Nanda-Maurya, 
particularly Maurya imperialism and Asokan policy of Dham- 
mavijaya drew India out of her primitive local tribal outlook. 
Asokan policy in the realm of religion raised Buddhism to the 
status of an international religion right from the position of a 
tribal and regional cult. So in the realm of art as well. Indi- 
vidual taste and preference of Maurya monarchs like Chandra- 
gupta, Bindusara and Asoka for ideas and objects from Achae- 
menian and Hellenistic Orient furnished the impetus and inspira- 
tion, and Indian art not only came to be fixed in permanent 
material but it was raised from the position of handicraft and 
primitive art to the dignity and status of higher art. The main 
lines of this art, just as the main lines of Asoka’s policy o& Dham- 
mavijaya were chiefly determined by individual will, taste and 
preference. Both lacked deeper roots in the collective social 
will, taste and preference, and were therefore destined to havt?^ 
isolated and short lives coeval and coexistent with and within 



MAURYAN ART 


391 


the four limits of the powerful Maurya court. This explains 
why Maurya court art with all its dignified bearing, monumental 
appearance and civilised quality forms but a short and isolated 
chapter of the history of Indian art. Like the columns and the 
animal figures themselves Maurya Art stands aloof and apart. 



392 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Barnett, L.D. : Antiquities of India, (London, 1913). 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, (Cambridge 1922). 

Lassen, Christian : Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. II 
2nd Edn. (Leipzig, 1874). 

Masson-Oursel and others : Ancient India and Indian 
Civilization, (London, 1934),. 

Rapson, E. J. : Ancient India from the earliest times to the 
first century A.D., (Cambridge, 1914). 

Raychauhuri, H. C. : Political History of Ancient India, 
4th Edn., (Calcutta, 1938). 

Vall6e-Poussin, Louis de la : LTnde aux Temps des Mauryas 
(Paris, 1930). 


Chapters I {India in the age of the JVandas) and IV Chandra - 
Gupta and Bindusara. 


SOURCES : — 

Arrian : Anabasis of Alexander and Indica (English Tr.) 
E. J. Chinnock, (London, 1893). 

The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as described 
by Q,. Gurtius, Diodorus, Plutarch and Justin, transla- 
tion by J. W. McCrindle, Westminster, 1896). 

Hathlgumpha Inscription of Kharavela — Ep. Indica, X., 
App. No. 1345 ; J.B.O.R.S., Dec. 1917 ; J.R.A.S., 1910 
(Fleet), 1918 (Smith), 1919 (Chanda) ; IA. 1919 
(Majumdar, R. C.), 1920 (Sankara Aiyer), Ep. "indica, 
XX, pp. 71-89. 

Kalpasutra of Bhadrabahu, Ed. H. Jacobi, (Leipzig 1877) 
Trans, by H. Jacobi S.B.E. XXII. 

Kalpasutra of Bhadrabahu, Trans, by H. Jacobi, S. B. E. 
XXII. 

McCrindle : Ancient India as described in classical litera- 
ture (Westminster, 1901) 

Mudrarakshasa of ViSakhadatta, (Bombay, 1928). 

Pargiter : Purana Texts of the Kali Age, (Oxford, 1913) 

Rigveda Brahmanas — A. B. Keith (Harvard, 1920). 

Shama Sastri, R. : Arth^astra of Kautilya, (Mysore 1909). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


393 


Strabo — Geography, Eng. Tr. Hamilton and Falconer 
(London, 1854—7). 

Sthaviravalicarita of Hemachandra, ed. H. Jacobi, (Cal- 
cutta 1891, 2nd Edn. 1932). 

MODERN WORKS 

Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India (London 1903). 

Spooner, D. B. : The Zoroastrian period of Indian History, 
J. R. A. S., (1915, pp. 63-89, 405-55). Further dis- 
cussion by (1) V. A. Smith ib. pp. 800-2 (2) A. B. Keith 
ib. 1916, pp. 138-43 and (3) F. W. Thomas ib. pp. 362-6. 
See Modern Review, 1916 (XIX). 

Tarn, W. W. : The Greeks in Bactria and India (Cambridge, 
1938). 

Waddell, L.A. : Report on the excavations at Pataliputra, 
(Calcutta, 1903). 



394 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter II — Alexander's Campaigns in India 

Breloer, B. : Alexander’s Kampf Gegen Poros (Stuttgart, 
1932-3). 

Cambridge History of India : I, (1922) chapters XV and XVII 
beginning. 

Cambridge Ancient History, VI, ch. XIII, esp. iv-vii. In his 
account of the battle of Jhelam, Tarn, following 
Baer, says that Alexander divided his cavalry force 
in order to draw the Indian cavalry, a weaker 
force than his own, to charge him and thus draw 
them away from the elephants (1928). 

Cavaignac, E. : A propos de la bataille d’ Alexandre contre 
Porus (JA.1923 ii 332-4), points out that Alexander 
crossed the river above his camp as Curtius (viii. 
13) says that Ptolemy’s troops watched by Porus 
occupied the bank of the river lower down. 
(Contra. C.H.I. i, p. 361 n. 2 and p. 365). 

Holdich : The gates of India (London, 1910) — 4 Aornos 
appears to have been a kind of generic name with 
the Greeks, applied to mountain positions of a 
certain class’ (109). ‘We shall never recognise 
Aornos by its superficial features’ (118). 

Lassen : Indische Alterthumskunde 2 ii pp. 124 — 205 (Leipzig 
1874). 

McCrindle, J.W. : The Invasion of India by Alexander the 
Great as described by Arrian, Curtius, Diodorus, 
Plutarch and Justin (Westminster, 1896) 

• McCrindle, J. W. : Strabo and the Itinerary of Alexander 
the Great (pp. 6-101, and 150-155 of Ancient 
India as described in Classical literature). 

(I have followed Arrian’s narrative in the main ; where I 
have preferred Curtius or Diodorus, this is 
indicated in the text. For the references, very few, 
to occurrences after Alexander’s death I have 
depended on citations in standard modern worsts) . 

Smith, V. A. : Early History of India 4 — chapters III and IV, 
(Oxford, 1924). 

Stein : Alexander’s campaign on the Indian N. W. Frontier, *4 
Geographical Journal, 1927. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


395 


Stein : OnAlexander’s track to the Indus (London. 1929). 
Stein : An Archaeological Tour in Upper Swat and adjacent 
Hills Tracts (A.S.I. Memoir, No. 42 ; 1930). 
Stein : Serindia, Vol. i. pp. 1-5 (London, 1921). 

Thirlwall : History of Greece Vol. vii (pp. 1-75), (London, 
1852). 



396 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Chapter III — India in early Greek and Latin Literature 

Breloer, B. : Kautilya — Studien 

(i) Die Grundeigentum in Indien (Bonn, 1927). 

(ii) Altindisches Privatrecht bei Megasthenes und 
Kautalya (Bonn, 1928). 

„ Megasthenes (etwa 300 v. chr.) uber die indische 

Gesellschaft, ZDMG, % 1934, pp. 130-164. 

„ Megasthenes uber die indische Stadtverwaltung, 

ZDMG, 1935, pp. 40-67. 

[Breloer has sought to offer very plausible 
interpretations of Megasthenes* statements on 
Indian society and polity and to explain them in the 
light of the mental equipment of a Hellenistic Greek 
administrator who was fully acquainted with all 
that had been written before him by his country- 
men about India. Unlike Otto Stein, he discovers 
fundamental agreement between Megasthenes and 
Kautilya.] 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I (1922), Ch. XVI. 

Falconer, W. (and H. G. Hamilton) : The Geography of Strabo, 
3 vols. (Bohn’s Classical Library). (London 
1854-7). 

Godley, A. D. : Herodotus, with an English translation, 4 vols. 
(Loeb Classical Library). 

Lassen : Indische Alterthumskunde 2 (1874), II, pp. 626- 
751. 

McCrindle : Ancient India as Described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian (Calcutta, 1877). 

,, : Ancient India as described by Ktesias the Knidian 

(Calcutta 1882). 

,, : The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great 2 

(Westminster, 1896). 

,, : Ancient India as described in Classical Literature 

(Westminster, 1901). 

Monahan, F. J. : The Early History of Bengal (Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1925). 

Rawlinson, George : The History of Herodotus (Everyman\s 
Library) 2 Vols. 

Stein, O : Megasthenes ui\d Kautilya (Wien, 1921). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


397 


(Stein’s method of a mechanical confronta- 
tion of data from Megasthenes with those from 
Arthasdstra is of questionable value as Breloer has 
demonstrated ; but his discussions contain much 
that is useful). 



398 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter V — Mauryan Polity 

Arthalastra of Kautilya cd. Shama Sastri (Mysore, 1909 2nd. 


99 99 

99 99 

edn. 1919). 

„ Ganapati Sastri (Trivandrum, 

1924-25). 

„ Jolly (Lahore, 1923—4). 

Modern Works : 

• 


Bandyopadhyaya, N. C. : Kautilya (Calcutta, 1927). 

Barnett. : Antiquities of India (London, 1913). 

Breloer : Kautilya Studien I — III (Bonn, 1927-34). 
Cambridge History of India I, Ch. XIX (Cambridge, 1922). 
Gopal, M. H. : Mauryan Public Finance (London, 1935). 
Gowen, H. H. : ‘The Indian Machiavelli or Political Theory 
in India Two Thousand years ago*. Political 
Science quarterly Vol. 44, 1929, pp. 173 — 92. 
Hillebrandt, Alfred. : Altindische Politik. (Jena 1923). 
Jayaswal : Hindu Polity (Calcutta 1924). 

Law, N. N. : Studies in Ancient Hindu Polity (Calcutta, 1914). 
Monahan : The Early History of Bengal, (Oxford University, 
Press, 1925). 


Inscriptions 

Barua, B. M. : The old Brahmi inscription of Mahasthan 
(Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. X (1934) pp. 
57-66. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Maurya Brahmi inscription of Mahasthan 
(Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXI ( I'931 — 32 ) 
pp.83 — 91. 

Biihler George : The Sohgaura Copper plate (Indian Antiquary, 
Vol. XXV, (1896) pp. 261 — 66; also JRAS, 1907, 
pp. 501 ff ; E.I., XXII pp. 1-3 (K. P. Jayaswal) 
and ABORT XI pp. 32 ff. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


399 


Chapter VI — Atoka and his successors 
Inscriptions of Atoka : 

Henning, W. B : The Aramaic Inscriptions of Asoka found 
in Lampaka, Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, XIII, pt. 1, pp 80. — 88. 
Hultzsch : Inscriptions of Atoka (Oxford, 1925). 

Sahni, Dayaram : The Yerragudi Reck edicts of Asoka ASI. 

Annual Report, 1928-29 pp. 161-7. 

Senart E., : The Inscriptions of Piyadasi, Eng. Tr. by G. A. 
Grierson, IA. 1890-92. 

The Gavimath and Palkigundu inscriptions of Asoka (Hydera- 
bad Archaeological Series, No. 10, 1932). 

Literary Sources : 

Divyavadana, Ed. E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil (Cambridge, 
1886). 

Dipavamsa Ed. and Tr. H. Oldenberg, (London, 1879). 
Hiuen-Tsang — Beal, Buddhist records of the Western World, 
(London, 1 884) . 

Watters — On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, 
(London 1904—5). 

Mahavamsa Ed. Geiger (London, 1908), Tr. by same 
(London, 1912) 

Mahabhashya ed. Kielhorn, (Bombay, 1880-5) 

RajataranginI Ed. Stein, (Bombay 1892), Trans, by same 
(Westminster 1 900) . 

Taranatha : German Trans, by Schiefner — Geschichte des 
Buddhismijs in Indien (St. Petersburg, 1869). 

Modern Works : 

Burnouf E., : Introduction a L’histoire du Buddhisme Indien 
(Paris, 1876). 

Davids, T. W. Rhyes : Buddhist India, (London, 1903). 
Dikshitar, V. R. R. : The Mauryan Polity, (Madras, 1932) 
Franke : Pali und Sanskrit (Strassburg, 1902). 

Hardy Edmund : Konig Asoka, (Mainz, 1913). 

>v Lassen Christian, Indische Alterthumskunde (pp. 224-88) 
II (Leipzig, 1874). - 



t 

400 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Levi, Sylvain : Le Nepal — 3 vols. (Paris, 1905-8). 

Macphail, J. M., Asoka, (Heritage of India Series, Calcutta, 
n.d.) 

Marshall andFoucher : Monuments ofSanchi 3 vols. (Calcutta, 
1941). 

Mookerji, R. K. : Asoka, (London, 1928). 

Monahan : The early history of Bengal (Oxford, 1925) 

Przyluski, J : La Legende de L’empereur Acoka (Paris 1923). 

Smith V. A. : Asoka (Oxford, 1920). 

Vallee Poussin, L. de : LTndc aux temps des Mauryas (Paris, 
1930) 

Asoka and Khotan 

Beal: Buddhist Records of the Western World (above). 

Beal : Life of Hiuen-Tsang, p. 203. (London, 1914) 

Konow Sten : Khotan Studies, JRAS, 1914, pp. 344 ff. 

Rockhill : Life of the Buddha — Ch. VIII (Trubner’s Oriental 
Series.) 

Stein, Sir Aurel : Ancient Khotan i.pp. 156-166; 368 (Oxford, 
1907). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


401 


Chapter VII— South India & Ceylon 
Sources : Sanga Ilakkiyam (Madras, 1940). 

Modern Works : 

Aiyangar S. K. : Beginnings of South Indian History (Madras 
1918). 

Geiger W. : The Mahavamsa (Eng. Tr.) (London, 1912). 
Kanakasabhai : Tamils 1800 years ago (Madras 1904). 

Parker '.Ancient Ceylon. (London 1909). 

Sastri, K. A. N. : The Pandyan Kingdom Chh. II and III 
(London, 1929). 

„ The Colas I Ch. III-IV (Madras, 1935). 

Sesha Aiyar, K. G. : Cera kings of the Sangam Period, 
(London, 1937). 



402 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter VIII — Industry , Trade and Currency 

I. Sanskrit and Pali Works : 

The Artha£astra of Kautilya (or Kautalya) Ed. R. Shama 
Sastry, 2nd Ed. (Mysore, 1919). 

Ed. J. Jolly and R. Schmidt, Vol. I, (Lahore, 1929). 
Ed. (with original^ Sanskrit commentary) T. 
Ganapati Sastri, Parts I-III, Trivandrum Sans- 
krit Series. (Trivandrum 1921, 1924, 1925). 
Trans. R. Shamasastry, 2nd Ed. (Mysore). 

Trans. (Das Altindische Buch Von. Welt — und 
Staatsleben) von Johann Jakob Meyer, (Leipzig, 
1926). 

Jataka. Ed. V. Fausboll. (London 1877-97). 

Trans, by various hands under the editorship of 
E. B. Cowell. (Cambridge 1895-1913). 

(None of the above works can be definitely 
stated to refer to the economic conditions of the 
Nanda-Maurya times. But they may at least be 
taken to reflect the general or traditional environ- 
ment). 

II. Greek and Latin authors : 

Arrian (Flavius Arrianus) : Indica. Trans. J. W. McCrindle 
in Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian, (London, 1877. Reprinted, Calcutta, 1926). 
Anabasis of Alexander and Indica. Trans. E. J. 
Chinnock, (London, 1893). 

Diodorus : Bibliotheke. Book II. Chs. 35-42, giving epitome 
of Megasthenes. Trans. J. W. McCrindle in 
Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian. 

Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) : The Naturalis 

Historia. The portions relating to India trans. 
J. W. McCrindle in Ancient India as described in 
Classical Literature. (London, 1901). 

Trans, in the Loeb Classical Library, ten volumes. 
Quintus Curtius Rufus : Historiae Alexandri Magni. Tlje 
part relating to India trans. J. W. McCrindle in 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


403 


The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great. 
(London, 1896). 

Strabo. Geography. Book XV, Ch. 1 — gives connected account 
of India. Incidental notices of India in other- 
books. Trans. J. W. McCrindle in Ancient 
India a sdescribed in Classical Literature, (London, 
1901). 

Trans. Horace Leonard Jones in the Loeb Classical 
Library. Eight volumes, (1917-32). 

III. Inscriptions : 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Maurya Brahmi Inscription cfMahasthan. 
EL, xxi, pp. 83-91. 

Hultzsch, E. : Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. I The 
Inscriptions of Asoka New and revised ed. 
(Oxford, 1925). 

IV. Coins : 

(Only the recent and more important publications are noticed) 
Allan, John : A Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British 
Museum, (London 1936). 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Lectures on Ancient Indian Numismatics, 
(Calcutta, 1921). 

Bhattacharya, P. N. : A Hoard of Silver Punch-marked Coins 
from Purneah. Memoir No. 62 of Archaeological 
Survey of India. (Delhi 1940). 

Chakravortty, Surendra Kisore : A Study of Ancient Indian 
# Numismatics, 1931. 

Chatterji, Charan Das : Numismatic Data in Pali Literature (in 
Buddhistic Studies, ed. B.C. Law, Calcutta, 1931). 
Hemmy, A. S. : The Weight Standards of Ancient Indian Coins 
(JRAS, 1937). 

Jayaswal, K. P. : Early Signed Coins of India, JBORS, xx. 

September-December 1934. (Other papers in 
JBORS, 1935, 1936, xxiii, Part i, 1937). 

Kosambi, D. D. : On the Study and Metrology of Silver Punch- 
marked Coins (NIA. iv. pp. 1-35, 49-76). 
ij£rasad, Durga : The Classification and Significance of Symbols 
on the Silver Punch-marked Coins of Ancient 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


• 404 ( 


India. JASB. xxx, 1934, No. 3 (Num. Supp. No. 
xlv 1934). 

Observations on the Different types of Silver Punch- 
marked coins, their periods and locale . JASB, 
1937, No. 2, (Num. Supp. xlvii for 1937). 

Rapson, E. J. : A Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British 
Museum. (London, 1908). 

Indian Coins, (Strassburg, 1897). 

Sreenivas, T. : Annual Report of the Archaeological Depart- 
ment of H. E. H. the Nizam’s Dominions (1928- 
29). 1931. Appendix O — ‘Punch-marked coins 

in the cabinet of the Hyderabad Museum’. 
Walsh, E. H. C. : An examination of a find of punch-marked 
coins in Patna City with reference to the subject of 
punch-marked coins generally. (JBORS. v, 1919). 
An examination of fifty-eight silver punch-marked 
coins found at Gorho Ghat, (JBORS. v, 1919). 
Punch-marked Silver coins, their standard of weight, 
age and minting. (JRAS, 1937). 

Notes on two hoards of silver punch-marked coins, 
one found at Ramna and one at Machhuatoli 
(JBORS. 1939). 

Punch-marked coins from Taxila. Memoir No. 59 
of ASI. (Delhi, 1939). 

Paila Hoard of Punch-marked Coins, JNSI. No. ii, 
1940. 

An Examination of a Hoard of 105 Silver Punch- 
marked coins found in the United Proyinces in 
1916. (JNSI, No. ii, Part i, June 1941). 

A Comparative study of the Patraha (Purnea) 
hoard of silver punch-marked coins. (JNSI, No. iv, 
Part II, December 1942). 

V. General works : 

Breloer, Bernhard. : Kautallya-Studien. (Bonn, 1927 etc.). 
Ghoshal, U. N. : Contributions to the History of the Hindu 
Revenue System, (Calcutta, 1930). 

Majumdar, R. C. : Corporate Life in Ancient India. 2nd cd^ 
(Calcutta, 1922). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


405 


Mehta, Ratilal N. : Pre-Buddhist India. (Bombay, 1939). 

Neogi, Panchanan. : Iron in Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1914). 
Copper in Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1918). 

Puri, K. N. : Excavations at Rairh during Samvat years 1995 
and 1996 (A. D. 1938-39 and 1939-40) Depart- 
ment of Archaeological and Historical Research, 
Jaipur State. 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. C. A. F. : Economic Conditions according 
to Early Buddhist Literature in Cambridge History 
of India, Vol. i, (Cambridge, 1922). 

„ T. W. Buddhist India. (London, 1902). 

Rostovtzeff, M. : The Social and Economic History of the 
Hellenistic World. Three Vols. (Oxford, 1941). 

Sahni, Daya Ram. : Archaeological Remains and Excavations* 
at Bairat. Department of Archaeological and 
Historical Research, Jaipur State. (Not dated). 

Spooner, D. B. : Exacavations at Pataliputra. Annual Rep. 
of ASI., 1912-13. 

Subba Rao, N.S. : Economic and Political Conditions in 
Ancient India. (Mysore, 1911). 



406 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Chapter IX — Religion. 

Banerjea J. N. : The Development of Hindu Iconography. 
(Calcutta, 1941). 

Barua, B. M. : The Pre-Buddhistic Indian Philosophy The 
Ajivikas. 

Bhandarkar, R. G. : Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems, (Strassburg, 1913). 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Asoka (2nd edition). (Calcutta). 
Btihler, G. : The Indian Sect of the Jainas (translation by 
J. Burgess). 

Chanda, Ramprasad : Archaeology and Vaishnava tradition. 
(Calcutta, 1920). 

De la Vall6e Poussin : L’lnde Jusque Vers 300 av. J.C. (Paris, 
1931). 

Dutt N. : Early Monastic Buddhism, Vol. I. (Calcutta, 1941). 
Geiger : The Mahavamsa. (Eng. Tr. 1912). 

Guerinot : La Religion Djaina. (Paris, 1926). 

Hopkins, W. E. : The Great Epic of India, (Yale, 1920). 
Jacobi : Jaina Sutras (S. B. E., 2 Vols.) 

Keith : The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda. (Harvard, 

1925). 

Kern : Manual of Indian Buddhism, (Strassburg, 1896). 

L6vi Sylvain : Le Nepal 3rds (Paris 1905-8). 

Une langue pre-canonique du Bouddhisme J. As. 
Le Laghulovado et l’edit de Bhabra, J. As. 1896. 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian. (Calcutta, 1877). . 

Minayeff : Recherches sur le Bouddhisme (French translation). 
Oldenberg : Buddha, (London, 1882). * 

Pali Texts : (editions of the P. T. S.). 

Ray Chaudhuri, H. : The early history of the Vaisnava sect. 

The Political History of Ancient India, (Calcutta 
University, 1932). 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India, (London, 1911). •' 

Stevenson : The Heart of Jainism, (Oxford, 1915). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


407 


Chapter X — Language and Literature 

Apastamba Dharma Sutra, Ed. Biihler, III Edn. (Bombay 
1932). 

Aryamafiju&imulakalpa Text as edited by Rahula Sankrityayana 
in K. P. Jayaswal’s An Imperial History of 
India, (Lahore, 1934). 

Bhartrihari’s Vakyapadiya, Benares Sanskrit Series, Kandas 
1 and 2 (1887)* 

Bharata’s NatyaSastra with Abhinavagupta’s Abhinava- 
bharati, Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baroda Pt. 1, 
1926, Pt. 2, 1934 Manuscript in the Madras Govt. 
Oriental Mss. Library. 

Bhoja’s Sringara Prakasa, V. Raghavan, (Karnatak Publi- 
shing House, Bombay. Ms. in the Madras Govt. 
Oriental Mss. Library). 

Bodhayana’s Dharma Sutra (Government Oriental Library 
Series, Mysore, 1907). 

BrhatkathakoSa of Harisena Ed. by Dr. A. N. Upadhye, 
(Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1943). 

Brhatkathamanjariof Ksemendra, (Kavyamala 69,Nirnayasagar 
Press, Bombay, 1901). 

Commemorative Essays presented to Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, 
(Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 
1917). 

Grhya Sutras Pts. 1 Oxford, (1886) and 2. (1892). 

Haraprasad Shastri, Magadhan Literature (Calcutta, 1923). 

Hultzsch, E. Inscriptions of ASoka Corpus Inscriptionum In- 
• dicarum, Vol. I (Oxford 1925). • 

Kamasutras of Vatsyayana, (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 
Benares) . 

Kane, Mm. P.V. History of Dharma Sastra Vol. I, (Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 1930). 

Kavyalankara Sutra and Vrttiof Vamana, (Vanivilas Press, . 
(Srirangam, 1909). 

Kathasaritsagara of Somadeva, (Nirnayasagar Press, Bombay, 
1903). 



408' AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Kavyamimamsa of Rajasekhara, (Gaekwad Oriental Series, 
Baroda, 1934). 

Kautilya’s Arthaiastra, Ed. by Mm. R. Shama Sastri, (Mysore, 
1924). 

A. B. Keith : History of Sanskrit Literature, (Oxford 1928). 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described in Classical literature 
(Westminster, 1901). 

MaxMtlller : History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, (London, 
1892). 

Panini’s Astadhyayl with Katyayana’s Varttikas, (Madras, 
1917). 

Panini, His place in Sanskrit literature by Th. Goldstucker, 
(London, MDCCCLXI). 

Patanjali’s Mahabhashya. Ed. Kielhorn, (Bombay, 1892, 19C6, 
1909). 

Prabhatchandra Chakravarti : Patanjali as he reveals himself 
in his Mahabhasya (IHQ,. Vol. 2). 

Sacred Books of the East, Vols. II, XXIX, XXX. 
Sthaviravali Caritra or Parisistaparvam of Hcmchandra Ed. 

by H. Jacobi, (Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 

1932) . 

M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, English trans- 
lation Vols. I and II, (Calcutta University, 1927, 

1933) . 

Wilson Philology Lectures on Sanskrit and Derived languages 
(1887) by R. G. Bhandarkar Collected Works of 
R. G. Bhandarkar, Vol. IV, Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, (Poona, 1929). 

Yaska’s Nirukta. 

Sten Konow, The Home of Pairsachi Z. D. M. G. 64. (1910). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


409 


, Chapter XI— Maury an Art . 

Bachhofer, L. : Early Indian Sculpture. (Paris, 1929). Vol. I, 
Chap. I. pp. 1 ff. 

Brown, Percy : Indian Architecture : Buddhist and Hindu, 
(Bombay), Chaps. II and III. pp. 5 ff. 

Carotti, G. : A History of Art, I (Ancient Art). (London, 1908). 

Chanda, R. P. : Four ancient,Yaksha Statues, (J. D. L., C. U., 
IV, 1921). 

do The beginnings of Art in Eastern India with special 
reference to sculptures in the Indian Museim, 
Calcutta, M. A. S. I., No. 30. (1927). 

Codrington, K. de B. : Ancient India from the earliest time to 
the Guptas .... (London, 1926) . 

Combaz, Gisbert : LTnde et L’Orient, Classique, (Paris 1937). 

Coomaraswamy, A. K. : History of Indian and Indonesian Art, 
(London, 1927) Parts I and II, pp. 3 ff. 
do Origin of the Lotus (so-called Bell) Capital. (Ind. 
Hist. Q. VI, pp. 373-375). 

Cotterill : History of Art. I. 

Dalton, O.M. : The Treasure of the Oxus, 2nd edn. 

Delaporte, L. : La Mesopotamie, (Paris 1923). 

Fergusson, J. : A History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 
2nd Edn. (London, 1910). Chap. V. pp. 125 ff. 

Hultzsch : Inscriptions of Asoka (C. I. I., I Vol. I, 1925). 

Jastrow, M. : The Civilisation of Babylonia & Assyria, 2nd Edn, 
(Boston, 1898). 

Jayaswal, K. P. : Statues of two Saisunaka Emperors, (J.B. O. 

* R. S. V. 1919). * 

do. Another S^iSunaka Statue, (J.B.O.R. S., V. 1919). 
do. Jaina image of the Maurya period. (JBORS., 

XXII. 1937). 

King and Thompson : The sculptures and inscriptions of 
Bahistun. (London, 1907). 

Kramrisch, Stella — Grundztige der indischen Kunst. (Hellerau, 
1924). 

do. Contact of Indian Art with the Art of other coun- 
tries, (J.D.L., C.U., X. 1923). 

' do. Indian Sculpture. (Calcutta, 1933). Chap. I. 

Sec. 2. pp. 9 ff . # 



410 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Lawrence, A. W. : Later Greek sculpture and its influence on 
East and West. 

Mitra, A. K. : Mauryan Art, (Ind. Hist. Q. III. pp. 541 ff.) 
do. Origin of the Bell-capital, (Ind. Hist. Q,. VII. 
pp. 213 ff.). 

Marshall, John : Monuments of Ancient India, in C. H. I., I. 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described in classical literature. 
Perrot, George and Chipiez, Charles : History of Art in Persia. 
(London, 1892). 

Sarre, Friedrich : Die Kiunst des alten Persien, (Berlin, 1923). 
Smith, V. A. : History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon 2nd edn. 
(Oxford, 1930), Chaps. II and III. pp. 15 ff. 
do. The monolithic pillars or columns of Asoka, (Z.D. 
M.G., LXV. 1911). 

do. Persian influence on Mauryan India, (I.A. 1905 

pp. 201 ff.L 

Spooner, D. B. : Didarganj image now in the Patna Museum. 
(J.B.O.R.S. V. 1919). 

do. Mr. Ratan Tata’s excavations at Pataliputra, (A. S. 
R. 1912-13). 

do. The Zoroastrian period of Indian history (J.R.A.S. 
1915). 

Tarn, W. W. : Hellenistic Civilisation. (London, 1927). 
Tolman : Ancient Persian Lexican and Texts. Vanderbilt 
Oriental Seriej, VI. (New York, 1908). 
Waddell, L.A. : Report on excavations at Pataliputra, 
(Calcutta, 1903). 



INDEX 


Abastcnoe, sec Ambashtfias, 40. 

Abhidhamma, 215, 302. 

Abhidhanachintamapi of Hemachandra, 
148. 

Abhidharmapitaka , 284. 

Abhinavabharati a commentary on 
the Nafya Sastra, 329. 

Abhinavagupta, 329. 

Abhiras, the, a tribe, 40. 

Abhisara, (Abisares) the territory 
east of the Indus, 36, 50, 51-52; 
the king of, assisted by the Assake- 
nians against Alexander, 35; and 
Pushkalavati, 36, 37; protesta- 
tions of the loyalty of the raja of. 
to Alexander. 64-65. 

Ab (h) isares, (Embisoros), the king 
of Abhisara, 37, 50, 51, 52 55, 
56j 59J fight of the Kathanians 
against, 66; made satrap of his own 
dominions, 68, 78; two serpents 
kept by, 98. 

Achaemenid (s) (Achaemenian), 

3» 3°> 32-33, 123, 260, 318; 
influence of the, on Mfaurya art 
367-375 389> 390 Jover the 

Mauryan Court, 353, 359; succes- 
sors of the, 34-42. 

Achaemenid empire, 1, 31, 189, 
3i9, 352. 

Achaemenid inscriptions, 233. 

Achaemenian emperors, 318, 351 

and n. 

Adhikfitas same as Gramikas, 22 

Adhyakshas, Superintendents, 115, 
188; the Arthdastra on the duties 
of the, 180-18 1. 

.Adraistai (Adhrshfas, Arishtas), a 
tribe, 38; submission of the city 
of the, to Alexander, 66. 

Adzatathat (Ajata$atru),< 143. 


Aelian, a Greek writer, 86, 97, 166; 
on Indian birds, 99, _ioo; 
on the Mauryan palace at Patali- 
putra, 159; on the sons of Chan- 
dragupta, 160; on war chariots 
in India, no; one of the Klei- 
tarchus’ stories preserved by, 89. 

Agalassoi, see Agrasrcnii. 

Agenor, father of Peithon, 74, 78. 

Agniskandhas , 238. 

Agoranomoi, 272, 278. 

Agramatya, chief minister, 167. 

Agrammes (Augrasainya, Xandra- 
mes) see Mahapadma, 14, 16, 23, 
132, 141, 142, 145. 

Agronomoi, official of the rural 
administration in the Mauryan 

• state, 120 and n; Megasthenes on 
the, 224. 

Agrasrenis (Agalassoi), the, a 
rebublican tribe in North western 
India, subjugation of by Alexan- 
der, 39, 70-71. 

Ahananuru , on the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, 254. 

Ahara, an administsrative division 
under the Nandas, 22. 

Ahimaa, 233, 237, 239. 

Ahuramazda, 32. 

Aitareya Brahma ria t 9, 15, 188, 321, 
349 - 

Aindra grammar, 328. 

Ajatasatru (Adzatathat), 25, 143; 
father of Udayi, 158, n; annexa- 
tion of the Vrijis by, 19; con- 
quest of Kossla by, 17. 

Ajita Kcsa-Kambala, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Ajivakas, a community of religious 
tnen, 204, 212 215/1, 244, 245, 

• 295 - 96 , 299, 346 , 385, 386 ; the, 



412 


AGE OF THE NANDAS MAURYAS 


and Bindusara, 169; and the 
Mahamatras, 225; animosity of 
Kautilya towards the, 325; in 
Ceylon, 257. 

Akbar, 232. 

Akshapafalay record office, 180. 

Ak (o) uphis, President of the hill 
state of Nysa, 35; leader of the 
Nysan deputation to Alexander, 
48-9; visit of, to Alexander, 12 1. 

Alak (s) anda (kam), see Alexandria, 

154.. \ 99 > 271* 

Alberuni, 12. 

Alexander, 14, 16, 19,20,22, 23, 28, 
29, 3i, 32, 34, 35.39, 4°, 4M3, 
83, 90 n gin, 92, 93 100101,115 
132, 143, 15 1 , *53 ”, 172, 173, 
188,178, 233, 262, 267, 292, 305; 
Achaemenian hegemony extingui- 
shed by, 1, 33, 318; Agrammcs, 
the Nanda contemporary of, 141; 
altars of on the Hyphases. 353; 

, arrangements by, for the administra- 
tion of the conquered territories, 
149; battle of. with Porus, 57-64; 
behaviour of, at Perscpolis, 
352; Bucephalus, the charger of 
130; campaigns of, in India, 
45-8o, 82; capture of Aornos by, 
51-55; collection of snake charmers 
by, 98 ; end of the prefect of 
1 39. 145; exploration and return 
of, to Babylon, 76-78; features 
of the epoch after. 197-198; gold 
coins of 280; historians of, 87-89; 
idea of, to conquer the Prasii, 
87; importance of the Indiar 
campaign of, 2; Indian coins of, 
124-126; interview of, with the 
sages, 105, 1 06; meeting of Chan 
dragupta with, 12,14,24,133,137., 
142, 144; meeting of Sophytes 
with, 102 n., Mousikanos the 

contemporaray of, 45; movements 

< of, after the battle of the jhelum, 
64-66; the periofl to, from Hero- 
dotus, marked by a . set back in 
the Greek knowledge of India, 
87; presents to, by the Malavas, 
267, 269, by the king of Taxila, 
36, 103; prohibition of the killing 
of peacocks by, 100; results of 
the invasion of India by, 78 — 
80, 261; the return of, 

68 — 70; and the Sibi. 39; 
and Sophytes, 98; unpopu- 
larity of the Nanda contem- 
porary of, 24; visit of Akouphis 
to, 1 21; death of, in Babylon, 78, 

ai 149 * 

Alexander of Corinth (Alikasun- 
dara), 206, 207, 217. 

Alexander of Epirus, 207 and n. 

‘Alexander’s harbour’, 76. 


Alexandria (Alasanda, Alakanda- 
kam), a city founded by Alexander 
48, 199, 273; the capital of Paro- 
panisade, 78; capital of the Yonas, 
154; Clemens of, 324. 

Alexandrophagus, devourer of 
of Alexander, 65 n . 

‘Alexandrum’, 12, 144. 

Alikasundara (Alexander of Corinth), 
206, 207, 217. 

j\llahabad, ASokan column at, 216, 
3*3> 381. 

Allahabad-Kosam, Pillar edicts at, 
205. 

Allitrochades, see Bindusara 166, 
168. 

Alor (?), capital of Musicanus, 74. 

Amaravati, reliefs at, 389. 

Amasia, Strabo came from, 91. 

Amatyas , dharmasthiya and kanthaka - 
fodhana courts presided over by 
the, 185; highhandedness of 
the, during the days of Bindu- 
sara, 167. 

Ambashthas (Ambastanoi, Abastenoe, 
Sambastai, Sabargae), a tribe, 
40, 74; submission of the, to Alexan- 
der, 74. 

Ambhi, (Omphis, Taxiles) 132, 139, 
149; sent back to his capital 
by Alexander, 64; put in charge 
of the Indian province, 77 — 78; 
Philip in charge of the 
satrapy of. 78; reception of 
Alexander by, 55 — 57. 

Ambigares, ruler of Harmatelia, 41 

Amitraghata (in), Amitrokhad (t) 
es, see Bindusara, 8g, 133, 166, 
168, 315. 

Amitrochades, see Bindusara. 166, 168 

Ammon, libations to, by Alexander, 
69, 75- 

Amyntas, 46. 

Anabasis, a work of Arrian, 88. 

Anantadeva, author of Rajadhar - 
makaustubha, 140. 

Anathapindika, ofSravasti, 270. 

Andhras, (Andrae), the, a tribe, 
222, 217, 233, 321; Megasthenes 
on the, 43. 

Andracottu (o) s, see Chandragupta, 
23, 24, 141, 144, 151, 158 

Angirasa, 288. 

Animals in India, 95 — 100. 

Animals, Asoka’s arrangements 
for the convenience of, 238; prt£ 
hibition of the slaughter of, 239. 

Animal columns, of the Asokan 
pillars, 361 — 362. 

Animal sacrifice, prohibition of, 233 

Animal standard ( Dhvajastambha ) 
worship of, 344. 

Antamahamutras, officers of the 
borders, 226. 



INDEX 


> 413 


Antapala guardian ot the frontier, 
277, 278. 

Ant-gold, 95. 

Antialcidas, Heliodorus the amba- 
ssador of 305. 

Aiuigonus 151; favoured by Pithon, 
150; war of Seleucus with, 137 — 
3 8 - 

Antigonus Gonatas of Macedonia 
(Antikena), 206, 207. 

Antikmi, 217. 

Antiochus, (Soter), I of Syria, 15^ 
153 n> i 8 9» 219; coins of, 129; 
and Bindusara, 168 — 69; Deima- 
chus sent by, to the court of 
Bindusara, 354; letter of Bindusara 
to, 160 n\ and Subhagasena, 246. 

Antiochus Theos (Antiyoka, Anti- 
ochus II) 206, 207, 217, 238; and 
Asoka, 354; independence of 
Diodotus during the time of, 130. 

Antipater, 138; fight of Eumenes 
against , 150; regent of Mace- 
donia, 149. 

Anuradhapura, capital of Ceylon 
256, 257. 

Anusamyana, tours of inspection, 227 

Anula, queen of Devanampiya Tissa, 
of Ceylon, 218 — 219, 258. 

Aornos, capture of, by Alexander, 
51-55; Sasigupta at, 65. 

Apadanas, the 164. 

Aparanta, textile manufacture in, 262 

Apastamba, 293, 333, 335. 

Apastamba Dharma sutra , 333, 334. 

Apes, method of the capture of 06-97 

Aphamiotai, in. 

Appian, 1 37* 54^58, i6g;on 
the relations between Seleucus and 
Chandragupta, 151; on the resi- 
dence of Chandragupta, 158 n\ 
the Syriake of, 135. 

Arabia, 95. 

Arachosia (Kandahar), 33, 75, 153; 
given J>y Seleucus I to Chandra 
gupta Maurya, 130; Sybyrtius the 
Satrap of, 89. 

Arachosians, colonisation oS Ramba- 
kia with the, 77. 

Arachoti, 152. 

Aramaic inscription, 355. 

Aramaic script, 323, 352. 

Aranyakas , the 308. 

Arash^ras (Araftas ) Republics, 68, 
337. 

Arbela, battle of, 318. 

Architecture, 339-340. 

Ardhamagadhi dialect, 317, 347, 

Aria, 153 ; given by Seleucus I to 
Chandragupta Maurya, 130. 

Ariana, 91 n , satrapy of, 154. 

-Arigaon, a city burnt and deserted 
by its residents, 48. 


Aristobulus, a follower of Alexander, 
88 ; on the changes in the course of 
rivers, 93—94; on the customs at 
Taxila, 103; on the difference bet- 
ween the sanyasins and the vana- 
prasthas 105; on the fertility of 
the soil and crops, 94; on the Indian 
sages, 104; on the law relating to 
discovery of deadly substance, 95; 
on the products of South India, 
43; on rain and monsoon, in North- 
west India, 92-3; on the snake, 
98; on the size and shade of a 
tree, 94. 

Aristotle, on Keras, 43; Scylax cited 
by ; 83. 

Aristoxeus, on the visit of Indian 
philosopher to Athens, 81 

Arittha, a nephew of Devanampriya 
Tissa, 218. 

Ariunaka, Arjuna cult, 304 — 5. 

Arrian, 32, 36, 37, 41, 48, 58, 72, 74, 
97, 99, 10211, 135, 139, 156, 157, 
278; extracts from the memoirs of 
Nearchus in the works of, 88; on 
Alexander’s invasion, 40; on Ale- 
xander’s march to Pura. 77; on 
Alexander’s interview with the 
sages, 104; on Aornos, 52-3; on 
the army of Porus, 57; on the di- 
vision of the conquests of Alexander, 
78; on the extent of the empire of 
Cyrus in the east, 30; on the equi- 
pment of the Indian foot soldier, 
269; on Herakles, 101; on the hus- 
bandmen in India, 114; on the 
Indians. 101 — 102; on Indian ri- 
vers, 93; on Indian towns 357; on 
ivory works in India, 265; on the 
invasion of India by foreigners, 
31 ; on leather works in India, 266; 
on the life of elephants, 96; on the 
location of the country of Sambhuti, 
69; on the losses of the Indians and 
the Greeks in the battle of the 
Jhelum, 62; on the Malavas, 39; 
on Megasthenes and Porus, 89 — 90 
n; on the nomarchai, 39; on the 
Papdyan queen, 44; on the period 
between Dionysus and Sandrako- 
ttos, 1 01; on the position of the 
ruler of Takshaiila,36;on the ruler 
of Abhisara, 37 ; on slavery in India, 
hi — 1 12; on the sophists, 116; 
on the submission of the Kshudra- 
kas to Alexander, 73 ; on the system 
of government byond the Beas, 21. 

Arsakes, ruler of Urasa, 36; placed 
under Abhisares, 68. 

Art in India, common elements bet- 
ween the, and foreign art, 351. 

Artaxerxes Mnemon, Ctesias, a phy- 
sician in the court of, 86. 



414 ( 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Arthaldstra, the 3, 112, 113,115116 
164, 179 , 181, 226, 228; the, a 
work on polity, 336 — 37; assigned 
to the age of Chandragupta Maurya, 
12; authenticity of the, 172; the 
basis of the, 189 — 190; character 
of the, 178, 198; excurses on the, 
190 — 201; value of the,i35;mantri- 
parishad in the , 227; omission in 
the, of Kautflya’s part in the Maur- 
yan revolution, 146; reference in 
the, to Udyana’s story, 330 n ; 
Tantrayuktis borrowed from the by 
the Tolkappiyam, 192; on the du- 
ties of the adhyakshas , 180 — 18 1 ; on 
Anuikshiki , 335; on architecture, 
339 — 340 ; on arts, 332; on ascetics, 
335 J on the Chakravartikshctram, 
i72;on city administration, 121 ; on 
different types of chariots, 188; on 
different types of infantry, 188; on 
the encouragement of industry 
and'tradeby the state, 275 — 79; on 
, the expenditure of the government, 
184; on foreign policy, 187 — 188; 
on the ideal of good government, 
190; on the king’s ownership of 
jand, 177; on skin 265 — 66; 
on metallic ores, 266, 267; on 
the navadhyakfha , 189; on pandya- 
kavata, 252; on pearl necklace, 
268; on popular lores, 338— 339 J on 
the rajju, 224; on republic, 173; on 
royal power, 175; on the safety of 
the king’s person, 176; on slaves, 
275; on Tantrayuktis, 336; on trade, 
270 — 71; on textile manufacture, 
262 — 264; on the training of war 
horses and elephants, 122; on the 
units of currency, 279, 280; on the 
validity of royal decree, 174; on 
the Veda, 333; on the watchword 
of the Mauryan government 360; 
on the worship of Sam karshana, 
306. 

Artisan, the 278; punishment for offe- 
nces against, 279. 

Aryamanjusrmu lakalpa, the, onPanini, 
326; on the patronage of the Bra- 
haman Tarkikas by the Nandas, 324. 

Aryan India, division of into three 
parts, 310* 

Aryan speech, changes in the, 31 1- 
312; taken out of India, 318 — 319. 
spread of, 309. 

A (r) yaput (r) a, a title of the vice- 
roy of Suvanpagiri, 223. 

Aryaiura, author of the JdtakamaJa, 
196. 

Ashk<Jhasena, 298. 

Aim (v) aka, (Aspasians, Hippasioi, 
Hypassioi), a tribe in North western 
India, 26, 34, 47, 321 ; conquest of, 


by Alexander, 48; exterminated 
by Mahapadma, 17, 18; an Aryan 
state, 321. 

Asoka (ChandaSoka, Kalasoka, Ka- 
masoka, Dharmasoka, Piadamsana, 
Piyadassana, Piyadasi, Asokavar- 
dhana, Devanampriya), 1, n, 100, 
108, 140, 162, 164, 1650, 167, 168, 
176, 18 1 , 182, 187, 192, 199, 202, 
207, 208, 239, 241, 249, 298, 299, 
3 0I > 347» 355> 3^o; put to school 
.under Pingala Naga, 331, early 
life of, 208 — 10 and n; succession 
of, to the throne, 4, 170; adminis- 
tration under, 178, 223 — 226, 228- 
229; adoption of Buddhism by, 
210 — 212, 303; and the Ajivakas, 
169, 296, 299,346; and the Buddhist 
Sansha, 169, 214 — 216, 285, 301, 
302 — 304; and Devanampiya Tissa 
258; and the fall of the Mauryan 
empire, 247 ; and the Nirgranthas, 
299; and the southern kingdoms, 
250; art during the time of, 245; 
building activities of, 384, 385; 
chronology of the reign of, 206—207; 
conquest of Kalinga by, 272, 
309; a contemporary of Magas of 
Cyrenc, 138; currency system du- 
ring the days of, 282; date of the 
XIII Rock Edict of, 138; the Dha- 
mmavijaya of, 360; extent of the 
empire of, in the south 155 — 156, 
203-204; 219 — 223; imperialism of, 
390; inscriptions of, 3, 20, 171, 173, 
200, 204 — 206; language of the ins- 
criptions of, 312 — 319 341; mili- 
tary success of, 261; missions of, 
171, 216— 219, 273, 274, 318, 354; 
model for the inscriptions of, 359; 
north — western tribes under, 154; 
oral orders of, 226-227; patronage 
of Brahmanical learning by, 324; 
patronage of Dhamma by, 303; 
pilgrimage of 212 — 213,221; the 
policy of Dharmanusasti of, 22; 
possible additions of, to Patalipu- 
tra, 346^ propaganda of, in the He- 
llenistic kingdoms, 273; race of, 

1 41 and 142*1; religious policy of, 
229 — 234; remission of taxes by, 
in favour of Lumbini, 184; res — 
toration of order by, in Taxila, 167; 
rule of, a great epoch, 3 — 4; scul- 
pture under, 265; silence of Greek 
and Latin writers about, 168; so- 
urces for the reign of, 202 — 207 
stone pillars of, 192, 265, 358, 361- 
69; traditions about, 214 — 215*1; 
on the Pashan^as, 306; on the per- 
formance of mangalas, 306; weak 
successors of, 190, 243—248. 

Aiokarama, 215. 



INDEX 


A 13 


Aiokavadana , the 167; Chandragup- 
ta ignored in the, 134. 
A&okavardhana, see ASoka, 207. 
Aiokavardhandvaddna , 243. 

Asokavarma, mentioned as a ruler of 
Kanchl, 249. 

A$oke$vara, 219. 

Aspasians, see A^maka, 34, 47. 
Assagetes (ASvajit ?) a chieftain that 
helped Alexander, 51. 

Assakenians, a tribe in North-Western 
India, 34, 35, 47; attempt of the,» 
to expel the Macedonians from 
N. W. India, 150. 

Assakenoi, a tribe in North Western 
India, 51 ; subjugation of the, 
by Alexander, 49 — 50; rebellion 
and subjugation of the, 65. 
Assakenus, 15 n, 36. 

Assam, and A£oka, 221 — 222. 

Assyria, 344. 

Astddhydyi , the, 284. 

Astes, a chief in the Pushkalavatl re- 
gion, death of, 47. 

Astomi, 163. 

Astynomoi, officers in charge of the 
city, 120 — 121 and 120 71, 278. 
ASvaghosha, 196, 318. 

Asvamedha, a sacrifice, 171, 289. 
Athena, figure of the helmeted head 
of, on a coin, 127. 

Aivamitra, 298, 299. 

Athenaeus, a Greek writer, 134, 139, 
168. 

Athens, coins of, 128, 129; visit of an 
Indian philosopher to, 81. 

Attalus, a general under Alexander, 
59* 

Afthaka (A§taka) a Vedic Rshi, 
287. 

Atharvaveda, the, 262, 333. 
Audumbara (Kotumbara), 263. 
Augrasainya (Agrammes), son or 
descendant of Ugrasena, 14. 
Augustus. # 134. 

Austric speech, 308, 319, 320. 
Avaiyakaiutra , the, 298. 

Avanti, 300. • 

Avantisundari , 330. 

AvaddnakalpalaX the, of Kshemendra, 
13271; mention of M oka in the 
I 4 I * 

Avanti, (Malwa) i36;and theSaifiuna 
gas, 18; control of Chandragupta 
over, 155. 

Avantis the, see Pradyotas, 19, 
AvaddnaSy 203 ; the, on the oppression 
in the provinces, 182; on the succ- 
essors of Aioka, 243 — 44. 

Awadhi, Eastern Hindi 317* 
Ayodhya, the camp of Nanda in, 

Ayuktikas , officers, 227. 


B 

Babylon, (Baveru), 270; death of Ale- 
xander at, 78, 149; exploration 
of, and return of Alexander to, 76- 
78; Harpalus, satrap of 69; Hero- 
dotus on the Persian Governor of, 
85-6; partition of, i39;Seleucusin, 
I 5 I * 

Babylonia, 344; Alexander’s mint at, 
125, 126. 

Bactria, 33; conquest of, by Ale- 
xander, 46; revolt of, from Syria, 
2 . 

Bactrian Greeks 85 ; allegiance of the, 
to Seleucus I, 130. 

Badami, the Chaluyas of, 248. 
Badarayana, author of the Vedanta - 
sutras, 335. 

Bahmanabad, 41. 

Bahrikas (troupes of performers), 179, 
Bairat, Minor Rock Edicts at, 204. 

211-212. 

Balhikas, 146. 

Balissaha, a disciple of Mahagiri, foun- 
dation of the Uttarabalissahagana 
by, 298. 

Balkh, 46. 

Bana 196, 208 n; on Pushyamitra’s 
execution of Brhadratha, 189, 246; 
reference to the Vdyu purapa by, 
2 3* 

Bandhupalita (Samprati ?) 244, 245. 
Bankipur, 379. 

Barabar caves, 265, 313, 384, 385; 
inscription of Asoka in the, 204, 
205. 

Baroda, Yaksha image from, 380, 

381, 383- 

Basarh, 383. 

Basarh — Bakhira, Asokan column at, 
36a, 374, 377; lion figure in 
the column at, 369 — 70. 

Basileus, king, 34, 36, 37, 38. 

Bauddha Parvatiya v am f avail, 147/1. 
Baudhayana, 164/1, 333; on _th0 
A dramas 335 — 336; on the vana- 
prasthay 334. 

Baudhayana Dharmasutra , 321. 
Baudhayana irauta sutras y 349 — 50. 
Baveru (Babylon), 270. 

Bazira (Bir — kot) subjugation of, by 
Alexander, 50 — 51. 

Bear, constellation of the, 92, . 
Beards, dyeing of the, in India, 102 
and n. 

Bchistun insc. of Darius, 359. 
Benares, see Kaii, 17, 269, 271,313. 
Bengal and ASoka, 221 — 222. 
Bersaentes, Satrap of Arachosia, 33. 
Besnagar, Garuda column from, 389; 
inscription, 305. 

Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, 33. 



416 r 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Bhabra edict, (Calcutta Bairat), rock 
ins. 204, 285. 

Bhadrabahu, a Jaina patriarch, 16 1 
— 162 and 161/1, 165249,; migra- 
tion of to Mysore, 297. 299, 341 ; 
return of. to Magadha, 298; Kal- 
pasutra of 142 n. 

BhaddaSala, a general of the Nandas, 
15, 25, 146; conquest of, by 

Chandragupta, 136. 

Bhadrdvara author of the Kahavali , 

136. 

Bhagala, designation of a royal race 
of Kshatriyas, 38. 

Bhagala, a chieftain near the Beas, 
67. 

Dhagavata purdna, 141. 

Bhagu, a Vedic R?hi, 287. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. on the identifi- 
cation of Satiyaputa, 238/1; on the 
identification of Sophy tes, 126 n. 
Bharadvaja, a Vedic Rshi, 288, 
328. 

Bharata, a legendary hero, 171. 
Bharata, author of the Natyasastra, 
318, 33 1 * 

B (h) arhut, reliefs at, 375, 385, 
389. 

Bhartrhari, author of the Vakya - 
padiyo, 327, 328. 

Bharukachchha, 270. 

Bhattiprolu, inscription at, 252. 
Bhavishyanukirtana the, 19. 

Bhita relief, 383, 384; terracotta 
reliefs from, 343. 

Bhlmaratha, 330. 

Bhir mound, Takshaslla represented 
by the, 35. 

Bhfchma, 251. 

Bhoja, author of the Sringara prakaia , 
328, 330 

Bhojas, a tribe, 217, 222. 

Bhojapuri dialect, 317. 

Bijjala, 15. 

Bimbisara, 11, 25, 22, 15; father of 
<- AjataSatru, 17. 

Bindusara (Amitrochades, Amitra- 
chates, Aflitrochades, Amitra- 
khada, Amitraghata), 4, 133, 134, 
165, 168, 176, 210, 272, 330, 331, 
346, 390; Durdhara, mother of, 
in Jain tradition, 159;//!. the dau- 
ghter of Seleucus (?) 208, 209 — 
accession of, 206; and the Ajiva(i) 
kas, 169; and the Deccan, 168; 
Brahmanic learning under, 324; 
Council of five hundred under, 
167 /1; embassy of Deimachus to 
the court of, from Seleucus. 89, 
354; foreign relation of, 168 — 69; 
illness of, 209; last years of, 169 — 
179; mentioned in the Aiokavaddna> 
134; mentioned in Patanjali’s 


Mahdbhdshya , 133; military seccess 
of, 261 ; reign period of, 138; request 
of to Antiochus Soter, 160, n; 
Subandhu a minister of, 329. 

Bismarck, 200. 

Bodhan, 18. 

Bodh Gaya, 241, 375, 384; Bodhi- 
manda at 436, 385. 

Bodhisattvas of the Mathura school, 
379. 381* 

Bodhimanda, 385. 

B (o)ucephala, a city founded by 

r Alexander on the bank of the R. 
Jhelum, 64. 130. 

Brachmanes (Brahmana), 315. 

Brahmagiri, 223, 249, M. R. E. 
at, 204. 

Brahman as, attempt of the, to expel 
the Macedonians from N. W. 
India, 150; influence of the 40. 

Brahmana — mahasalas, 288 — 289. 

Brahmavadins, 335. 

Brahmi inscription, 220, 22,249, 250, 
253— ‘)3» 258, 309, 312, 321, 379- 

Brahmi script, 205, 256, 385; deriva- 
tion of the 323 — 324. 

Brahmanism in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 284, 287 293. 

Brajbhakha, 317. 

Brihadratha, 244, 246; execution of, 
189. 

Brhalkatha ', the 20, 25, 134, 147, 

325; on the origin of the Mauryas, 

1 41, 142; on Panini and Vararuchi, 

326, 329. 

Brhalkathakoia , Harishena the author 
of, 329. 

Brhaspat 1 , 244. 

Brhaspatimitra, 283 n, 

Breloer, ii2n, 113, iisandn, 117*, 

1 9 1 ; on the Arthaidstra , 1 96. 

Buddha (Boutta, Sakyamuni), 35, 
141, 211, 213, 214a, 215,231, 260. 
284, 294, 295, 308, 309, 31 1, 313, 

3 1 7> 321, 3 2 4> 3 2 5> and Ceylon, 
256; and the name Vrishala, 140; 
nirvana of the 206, 299; the religion 
of the 3; Vijayasimha, a contem- 
porary of, 44; on true Brahmins, 
292. 

Buddha era, 207. 

Buddhism , 284, and AAoka, 210- 
212, 230 — 34; conversion of Ceylon 
to 209; Kaujilya’s animosity to- 
wards 324; monuments of, in South 
India, 452; in the Nanda — Maurya 
period, 299 — 304; and San'&rit, 
325, 326; spread of, in foreign 
countries, 304. 

Buddhist canon, 285, 286. 

Buddhist literature, the 340 — 41; . 

Indian inland trade 269—70; oh l 
the Vedas, 289. - 



INDEX 


• 417 


Buddhist Sangha. 204; second and 
third councils of the, 214 — 16; 
299; 300 — 302; and Asoka, 169 

Buddhists and Chandragupta. 165. 

Buddhist symbols, worship of 

343 — 344 - 

Buhler, 164, 200; on the Rajukas,224 

Bulandibagh, 357, 383. 

C 

Calcutta Bairat rock ins., (Bhab»a 
edict), 204, 268, 341. 

Callimachus, 138. 

Callisthenes, 144. 

Cambyses, 315. 

Canki, 289. 

Cape Malan, 77. 

Carians, 33. 

Carmania, 273. 

Caryanda, Skylax of, 82. 

Cathaeans, (Kathaioi) a self-govern- 
ing tribe, 37; country of the, 38. 

Cave architecture in the Mauryan 
period, 384.87. 

Ceylon, (Ila, Lanka, Tambapanni, 
Taprobane), 43 , 250, 253, 257, 

270, 271 ; ASoka’s letter to the 
king of, 243; Asoka’s mission to, 
218; conversion of, to Buddhism, 
209; early history of, 256-259; 
elephants of, 95; fragrant wood in, 
266; and Mahinda, 258; Mega- 
sthenes on, 250,256; Pali canon 
taken by Mahendra to, 317? 138; 
production of gold in, 95 ; vaguely 
known to Onesicritus, 92. 

Ceylonese, commentary on the Great 
chronicle of, on the last Nanda, 24; 
legends jn die early life of ASoka, 
209 n; chronicles, 22, 134, 135, 
146; on the third Buddhist council, 
301-2. 

Chabahil, vihara built by Cliarumati 
221. 

Chakravata emperors, 253. 

Chakravartin, 10, 156, 255; ideal of 
the, 132, 172. . 

Chakravartikshetram, the ArthaJastra 
on the, 172, 1 9 1 . 

Chalcolithic civilization, relics of 
the, 342. 

Chalukyas of Badami and the 
Mauryas of Konkan, 248. 

Champa, 208, 269, 270, 308. 

Chanakya, see Kautilya, 1, 146, 148, 
164, 166, 167, 324, 325, 330, 337; 
an inhabitant of Taxila, 25; legen- 
ds about, 2 — 3. 

Chandakauiika the, 143. 

Chan da la language, 308. 

.Chandanagari, a sakha of theUttara- 
balissahagana, 298. 


Chandasa speech, 316. 

Chanda— Siri, (Chandrasri), seeL 
Chandragupta, 139. 

Chandasoka, 301. 

Chandrabhaga (Sandraphagos), 65, 

3 * 5 - 

Chandrag(k)upta (Sandrakopfas 
Sandrac (k) ottus, Andrakottos, 
Piyadassana, Chandagupta, 

Chandairi, Piadamsana, Vrishla, 
Xandrammes) 1,4, 12, 14, 22, 23, 
89, 90 n, 101, 132, 139, 140, 152, 
155 165, 16571, 168, 175, 176, 

182, 206, 208, 223, 243, 315, 
358, 390; accession of, 166, 206; 
achievement of Indian freedom 
by 139; ancestry of, 140 — 42; 
and Bhadrabahu, 299; Brah 
manic learning under, 324; 
building of pafaliputra and the 
palace by, 345, 346; chronology 
of 136-39; 207/z; civil administra- 
tion under, 157-158; conquest of 
Bhadrsala by, 156; conquest of 
North West India by, 1 49-1 54; 
261; consorts of, 159-160; and 
contemporary religions, 164-65; 
control of, over western India, 
20; defeat of Seleucus by, 130, 
156, 159, 169, 273, 353-354; 

early career of 142-44; extent of 
the empire of, 155-156; 352; hosti- 
lity of, to non-monarchical states, 
173; influence of Alexander’s 
invasion of India, on the career of, 
79; Jain traditions about the abdi- 
cation of, 165; Justin on the op- 
pression of, 148; Kautilya Chance 
llor of, 1 91; language of, 313; 
legends about, 23 ; private life of 
160, 162; literary interest of the 
period of, 163-64; Malwa and 
Gujarat, parts of the empire of, 
18; Mauryan revolution by, 24- 
25; meeting of, with Alexander^ 
12, 14, 137, 142, 144; Megasthenes 
sent by Seleucus as ambassador to 
the court of, 89; and the Mysore 
territory, 155, 249, 341; and the 
N. W. route, 271-2; origin of, 
139, r 4 2 an d n ; palace of, 188; 
personal gifts of, 163; Plutarch on, 
141; political organisation of, and 
foreign models, 173-74; residence 
of, 158 and n; Rostovtzeff on, 198; 
sabhd of, 160-61; sources for the 
reign of, 133-135; strength of the 
army of, 188; Subanclhu, a 
minister of, 329; theft in the camp 
of, 1 1 7 ; uprooting of the Nandas 
by, 145-146; war of with the 
prefects of Alexander, 145. 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


-418 


'Chandragupta-katha the, 13, 133, 135, 

143, *45- ff r , . , 

Chandragupta sabha , referred to in the 
Mahabhashya , 133, 160. 
Charakasamhita , the 194. 

Chariot, the, in Indian warfare, no. 
Charpentier, on the Arthaidstra and 
the epics, 195. 

Charumati, d. of Asoka, 221. 
Chatterji, Charan Das, on ancient 
Indian coins 281 n. 

Chera (Kerala, Keras), 43, 251. 
Chetas, the, of Kalinga, 246-247. 
China, connection of India with, 319. 
Chinese pilgrims value of the writings 
of the, 82. 

Chitaldroog, Anoka’s inscription in 
the district of, 203, 

Cho(d)las, the, 43-44; 217, 238, 
250, 251; state of the, outside 
Anoka’s, empire, 219 
Chora-rajju , a source of revenue, 224. 
Chorarajjuka , rural officer, 224. 
Cmabhumi, 193. 

Cinnamon, production of, in India, 


Classical Sanskrit, emergence of 316. 
Classical writers, reference to Chan- 
dragupta by the, 137-39. 
Cleisobora (Krishnapura J), 101, 305. 
Cleitus, 144. 

Clemens of Alexandria, on Buddhist 
philosophers, 324. 

Clitarchus, 162. 

Coins: — Bajaur Hoard of coins, 
283 n; Daric, a persian gold coin, 
123, 124; Dliaiana (purana) a 

silver punch marked coin, 127, 
258,279, 280; diobol, aGreek coin, 
129; didrachm, a Greek coin, 128; 
drachma, a Greek coin, 117, 12^, 
129; gandaka, 283; gold coins of 
Alexander, 280; gold coins of Phi- 
lip Arrhidaeus, 280; Karsha, 
« 28m; 319; Karshapana(Kahapana) 
a silver or copper coin, 279, 280, 

281, 319; mashaka, a token coin, 
279; nishaka, 279; pana, a silver 
coin, 279; punch marked coins, 
123, I23n 280, 281, satamana, 
279, 281; signatum argentum, 

282, Siglori, a Persian silver 
coin, 123 i24;Sophytes coins 126, 

127, 129; suvarna 279; Taxila 

Hoard of coin, 280, n, and 281; 
Tetradrachm, a Greek silver 
coin, 125 and n, 128; under the 
Nandas and the Mauryas, 279-283. 
'Columbus, 80. 

‘Companions*, the, of Alexander, 57, 
59, 62, 63. 

Coniaci, (Kumarika), Eratosthenes 
on, 43, 44. 


Constantinople, Photius, a patri- 
arch of, 86. 

Coomaraswamy, on Indian art, 351 

Coral trade, 199. 

Courtezans, employment of the, 337 

Craterus, a general under Alexander, 
48, 52, 59, 61, 6 4, 69, 70, 74, 
75, 78, 80. 

Crime and punishment in India, 
according to the Greek writers, 

1 17. 

Cunningham on Alasanda, 154. 

Curtius Rufus, Q,. 47, 48, 305; on 
the Agalassoi, 39; on Alexander’s 
subjugation of Massaga, 50; on the 
Ambashthas, 40; on the army of 
the Malavas and the Oxydrakai, 39; 
on Chandragupta and his palace, 
118-119. n; on the colonisation 
of Rambakia, 77; description of 
Sophy tes by, 102 n.; on the dress 
of the Indians, 109 n; on the 
father of Mahapadma, 14; on the 
image of Heracles carried by 
Porus, 307 ; on the impeachment 
of Alexander by his friends for his 
rashness, 73; on the kingdom of 
Saubhuti, 37 i on marriages in 
India, 102; on the number of 
chariots, under the Nandas, 188; 
on the presents to Alexander by the 
king of Taxila, 282; on the Pro- 
shtiias, 41; on the reception to 
Alexander at Takshasila, 56; on 
the submission of the Kshudrakas 
to Alexander, 73; on the submi- 
ssion of Saubhuti to Alexander, 69. 

Ctesias, book of, on India, 86-7, 92. 

Cyropacdia, a work of Xenophon, 1 2. 

Gyrus, 76, 351 n; Achacmenian empe- 
ror, conquests of, in the east, 
30-3I- 

D 

Daimachus, Hellenic envoy, 135. 

Dakshindrnava , southern ocean, 156. 

Dames, on the Sattagydians, 31. 

Damila, 322. 

Damir , 322. 

Damirike (Damiz, Damizakam), 
43, 322. 

Danda , a measure, 271. 

Dandamis, (Mandanis), 106. 

Dandadhara , king, 175. 

Dandin, 19 1, 196, 200. 

Dandopanatasamantas, 34. 

Dantak(p)ura (Dantavaktra) capital 
of the Kalingas, 18. 

Dardic Khasa speech, 315-16. 

Darius I, Scylax sent to India by, 82, 

Darius (Hystapes), Achaemenian 
emperor 30, 350, 351, 35 a > 353> 



INDEX 


419 


357, 358; Behistun inscription of, 
359, chronology of the inscrip- 
tions of, 200; dark coins of, 
123; empire of in India, 31-32; 
overthrow of, by Alexander 318; 
tribute to, from the Indians, 84* 
Darius III, 33* _ 

Dasaratha, gift of caves by, to the 
Ajivakas, 169, 244-45* 283;*; 296, 

346; epigraphic records of, 1 34. 

Dasas y 112. # 

DaSona, 244. 

Dasikharbatika, a sakha of the Godasa 
gana, 298. 

Dattaka, codification of the courte- 
zan’s art by, 337- . . 

Decourdemanchc, on the origin of 
the punch — marked coins, 12372. 

Deimachu(o)s, sent on an embassy 
to Pataliputra by Seleucus, 89, 
168, 354. 

Deinon, father of Klcitarchus, 89. 

Delhi-Mirath, Asokan column of, 
203, 361. 

Demetrius, 198; coins of, 130. 

Deopatan, city founded by Deva- 
pala, 221. 

Derdai (Daradas, mod. Dards), 
Megasthenes on, 85. 

Devadharman, 244, 28372. 

Devanamp(r)iya, an epithet of 
Asoka, 140, 175, 208, 217, 218, 

233*233,238,354,339- 

Dcvanampiya Tissa, king of Ceylon, 
257; and Aioka, 218, 258. 

Devapala, m. Charumati, 221. 

Devi, wife of Asoka, 209. 

Dhammapada , the, and the ethical 
ideas in Asoka’s edicts, 230. 

Dhamma-paliyaya (Dharmaparyaya) 
285. 

Dhamma, principal queen of Bin- 
dusara, 167. 

Dhana Nanda, the last prince of 
the Nanda dynasty, 23. 

Dha(r)mma 169, 171, 21 1, 2 12, 

250; standard of equity, 174; 
content and propagatioh of, 233- 
243; seven expositions of, 285-86; 
elaboration of, in the P. E. 213- 
214; propagation of, by ASoka, 
187, 232, 303; propagation by the 
Rdjukasy 225. 

Dhammaguna, moral virtues, 234. 

Dhammaniyama, 240. 

Dharma courts, 185, 186. 

Dharmaguptaka, Buddhist school, 
303- f 

DharmamahdmdtraSy 22, 225. 

Dharmanusasti, policy of, 22. 

Dharmasoka, see ASoka 165, 301. 

DharmastambhaSy 362. 

Dharmasthiyay 185. 


Dharasu tras , the 333, 334. 

Dha (r) mmavijaya, conquest by 
law, 3, 229 and n ,. 303; basis of, 
390; nature of the, 360; in W. 
countries, 354. 

Dharmayatras, 241. 

Dhavala, 248. 

Dhauli (Tosali), 203, 204, 205, 313; 
362, a centre of provl. admn. 223, 
225; elephant carving at, 346, 
369* 370 , 371 , 376, 377, 382, 388. 

Dhundiraja, a commentator, 134, 
140. 

Didarganj (g) Yakshini image, 379, 
380, 381, 382, 388. 

Digambaras, 286. 

Diodorus Siculus, Greek author, 
14, 41, 91, and n.y 103, 111, 135, 
147, 168, 278; on the Ambashthas, 
40; on Alexander’s capture of 
Massaga, 50; on the army of the 
Malavas and the Oxydrakai. 39- 
40; on the foundation of Pa^alT- 
putra, 158 n.y on Gangaridae and 
Prasii, 16; on Hermatelia, 41; on 
the husbandmen in India, 114, 

1 15; on India’s agricultural and 
mineral resources, 261-62; on 
Indian metal works, 267; on the 
kingdom of Saubhuti, 37-8; on 
marriage and occupation rules in 
India, 102, 1 16; mention of Xand- 
rames by, 23; on the number of 
chariots, under the Nandas, 188; 
on Porus, the Elder, 37; on the 
reason for the practice of satl 
103; on the strength of the Nanda 
army, 16; on Tauala, 41. 

Diodotus, I, independence of, during 
the time of Antiochus Thcos, 130. 

Diodotus II, coins of, 130, 280. 

Diogenes, Cynic philosopher, 106; 
Onesicritus a follower of, 88. 

Dionysius, envoy from Philadelphus 
(Ptolemy II), 89, 135, 168. • 

Dionysus, 31, 39; supposed founder 
of Nysa, 48; legends about, 100, 
101; worship of, 106, 306. 

Dipavamfay the 203, 206, 208; on 
Asoka’s religious quest; 210; on 
the third Buddhist council, 214- 
216. 

Dipiy 233. 

District administration under the 
Mauryas, 181. 

Divyavaddna, the 23, 168, 171, 246, 
247, 331; on Asoka’s accession, 
209n; on Anoka’s adoption of Bu- 
ddhism, 210; on Asoka’s pilgrimage 
213 and n ; on the mother of Asoka, 
208 ; on the Nirgrantha religion in 
, Bengal, 299; on Pushyamitra, 
246; on the revolt in Taxila, 167; 



420 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


on Samp(r)a(t)di, 245; on the suc- 
cessors of Asoka, 244. 

‘Dotted Record’ of the Chinese, 206 
Dr (a) mil (2), 321. 

Dravida, see (Tamilakam), 43; ori- 
gin of the word, 321 
Dravidian language, growth of the, 
320-22. 

Dravidian speech, 308. 

Drona, 251. 

Dundubhi(s) sara, a missionary, 216, 
217. 

Durdhara, mother of Bindusara, 

I59» 165. 

Dush$amatyah, wicked officials, 167 
Dyrta, a city in North-western India, 
55 - 

E 

Eastern Prakrit, vehicle of religious 
culture, 316, 317. 

IJc(k)batana, 30, 159, 357, 358. 
Egypt, notions about the State in, 
197; trade of India with, 273. 
Ekachchhatra> 21. 

Ekrdt , 10, 11, 21, 156; Mahapadma 
an, 16. 

Elephant, the, in Indian warfare, 
no; Greek writers on the, 95-96. 
Elephant device on Greek coins, 
129, 130 - 

Embisaros (Abisares), Abhisara, 
king of, 37. 

Embolima (Amb), a city in North- 
western India, 52. 

Enotokoitai, the, 163. 

Epics, the, and the Arthaiastra, 195. 
Episkopoi, 160. 

Eratosthenes, President of the Alexan- 
drian library, 33; description $f 
India by, 43 ; on rains in N.W. India, 
92-93; on the size of India, 91-92. 
Eronnaboas (Hiranyavaha), 315. 
Ethiopia, 95. 

Eucratides, coins of, 130, 13 1. 
Eudemo(u)s, 139, I 47 » . * 5 * ; and 
Porus, 149, 150; continuance of, 
in India, 79; putin charge of the 
Indian province, 77-78. 

Eudoxus of Gyzicus, 273 n. 

Euergetes II, king of Egypt, 273 rt. 
Eumenes, 103, 151; fight of against 
Antipater, 1 50. 

Eurymedon, Persian defeat at, 32. 
Euthydemus, I dispossession of 
Diodotus II by, 130; coins of the 
house of, 13 1. 

F 

Foreign ideas, influence of, in the 
Arthasdslra , 198. 


Foreign models, in the administration 
of justice, 186. 

Forts, F. W. Thomas on, 189. 

G 

Ganana, Accounts Department, 226. 
Gapapatha, 199. 

Gandhara, (K’ien-t’-io) 30, 220, 
308,310; kingdom of, 35-36 Kaspa- 
”pyros, a city in, 83; merchants 
from, 269; oppression in, by 
wicked ministers, 182; people, in 
the army of Xerxes, 32; Pushkala- 
vati, the capital of, 51; Virasena's 
rule in, 246; wollen goods from, 
263. 

Gandhara art 323. 

Gandharas (Gandharians), 225; one 
in the seventh satrapy, 30-31; a 
tribe in North-west India under 
ASoka, 154, 222, 223. 

Ganga, author of a schism among the 
Nirgranthas, 298. 

Gangaridae(i) (Gandaritai, Gandari- 
dai) 12, 21, J)6n, 350. 

Garuda the vdhana of Vishnu, 344 
Ganikadhyaksha, see striadhyaksha 
mahamatras, 226, 337. 

Gargi Samhita 245. 

Garuda column from Besnagar, 

3 8 9 - 

Gathas, the, 164. 

Gaugamela, battle of, 318; Indian 
contingents at, 33, 34. 

Gaur (a) (e)ians, the, a tribe in 
North-Western India, 34, 47, 49. 
Gautama, the Buddha, 10. II. 
Gautama, 274, 293, 333. 

Gautama, grammer of, 328. 
Gautamiputra, a devotee of Vasudeva, 
305 - 

Gavimath, Minor Rock Edict at, 
204. 

Gaya (Sambodhi), 21 1. 

Gaza, battle of, 150. 

Geiger, oif Alasanda, 154. 

Gedrosia ( Gedroseni, Southern, 
Mekran ), 76,^ 77, 80, 152, 153, 
273; given by Seleucus to Chandra- 
gupta Maurya, 130. 

Geography the, a work of Hecataeus 
of Miletus, 83. 

Geography , the, of Strabo, gin. > 
Ghasundi inscription, 305. 

Ghoshal U. N. 114^, 178/*. 
Girivraja-Raj agriha, old Magadhan 
capital, n, 17. 

Girnar, 20, 313, 314; Asoka’s inscrip- 
tion at, 203, 204, 205 ; inscription 
ofRudradaman at, 171, 182, 192, - 
199, 208. 



INDEX 


421 


Glauchukayanas (Glausai, Glaugani- 
kai), a trible subjugated by Ale- 
xander, 64. 

Glauganikai, see Glauchukayanas, 
38, 64. 

Go-adhyakhas, see Vachabhumikas , 228. 
Godasa, a disciple of Bhadrabahu, 
foundation of the Godasagana by, 
298. 

Gold, Herdotus on the supply of, 85 
Gold digging ants, 85. 

Gond, a Dravidian tribe, 309. * 

Gopay the, 18 1. 

Gorgias, a general under Alexander, 
59- 

Gotiputta, 217. 

Govindaraja, a subordinate of Seuna- 
chandra, 248. 

Gram ant, 18 1. 

Gramavriddhas, village elders, 81. 
Grdmikas , (village headmen), 10. 
Great Decease of the Buddha, 136. 
Gydhrakuta, see Kalugumalai, 252. 
Greece, 80, 81. 

Greek ambassadors to India, 89-91. 
Greek writers on Brahmin philoso- 
phers, 291. 

Greek writings, value of the, on 
India, 81-82. 

Grhya sutras , the, 284, 333, 343. 
Guilds, maitenance of troops by, 189. 
Gujurat, 18, 1 71. 

Gunjas , see ratis , 279. 

Gupta age, the, 26. 

H 

Haihayas, the 19, 26; exterminated 
by Mahapadma, 17-18. 

Hairwashing ceremony, no, 162. 
Hannibal, 318. 

Harappa, script of, 323, sculptures 
„ at > 342. 

Haraprasada Sastri, 247 n. 

Harishenaf author of the Bxhatkathd - 
koJa, 329. 

Harmatelia, a city ruled by Ambige- 
rus, 41. • 

Harpalus, satarap of Babylon, 69. 
Harsha, 158. 

Harsha-charita , the, of Bana, 246. 
Haryankas the, 348, 352. 

Haryanka kula , Bibmisara of the, 1 1 . 
Hasdrubal, 318. 

Hathigumpha inscription of Khara- 
vela 18, 20, 202, alleged reference 
to a Nanda era in the, 12; men- 
tion of Nandaraja in the, 13. 
Hecataeus of Miletus, value of the 
t works of, 83. 

^gesander, 134, 168, 169. 
lieliodorus, ambassador of Anti- 
cidas, 305. 


Hellenic influence, 2; on Chandra- 
gupta, 198, 199; on the Mauryan 
court, 354-58- 
Helots in. 

Hemachandra, 134, 136, 148, 164. 
Hephaestion, a general under Alexan- 
der, 46-7, 51; colonisation ofRam- 
bakiaby, 77; and the subjugation 
of the Malavas, 70; and Patala, 
75; and the younger Porus, 65-6; 
return, of, 69, 70. 

Heracles, 39, 53, 54> 2 5°> 3° 6 J all <> 
ged foundation of Pajaliputra by, 
158 n; legends about, 100, 1015 
Megasthenes on, 90; libation to, 
by Alexander, 69; and the Pan^U 
yas, 44; story of, 164; worship 
of 106, 305. 

Hercules, 31, 52-53; image of, in 
front of Porus* infantry, no; the 
Sibis traced their descent from, 70. 
Herodotus, 32, 82, 83, 116 n ; “Indi- 
ans” of, 31 ; on the conquest of the 
Indians by Darius, 83; on the’ 
extent of the empire of Darius in 
India, 31; on the tribute paid by 
“India”, 29; period between, and 
Alexander, marked by a set back 
in the Greek knowledge of India, 
87; references to India and 
Indians by, 84-86. 

Herzfeld, on the Sattagydians, 30- 
31; on Hidu, 31. 

Hertel, 193. 

Hidu (Hindu), “Indians” of Herodo- 
tus, 31. 

High Hindi, 317. 

Hillebrandt, 193; on the Arthaiasatra 
and the epics, 191, 195. 
Himavatkuta, 147 
Hi*ayana Buddhism, 316. 

Hippalus, 273 n. 

Hippasioi, see ASmaka, 47. 
Hiranyavaha (Eronnaboas), 315. 
Hiuen Tsang, Chinese pilgrim, 30,® 
221, 222; on Aiokan stupas, 219, 
220; on Mahendra, 209/j; on 
Purnavarman, 248; on the trea- 
sures of king Nanda’s precious 
substances, 24; visit of, to the 
stupa of Kanakamuni, .213. 

Holdich, on the location of Nysa, 35. 
Horse, the, in Indian warfare, 109- • 

1 10. 

Hullzsch on A§oka*s claim of Gods 
mingling with men, 234; on the 
ASokan edicts and Dhammapada, 
230; on the extent of A$oka*s 
empire, 203-204. 

Hunas, the, 146, 147. 

Hunting dogs, the Greek writers on 
the, 98. 

Huvishka, 283. 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


422 * 

Hwen (Hiucn) Thsang, on the origin 
of the Sakya-Mauryas, 142 n. 

Hydaspes, the 28, 35, 39; the ruler of 
Abhisara and the battle of, 36. 

Hylobioi (Vanaprasthas), the most 
honoured among Sarmanes, 107, 
108, 163 and n, 334. 

Hyparch, a provincial official under 
the Nandas, 22, 24, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 41- 

Hypasioi, see ASmaka, 47. 

I 

Iamb (o)ulus, Greek author, recei- 
ved at Pataliputra, 169, 354. 

Ikshvaku (okkaku) king, 290. 

Ikshvakus, the exterminated by 
Maliapadma, 17. 

Ila, see Ceylon, 253. 

“India” (Indus valley), tribute paid 
in gold-dust by, 29. 

India, size of, according to Greek 
writers, 91-92. 

Indian Dionysius, Megasthencs on, 
90. 

Indian Philosopher in Greece, 319. 

Indica , the, of Mcgashthenes, 90-91, 
164; value of the, 135 

Indo-Aryan language, changes in 
the, 320. 

Indo-China, 100. 

Indo-Greekls, coinage under the, 
283. 

Indradatta, a grammarian, 328. 

Indrapalita, 244. 

Industry under the Nandas, and the 
Mauryas, 260-69. 

Ipsus, 1 51. 

Inquiries , a work of Hecatacus, 83 

Iravati, (Hydraotis, Parushni, R^yi), 
28. 

ISila (Siddhapura), a subordinate 
division of Suvarnagiri, 223. 

« I-tsing on the image of Aioka in 
monastic robes, 243. 

Ivory works, 265. 

j 

Jacobi. 19;, 193, on the Arthaidstra , 
195; on the Samachdris , 16 1 n, 

Jaina canon, the 286. 

Jainism 248; Kautilya's animosity 
towards, 324; patronage to, 245, 
246; and Sanskrit, 325, 326; in 
South India, 252. 

Jain literature, 340-41. 

Jalauka, a son of Asoka, 219, 245. 

Jamadagni (Yamataggi), 288. 

Jambudvipa, 233. 

Jambukola, 218. 

Janaka king of Mithila, 19. 


Janapada (Rashtra) an adminis- 
trative division, 21, 22, 120, 224, 
225. 

Janapadakalyani, mother of ASoka 
(?) 208. 

Janussoni, 289. 

Jatakas, the, 224, 274, 275, 308; on 
the different kinds of silpas, 349; 
on the units of currency, 279; on 
the voyages of the Indian mer- 
chants, 270. 

' Jdtakamala, a work of Aryasura, 1 96. 

Jatilakas, the 164. 

Jatilian, minister of Chandragupta, 
164. 

Jatinga Ramesvara, Minor Rock 
Edict at, 204. 

Jaugada, Asoka’s inscription at, 
203, 204, 205, 303. 

Jayaskandhdvara , camp of victory, 
158. 

Jayaswal K. P. iqi;on the two scul- 
ptures at Patna, 345 and n. 

Jett ha, (alderman) 274. 

Jewellery in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 2G8. 

Jhelum, battle of the 57-64. 

Jnatrkaputra, sec Mahavira, 296. 

Johnston E. H., 191; on the Artha - 
sdstra , 196. 

Jolly, on the Arthasditra , 191, 192, 

193 , 194 , 195 - 

Junagadh Rock inscription of Rudra- 
daman, 134; mention of Chan- 
ragupta in the, 139. 

Justice, administration of, 185-187. 

Justin, 13, 23, 41, 135, 151* l66 ; on 
the meeting of Chandragupta 
with Alexander, 133, 144; on 

Chandragupta’s overthrow of 
the existing government, 144- 145; 
on the Mauryan revolution, 24; 
on the oppression of Chan- 
dragupta, 148, 157-58. on the 

origin of Chandragupta, 141; on 
‘the royal harlot’, 50, reference 
by, to the feats of Chandragupta, 

1 43 ; 'sources of, on Chandragupta 
143. 

K 

Kabir, 317. 

Kabul, (-kophen) part of the empire 
of Cyrus, 30. 

Kahdvali , of BhadreSvara, 136. 

Kaiyata, 328, 329. 

Kakani, 213 n. 

Kakavarna, 301. 

Kalanos, (Kalyana ?) engaged in the| 
study of nature, 105, 106. 

Kalapa, a work on grammar, 328. - 

KalaSoka, (Asoka), 301. 



INDEX 


# 423 


Kalatiai, a people in North West 
India, 83. 

Kalhana, historian of Kashmir, 219, 
244; on Jalauka, 245. 

Kalidasa, 334. 

Kalinga, 11,20, 205, 212; the Chetas 
in, 246; Asoka’s conquest of, 155, 
210-11, 219, 309; Asoka’s re- 
morse after the war against, 229; 
231; independence of, till the days 
of Asoka, 168; part of the Nanda 
empire, 260. 

Kalinga edicts, 167, 205, 212, 233. 

Kalingas, the, 26; exterminated by 
Mahapadmananda, 17, 180. 

Kallatiai, a tribe in the Persian em- 
pire, 84. 

Kallil Attiraiyanar, 253. 

Kalpadruma , 344. 

Kalpaka, 15. 

Kalpasutra , the, of Bhadrabahu, 142 
161, 164, 298, 333, 341. 

KalsI, Asoka’s inscription at, 204, 
3 ! 3 - 

Ka/ugumalai (Grdhrakuta), 252. 

Ka/uvaki, w of Asoka and mother of 
Tivala, 214. 

Kalyani, in S. W. Ceylon, 256, 

Kamandaka, Nitisara of, 146. 

Kamandahya Nitisara, 195. 

Kamarupa, (Suvarnakudya) (Assam) 
221, 263; fragrant wood in, 266. 

Kdmasdslra, 194, 337-338. 

Kamasoka, see Asoka, 301. 

Kamasutra the, of Vatsyayana, 194; 
and the Arthasdstra, 195. 

Kambojas, a tribe in N. W. India, 
146, 154, 217, 222, 225; a repub- 
lic, 173. 

Kanakamuni, see Konakamana, 213. 

Kanauj, 245, 300. 

Kanchi (puram), Asoka’s stupas 
near, 222; Asokavarma, a ruler of, 
249- 

Kantakaiodhana courts, 185, 186, 

187. 

Kanvas, dvijas, 140. 

Kanva period, 13 1. • 

Kapila, son of Prahlada, on jnana, 

336. 

Kapilavastu, 269. 

Kapisi (Ka-pi-shin, Ki-pin, Kophen), 
30 - 

Karmakaras, 112. 

Karmanda, 334. 

Karmania, journey of Craterus to, 
80. 

Karri plain, battle of the Jhelum in 
the, 61. 

Ilasakrtsna, 335. 

ifaseyas, the, exterminated by Ma- 
mapadma, 17. 

Kashmir, and Asoka, 219-220. 


Kasi (Banares) 21, 263, 270, 310 
313, and the Saisunagas and the 
Nandas, 17; textile manufacture 
in, 262. 

Kdhka commentary, 260. 

Kaspapyros (Kaspatyrus), city of 
Gandhara, 83. 

Kassapa, a Vedic Rshi, 287. 

Kassapagotta, a missionary, 216,217. 

Kathaians (Kathas, Kathaioi, Catha- 
eans, Kshatrasreni), 38, 66; 69, 
173; marriage among the, 102; 
sati among the, 103. 

Kathdhritsagara y 17, 328. 

Kathdvatthuy the Abidhamma treatise, 
composed by Moggaliputta Tissa, 
215, 230, 302. 

Katyayana alias Vararuchi, a scholar 
and grammarian of the Nanda 
period, 25, 178 n, 308,325, 326, 

327> 328, 3 2 9>33°> 33° n > 33 r > 3335 
340 ; on the Chola and Pandya coun- 
try, 44; reference of, to Vyadi, 335. . 

Kausambi, (Vatsa) 203, 216, 269, 
300, 239; Asoka’s instruction to 
the Mahamatras of, 302-303; 
M. P. E. at 204; textile manufac- 
ture in 362. 

Kausambika, a sakha of the Utta- 
rabalissaha gana, 298. 

Kaushitaki Bialimana, 310. 

Kautilya (Chanakya), 3, 4, 25, 135, 
164, 174, ! 75> 177, i«2, 

187, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, 

196, 198, 199, 226, 252, 265, 267, 
268, 270, 271, 273-279, 3°8, 332, 
333> 335> 337, 33**, 339, 34°, 3*>o; 
animosity of towards Buddhism 
and Jainism, 324; and Bindusara, 
166; warlike activities of, 167-68; 
Ghancellor of Chandragupta 
Maury a, 1 91 ; Chancellor of the 
Mauryan empire, 1 61; going of, 
to Pataliputra, 325, hostility of, 
to noil-monarchical states, 173; 
the Indian Bismarck, 200; inno- 
vation of, in the administration 
of justice, 186, 187; part of, in 
the Mauryan revolution, 146-47, 
148; share of in the building up of 
the Mauryan administrative system, 
179; Stein on, 196; on the personal 
safety of the king, ng; on the 
state dept, to look after foreigners, 
354; on the sources of income of 
the government, 183-84; on the 
Tamraparnika, 42. 

Kautumbini, a Sakha of the 
Uttarabalissaha gana, 298. 

Kavi, a minister, 330. 

Kdvydlankdrasutravxllii of Vamana, 330. 

Kavyas, during the Nanda-Maurya 
period, 330-331 



424 


AGE OF THE NANDAs AND MAURYAS 


Keith, 1 91. 

Kekaya, 310 

Kera (Chera), 43. 

Kerala (Ghera), 43, 45, 251. 

Keralaputa (Ketalaputa) 238, 
250; outside Asoka’s empire, 219. 

Xhallataka, 167 

Khalsi, 251. 

Kharavela, Hathigumpha inscrip- 
tion of, 13, 20, 202. 

Khariboli Hindi, 317. 

Kharoshthi script, 205, 220, 233; 
origin and evolution of the 323, 
352 . 

Khasa, 146. 

KhaSarajya, 167. 

Khotan, and A£oka, 229. 

K*ien-t’o-lo, see Gandhara, 30. 

King, ministers and council of the, 
176-177; and ownership of land, 
177 and n; powers and duties of, 
174-76. 

Ki-pin see (KapiSi), 30. 

Klkatas, an Anarya clan, 9, 146, 
147 n. 

Kleitarchus, a follower of Alexander, 
88 — 9, hi; on Alexander’s en- 
counter with monkeys, 96. 

Kleisobora (Krishnapura), a city of 
the Sursaeas, 305. 

Kod (t) umbara (Hudumbara), 
woollen goods of, 263. 

Koinos, a general of Alexander, 50, 
52, 56, 61; exhortation of, to 
Alexander to return home, 67- 
8; left behind by Alexander at 
the Chenab 65; death ol, 69. 

Kokala, a place in the country of 
the Oreitai, country of the 
Oreitai, 76. 

Kol, 309, 3 J 3> 3 21 - f 

Konakamana (Kanakamuni, Kon- 
gagamana) a legendary Buddha, 
Asoka’s visit to the stupa of, 

# 212 — 213. 

Konkan, 271. 

Kophaios, a chieftain that helped 
Alexander, 51. 

Kophen see Kapisi, 30. 

Kos, 238. 

Kokala, 2i, # 310, 313; Buddhism in, 
299, Kingdom, 280. Sravasti, 
capital of, 269. 

Kosasla devi, 154. 

Kosambi (Kosam) a centre of pro- 
vincial administration, 223; Asoka 
column, 361. 

Kosambi, on the Taxila Hoard, 
280 7Z, 28 m. 

KoSar (Satyaputras?), 254, 255, 251. 

Koshtha, temple, 338. 

Kosh\hdgdradhyaksha , Superintendent 
of warehouses, 177. 


Kotikapura, 161. 

Kramrisch, on Mauryan sculpture, 

387- 

Krishna and Heracles, 101. 

Krishnala a unit of weight, 279. 
Krishnpura (Cleisobora ?) a city of 
the Surasenas, 101, 305. 

Karoshtiya, 328. 

Kshanika, a doctrine, 298, 299. 
Kshatri (yas) (Xathroi) 40; submi- 
ssion of the, to Alexander, 74. 
JCshatriyafreni (Khathoi), a repub- 
lic, 173. 

Kshemendra, epitomiser of the 
Brihatkathd , 20, 141. 

Kshudrakas (Oxydrakai), 39, 40, 70; 
subjugation of the, by Alexander 
73; Visit to Alexander, by the 
leading men among the, 121. 
Kotivarsiya, a $akha of the 
Godasagana, 298. 

Kotuhalasalas, 294. 

Kukura, a republic, 173. 
Kukutarama, 215 n. 

Kumara, a title of the Viceroys of 
Tosali and Ujjeni, 167, 223. 224. 
Kumarika (Goniaci), 44. 

Kumrahar, 357, 357, 383; ruins of 
Maurya buildings at, 159. 

Kunala, a son of Asoka, 214, 215 n , 
244, 245; and Khotan, 220. 

Kuni Vadava (Kunaravadava), 328. 
Kuntala, and the Nandas, 20. 

Kuru, a republic, 17, 173, 310. 
Kurukshetra, 19. 

Kurundogai , the 255. 

Kushana, 199. 

Kushans, coinage under the, 283. 
Kutadanta, 289. 

Kuvanna (Kuveni) and Vijaya, 256. 

L 

Laghman , Asoka’s inscription at, 

204, 205. 

Laghiiparibhashdurtti, 327. 0 
Lagos, father of Ptolemy, 48, 51. 
Lae(k)cc]aemonians, and the helots, 
hi. 

Land, ownership of and tax on, in 
India, according to Greek writers, 
114—115. 

Lanka (Ceylon) 257. 

Las Bela, the land of the Oreitai, 77. 
Latage, feeding of monkeys at, 97. 
Later Nandas, 23-26. 

Lauria,, gold tablet, 343. 
Lauriya-Araraj, ASokan column 
at, 205, 313, 361, 362. 

Lauriya Nandangarh, column at, 

205, 361, 362, 364, 365, 368 , ; 

37 1, 377> lt° n figure on the column 1 
at, 370. 



INDEX 


» 425 * 


Law of deposits in India, Greek 
writers on, 112, 113. 

Learning (Sanskrit) under the Nandas 
and Maury as, 324- 25. 

Legends, of the Greek writers, 100- 
101. 

Leonnatus, 77; victory of, against 
the Oreitai, 76. 

Libya, 83. 

Lichchnavis, 19, 39. 

Lichchhivika, a republic, 173. 

Life of Apollonius of Tyana, by # 
Philostratus, 83. 

Luders H. 313; on the Satiya- 
putas 251. 

Lohanipur, images from 379, 388. 

Lokayata, 288, 335. 

Lomasa Rishi cave, 376, 377, 385, 
386, 387. 

Louis XIII, 15. 

Lumbinivana, 184, 213. 

Lysimarhus, a general under Alexan- 
der, later king of Thrace, 59. 

M 

Macdonald, on the marriage compact 
between Seleucus and Chandra- 
gupta, 154; on the Sophyte’s coins, 
127; on the two classes of imita- 
tion*- of Athenian coins, 128, 129. 
Macedon (Madhuka or Madhu- 
dana), known to Indians, 132 n. 

Machatus, father of Philip, 56, 78. 

‘Machiavellian* nature of the mandala 
theory, 188. 

M’Crindlc on the attainments of 
Alexander’s men, 80 

Madhyadesa, 260, 310. 

Madhyamika, march of a Greek 
army to, 355. 

Madhuka, identification of, 132W. 

Madra, 310. 

Madraka, a republic, 173. 

Madura, capital of the Pandyas, 
250, *252 ; textile manufacture 

at, 262. 

Magadha, 21, 136, 1 41, 28o,Jluddhism 
in, before the days of Asoka, 299; 
empire, 172, 173; extent of the 
empire of, during the time of 
Alexander, 87; empire under the 
Nandas, the, exposed to a two- 
fold danger, 132; factors for the 
greatness of, 9-10; famine in, 
165, 297; language in, 313,314; 
veneration of Alexander’s altars by 
the kings of, 68. 

Magadhi canon, 286. 

a Magadhi dialect, 205, 317. 

J Magas of Gyrene (Maka), 166, 206, 

V 207; 217 Asoka a contemporary 

" of, 138. 


Maggadesako, an order of • am an a" 

294< , . 

MaggadusI, on order of Sramana, 

295 - 

A lahabharata, 166, 195, 199, 284, 

308,349,366. 

Mahabharata battle, date of the 323 

Mahabhashya , the, of Patanjali, 133, 
166 289, 295, 3°7» 33°, 33 l - 

Mahabodhiiamsa , 13, 23. 

Mahagiri, successor of Sthulabhadra, 
298. 

Mahakosala, 309. 

Mahamatra, 10, 15, 22, 115, 183, 
200, 2T4;a provincial officer, 223; 
a high ranking official, 225-226; 
Council of the, 226. 

Mahamatras, of morality, 236; occu- 
pied with the welfare of the 
Ajivakas, 297. 

M ahdma.tr ly a , the Secretaries, 179. 

Mahapadma Nanda (Pati (Ugra- 
sena, Agrammes, Xandrames), 
13-20; 132, 142; contemporary 
of Alexander, 141; political 
unity of N. India under, 260; succe- 
sors of, Sudra according to the 
Puranas, 140; titles of, 350; 351. 

Mahaparinibhana Sutta , on the 
Moriyas, 1 41 — 142. 

Mahasanghika, 300. 301, 303. 

Mahasangiti, 300. 

Mahasetthi, 274. 

Mahasthan inscription, 83, 222,283. 

Mahavamsa, the 154, 203; on the 
antiquity of the Pandya kingdom, 
44; on the early history of Ceylon, 
257-59; on the adoption of Bu- 
ddhism by Asoka, 210; on Asoka’s 
message to the king of Ceylon, 243; 
on the third Buddhist Council, 
•215, 216. 

Mahavamsa Tika the, 134, 161, 
167; on the Mauryan Revolution, 
147, 148. 

Mahavira(Nataputta,Jnatrikaputraj, 
10, 286, 298, 313, 325; founder 
of the Nirgrantha order, 296; 
liberation of, 136. 

Mahayana Buddhism, 231. 

Mahesvaa, (Mahislimati), 18 

Mahindra (Mahendra)J a son of 
A/oka, 209, 209 n; brother or Asoka, , 
222; Pali canon taken by, to 
Ceylon, 317, 318; stupa of, near 
Madura, 222; and Ceylon, 218- 
219, 258; nirvana of, 259. 

Mahisasaka, Buddhist school, 303, 

Mahisha, textile manufacture in, 262* 

Mahishmatl, the capital of the Hai- 
hayas, 18 . 

Maithilas, the, exterminated by 
Mahapadma, 17, 19. 



426. 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


IVlajjhima, a missionary, ai6, 217. 

Majhimanikaya 35; on the perfor- 
mance of sacrifices, 290-91. 

Maka, see Magas of Gyrene, 206, 
207, 217. 

Makara, the vahanaoi Ganga, 344. 

Makkhali Gosala, a Tirthika teacher 
and founder of the Ajivaka order, 
295- 

Makran, rounding of the coast by 
Ncarchus, 80. 

Malakonda, natural cavern at, 252. 

Malakuta (Pandya), Capital, stupa 
near 222. 

Malayaketu, 146. 

Malay Archipelago, 270. 

Malay peninsula, 270. 

Malava (Malloi) a people of the 
Punjab, 39, 40, 70, 262; presents 
of the, to Alexander, 267; subju- 
gation of the, by Alexander, 71-73. 

Malayagiri, 340. 

Malaysia 100 

Malcr, a Dravidian tribe, 309. 

Mallaka,a republic, 173. 

Mallanaga, 148. 

Mallas, the 39 

Malloi, see Malava, 39, 40, 70, 262. 

Malwa, (Avanti), 18, 155. 

Mamulanar, 253, 254, 255, 256. 

Mana, a unit of weight, 279. 

Mandala theory, 187-188, 200. 

Mandanis, see Dandamis, 106; Me- 
gasthenes on, 291 

Mandhata, (Mahismati?), 18. 

Mamgalas, Asoka, on the perfor- 
mance of 306. 

Manibhadra Yaksha, statue of, from 
Pawaya, 380. 

Maniyattappo (a Jatilian), a minister 
of Ghandragupta, 161 . 

Ma fijusrimulakalpa, on BinduSdra, 
330; on Katyayana, 329. 

Mansehra, M. R. E. at, 204, 205, 
238, 312; language of the inscri- 
ption at, 314. 

Mantriparishad, 227. 

Manu, 164 n; on units of weight, 
279- 

Marco Polo, on raised beds, as pro- 
tection against reptiles, 977*. 

Markandeya Purana the, on the 
Mauryas, 141. 

Marshall excavation of, at Taxila, 
125. 

Marriage, 1 1 7, 117 n; and occupa- 
tion rules in India, according to 
Greek writers, 116. 

Martikhora, (maneater), descrip- 
tion of the, by Ctesias, 87. 

Mashudana, identification of, 132 n. 

Maskarin, a class of Parivrajakas, 295. 

Maski, Minor Rock Edict at, 204, 
207, 313. 


Massaga, (Masakavati), capital of 
the kingdom of the Assakenians, 
35> 55; capture of, by Alexander, 
49-5o; 

Maihura (Methora), 44, 203, 314, 

3 1 7» 345^ 383; capital of the 

3urasenas, 19, 101,305; Buddhism 
in, beforeAaoka, 299, 300; Kushana 
school of art of, 388; sculptures 
at, 379, 381, 382; 

Mathura stone-pillar inscription, 283. 

y Mdthun Vrtti , a work, 328. 

Matsya, 310 

Matsya Purana , 23, 

Maurya, origin and derivation of the 
word, 140-41. 

Mauryan art, animal figures in, 
369 — 378; characteristics of, 347- 
48; isolated existence of, 390-91; 
remains of 346. 

Mauryan bureaucracy, 178-179. 

Mauryan court, ambassadors to, from 
the Hellenistic kingdons, 89-91; 
influence of the Achaemcnids in 
the, 355-59; and the Syrian court, 
134-135- 

Mauryan empire, establishment of 
the 2-3; fall of the, 247-48; 
military organisation in the, 2 1 29, 
188-89; southern limit of, 249; 
foreign policy, 156-57; govern- 
ment, central offices in the, 179- 
181; polity, features from foreign 
models, 173, 175, 178, 189-90, 

Mauryan Pillared Hall, 346. 

Mauryan Revolution, course of, 
24-25 

Maurya putra, 142 n. 

Mauryas alleged sculptures of the, 
378-384; income and expendi- 
ture under the, 179, 183-185; 

industry under the, 260-69; rule 
of the, in Kuntala, 248; superses- 
sion of the Nandas by, 145-46. 
trade under the, 269-279; the, 
in the Sangam literature, 253, 
254 j 2 55, 256. 

Mauryas of Konkan, 248, 249. 

Mediterranean art, 342. 

Megasthenes, a Greek ambassador 
to the Mauryan court, 19/32,89, 91 
n, 1 16 n, 1 17 n, 135, 152, 161, 164, 

1 71, 261, 287, 353> 356, 360; and 
Kautilya, Stein on, 196; and 
Porus, 89-900.; valueof the account 
of 89-91 ; on the absence of 
famine and scarcity in India, 
94 ; on the administrative 
organisation in the Mauryan 
state, 120-22; on the agronomoi, , 
224, 272, 278; on the Andhras, 43;, 
on the artistic skill of the Indians, 1 
102; on Ceylon, 256; on the city 
administration at Patiliputra, 



INDEX 


%21 


1 20-121; on the department to 
look after foreigners, 354; on the 
Derdai, 85; on the fighting class, 
188; on food and drink among the 
Indians, 116-117; on the foreign 
policy of the Indian kings, 156; 
on the foundation of Pataliputra, 
158 n\ on the hunting of elephants, 
96; on the Hylobioi, 163 and n\ on 
the Indian elephants, 95, 96; on 
the Indian monkeys, 97 ; on^ 

Indian philosophers, 106-107, 
287; on the Indian physicians, 107; 
on the Indian rivers, 93 and n; 
on Indian women, 107; on the 
kingdoms of South India, 249-50; 
on the laws of the Indians, 108 and 
n; on laws in India, 164; on law 
deposits in India, 112-113: 

on the length of India, 92; on the 
length of the royal road from 
Pataliputra to the north west, 
91 ; on Mandanis, 291 ; on marriage 
and occupation among the Indians, 

1 16; on the military organisation 
in the Mauryan state, 120, 122; on 
the mineral wealth of India, 95; on 
the Nirgranthas, 296-297; on the 
Oxydrakai and Dionysus, 306; on 
Pandaia, 101 ; on public spectacles 
attended by Chandragupta, 162; 
on the race; in India, 100; on the 
role of Indians in foreign warfare 
31; on rural administration in 
the Maurvan state, 120; on the 
safety of the king’s person, t 76 ; 
on the sages, 104; on serpents in 
India, 98; on the setting of tlic Bears 
in South India, 43; on seven 
tribes or classes in India, 113-115; 
on slavery in India, 111- 
112; on Indian social organisa 
tion, 105; on the Sramanas 293, 
294; on the strength of Chandra- 
gupta’s afmv 188 ; on the supply of 
gold, 85 ; 103; 011 the tigers in the 
country of the Parsii, 99; on the 
trade of South India, 5 - 2 ; on 
some wild animals, 99, on the 
worship of Heracles, 305; use 
of the legends about Dionysus and 
Herakles by, 100-101; 

Meghaksha (Meghanada) king of 
the Persians, 146. 

Meleager, a general under Alexander 
59. 

Memphis, Indian figures at, 218. 

Menander, 198. 

Meros, Mt.,(Koh — i — Mor)43, 48,49. 

’^erutunga, author of the Vicharasi eni 

(156. 

Metal works, 266-67. 

Methora see Mathura, 101,-305. 


Metronymics, use of, 15 n. 

Meyer, J. J. 112 6z, on the Arlhaias- 
sira, 1 9 1, 192, 195. 

Miletus, Hecataeus of, 83. 

Milinda Panho the, 13, 15; stories 

about Chandragupta in the 134; 
on Chandragupta’s overthrow of 
the Nandas, 145-46. 

Minor Rock Edicts, the 204, 206, 
211,233,244. 

Midland dialect, 315, 316, 317. 

Mineral science (dhatusdstra ) , 339. 

Mithila (Janakpur), 19 

Modubae, sec Mutibas, 43, 

Moeres (Moriya or Maurya), a 
king of Tauala, 41. 

Moggaliputta Tissa, religious mi- 
ssions of, 203, 216-217 

and 21 6 n; 259; and Asoka, 303- 
304 ;com position of thzKathdvatthu 
by, 230; and the Third Buddhist 
council, 301-302. 

Mohen-jo-Daro, script of, 323, 324; 
sculptures at, 342; weights in, 
282 n. 

Moliur, 254; rebellious chieftains 
of, 255. 

Moksha , divorce, 185, 

Monahan, 113 n, 120 n, 159 n. 

Moniyanagara, perhaps identical 
with Pipphalivana. 143. 

Monkeys, Greek writers on, 96-97. 

Moriya (Morieis, Mcrocs, Moeres) 
1 41, 142 n; and mora, 143 n. 

Moriyar, 155, 253, 254. 

Mousikanos see Musicanus, 29, 40, 
4 i 1 45 , 150 

Mrxchchhakalika of Sudraka, 318 

Muchukarna .’ sec Musicanus, 74. 

Mudrarakshasa , of Visakhadatta, 142 
!§ 4 j 144”, 147, I7D 182, 

208; on the origin of Chandra- 
gupta Maurya, 141, 142; account 
of the Mauryan revolution in 
the, 25, 146—47. 

Mulakadcva, a missionary, 216. 

Multan, 83. 

Mura, 140. 

Mushika, a district in Kerala, 45. 

Musicanu (o) s (Mousikanos, Muchu- 
karna ?), the greatest* king in 
the lower Indus, 40; attempt of, 
to expel the Macdonians from 
N. W. India, 150; enmity of, with 
Sambos, 41 ; gold and silver 
‘mines’ in the country of, 29; pe- 
culiar usages in the kingdom of, 
hi; rebellion and execution of, 
74 — 75 ; Oncsicritus on the coun- 
try of, 45. 

Mutasiva, king of Ceylon, 257. 

Mutibas (Modubae), a tribe, 43, 321. 

My calc, Persian defeat at, 32. 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


42u 


N 

Nabhakas, a tribe, 217, 222, 223. 

Nabhapanktis (Nabhitis), a tribe, 
217, 222, 223. 

Nagas, the in Ceylon, 254, 256. 

Nagadvipa (northern Ceylon), 256. 

Nagaraka , city magistrate, 18 1, 198. 

Nagarasobhini, 10 

Nagaraiyavaharakas , the Mahama- 
tras as, 225 — 226. 

Nagarjuni cave, the 385, 386. 

Nagoji, 328. 

Nakshi-Rustam, inscription of Darius 
at, 359- 

Nalanda, 269. 

Nanaghat cave inscription, 305. 

Nandas, the 1, 4, n-20, 132, 168; 
administration under the, 21-23; 
and Chandragupta’s extraction, 
140; extent of the Empire 
of the, 26-27 ; industry 

under the, 260-69; language of 
the, 313; Magadha under the, 
172; power of the, heard by Ale- 
xander, 67; in Tamil literature, 
253-55; trade under the, 269- 
279; traditions about the rule 
of the, in the Karnataka, 249; 
overthrown by Chandragupta, 
135, H2, 145-47, 154, I5 6 - 

Nanda era, 12. 

Nanda-Maurya period, early for- 
eign coins in India in the, 123- 
131 - 

Nandaraja, 12, 13, 20. 

Nandrum, 12, 144. 

Narada, on the validity of royal 
decree, 174. 

Naradasmrti, the, 199. 

Naramedha, 289. 

Natabhata, monastery of 300. 

Nataputta, see Mahavira, 142/7, 296. 

Natural History , a work of Pliny the 
Elder, 91 n, 272. 

Natyasastra , of Bharata, 331. 

“Nau Nand Dehra” (Nander), 18. 

Navadhyaksha , 189. 

Nava Nanda , meaning of, 20. 

Nearchus, commander of the naval 
squadfon of Alexander, 69, 70, 
75, 76, 78, 80, 99, 1 13; and the 
subjugation of the Malavas, 71; 
memoirs of, 88; on the arms and 
outfit of the Indian soldiers, 109- 
no; on the dress of Indians, 108- 
109; on the hunting of elephants, 
96; on Indian rivers, 93; on the 
Indians dyeing their beards 102 
n.\ on Indian sages, 104, 105; 
on Indian women, 107; on the in- 
fluence of the Brahmanas, 40; on 
the laws of the Indians, 10JJ and 


n; on the making of fine webs, 
94 ; on the setting of the Bears, 43 ; 
on the size of India, 92; on the 
size and shade of a tree, 94; on 
the skill of the Indians in arts, 
iio-iii; on the skin of the gold 
digging ants, 85; on snakes in 
India, 97-98; on the tribes in 
north-western India, 108-109. 

Necho, an Egyptian king, 83. 
f Nepal and Asoka, 22 1 ; wollen goods 
from, 263. 

Nicanor, a satrap under Alexander, 
5 1 ; placed in charge of Alexanderia 
46; Philip in charge of the satrapy 
of, 78 ; governor of the Assakenoi, 
slain, 65. 

Nigali Sagar, Asoka’s inscription at, 
204,205,221,361. 

Nigali Sagar, stupa of Kona Kamana 
at, 212. 

Nighandu, 288 

Nigantha Nataputta, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Nigrodha, son of Sumana, 210. 

Nijhati, conversion, 240. 

Nilcaya, 228. 

Nikaia, (1) a city founded by Alexan- 
der, on the site of the battle of the 
Jhelum, (2) 64; embassy of Ambhi 
to Alexander at, 46. 

Nike, 126. 

Nipishta, 233. 

Nitisara of Kamandaka, on the 
Mauryan revolution, 146. 

Nirgranthas, ( Niganthas ) 21571, 

225, 295, 296-299; in Ceylon, 

257 - 

Nirvana, 230, 294, 300, 30, 303. 

Nomarch, a provincial official under 
the Nandas, 22, 34, 37, 38, 40, 41. 

Nomarchai, 39. 

North-west India, physical aspects of, 
27-30. 

Nyaya (reason), exalte&ion of, 174 

Nysa, hill state of, 35, 69, 121; sub- 
mission of the city of, to Alexander, 
48-9. 

Nysa, the nurse of Dionysus, 48. 

O 

Ohind, 55. 

Oldenbcrg, 209 n. 

Omphis, see Ambhi, 46. ** 

Onesicritus 38, n6/z; pilot of Alexan- 
der’s ship, 69; pilot of Nearchus’s 
fleet, 88; the existence of Ceylon, 
known to, 43, 92; sent by Ale- 
xander to the sages, 104, 105-06; 
on the banyan tree, 94; on th<e 
choice of kings among the Kathai- 
ans, 102; on the country of Mou- 



INDEX 


$ 429 


sikanos, 45, 1 1 1 ; on elephants, 
95-96; on longevity and marri- 
age in India 102; on the serpents 
kept by Abisares, 98 and n; 
on the size of India, 92 ; on sla- 
very in India, 112; on Taprobane, 
43- 

Opiai, a people in the North West 
India, 83. 

Ora (Udagram), subjugation of, 
by Alexander, 50-51. 

Oraons, a Dravidian tribe, 390. * 

Oreitai, country of the, 76, Apo- 
llophanes, Satrap of, 77; Las 
Bela, the land of the, 77. 

Orobatis, a city fortified by the 
generals of Alexander, 51. 

Ossadioi (Vasati), 40, 74. 

Ottorakorrhas (Uttarakuru), 315. 

‘Owl* figure of the, on the Greek 
coins, 128, 129. 

Oxyk(c)anos (Portikanos), a chief- 
tain, 41; submission of, to Alexan- 
der, 74. 

Oxydrakai (Oxydracac, Sydracae, 
Sudracae, Syrakousai) see, 
Kshudrakas, a people in the Punjab, 
39, 70. 101 , 121, 306. 

Oxyartes, father or Roxana, and 
satrap of Paropamisadai, 74; 78. 


Pabbajja, 243. 

Padaeans. a nomad tribe in north- 
west India, 84. 

Padmavatl, Queen, 214 n. 

Pakshilasvamin, 148. 

Paktiyaka (Pashtu country), Indian 
tribes of, 85. 

Pakudha Kachchayana, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Palaka, son of Pradyota of Avanti, 
20. 

Palasin^indu, 193. 

Pali, 313-314, 316-17. 

Pali(m)bothra (Pataliputra), 16, 

^ 101, 155, n 158, 168, 31$, 354. 

Palidas, 217. 

Palkigundu, Minor Rock Edict at, 
204. 

Pamukha (President) 274. 

Pancalas, a republic, 17, 18, 173, 
310. 

Panchayat, 121. 

Panchyats of castes, 185. 

Pandae (i) a, daughter of Herakles, 

1 64, 2 50 ; Megasthenes on, 1 o 1 

Pandion, 1572 

Pandukabhaya, king of Ceylon, 257. 

Pandya Ka (p)vata, 42, 251. 

Pandya (Malakufa), 222, 250; 251, 
271; country, 44; statej Megasthe- 


nes on, 1 01, outside Asoka’s em- 
pire, 219. 

Pandyas, the 44, 217, 238. 

Panini, 208, 308, 316, 329, 331, 334; 
author of a Prakrit grammar, 
340 ; a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25, 26 ; 326-27 ; the 

Aftadhydyi of, 284; Bhagala known 
to, 67; the Brihatkathd on 326; 
mention of Subhuta by, 69; on 
the Malavas, 39; on the Maskarin 
295; on the N. W. trade route, 
269; on the suffix vun, 304, 305. 

Panya-samstha, market place, 277. 

Paradas, 22371. 

Parangorranar. 253. 

Parasamudra, 193. 

Paras arya, 333. 

Pargiter, on the identification of 
Mahishmati, 18. 

Paribbajika, see Parivrajaka, 294. 

Paribhajaka-arama, 294. 

Parikshit, 1 1 . 

Parindas, a tribe, 222, 223. 

Parinirvana of the Buddha, 136, 206 
and n. 

Parisishta Parvan, the, of Hemachan- 
dra, 134, 147, 161/2; on the 

accession of Chandragupta, 136, 
143, 147-46; on the home of 
Kautilya, 148. 

Parivrajaka (Paribbajaka) an order 
of ascetics, 293-294, 335; in 

Bengal, 299. 

Parkham, Jain image of, 379-380, 
381, 383; Yakshas, 388. 

Parmcnio, the army of, 33. 

Paropamisadae (i), 149, 152, 153; 
Alexandria the capital of, 78; 
change in the satrap of, 74; given 

# by Scleucus I to Chandragupta 
Maurya, 130. 

Parthia, revolt of, from Syria, 2. 

Parvata, 146. 

Parvataka, 146, 147 and n. 

Parvatesvara (Sailesvara), 146. • 

ParushnI (Iravati, Hydraotis, Ravi), 
28. 

Pashamdas, religious secs, 306. 

Pasni, a harbour, 77. 

Patala, Alexander § at, 76; sub- 
mission of the ruler of,' to Alexander, 
75; Patalene, see Tauala, 41. 

Pataliputra (Patna, Pali(m)bot- 
(h)ra(i), Pupphapura), 14, 16, 
24, 1 17, 1 18, 143, 145, 152 

and n, 155 n, 157, 158-59, 168, 
182, 203, 204, 205, 218, 221, 245, 
254, 255, 269, 272, 273, 312, 318, 
329, 33 1 , 34L 347, 352; alleged 
foundation of, by Herakles, 101; 
foundation of, by Udayi, 15872; 
origin and growth of, 11; capital 



430 « 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of M&gadha (the Maury a), 21, 
223; architectural magnificience 
of, 339-34°; building of, by 
Chandragupta, 345, 346 ; city 

administration of, 120-21; connec- 
tion of, with the Hellenic countries, 
355; courtezans at, 337; Curtius 
on the king and palace at 1 18-1 19 
n; description of, 356-358; forei- 
gners in, 157, 354, 355; hair-wash- 
ing ceremony at, 162; Iamboulus 
at, 354; the influence of the 
Buddhist community at, over 
Asoka, 302 ; length of the road 
from to the north-west, to 91; 
meeting of the council of Niigran- 
thas at, 297, 298; the people of, 16; 
Rajasckhara on the court of learn- 
ing at, 325 ; royal place in. 158- 
159 and 159 n ; third Buddhist 
Council at, 285; under the Nandas, 
25-26; Upavarsha a resident of, 
335; women in the palace at, 1 19; 
a wooden palisade round, 192. 

Patan, a city founded by Asoka, 221. 

Patanjali, author of the Mahabhashya , 
* 33 , l6o » 166, 208, 289, 307, 308, 
325 , 326, 327, 330, 331; Chandra- 
gupta known to, 139 ; comm- 
entary of, 26; on the introduction 
of images, 184; on Katyayana, 
329; on the Maskarin, 295; on 
some grammarians, 328; on the 
suffix run. 304; on women studying 
Mimdmsa, 335. 

Patheyya monks, 299, 300. 

Patna statues, (Yakshas), 378, 379, 
380, 382. 

Patrocles, admiral of Selcucus* 89; 
on the size of India, 91. 

Patronymics, use of, 15/z. « 

Patira, 120. 

Paurava (see Porus), the, 36, 37, 56, 
57, 64, 65, 78, 139. 

fauravas (Purus), ancestry of the, 
147 . 

Pauravyavaharikas , 226. 

Pautaiadhyaksha , ‘Superintendent of 
weights and measures* 278. 

Pawaya, Yaksha statue from, 380. 

Pearl-fishing, Megasthcnes on 95. 

Periplus 193; on the coral trade of 
India, 199. 

Peithon, son of Agenor, satrap of the 
lower Indus valley, 74, 78; and 
the subjugation of the Malavas, 
71; suppression of the revolt of 
Musicanus by, 75; transferred to 
the west of the Indus, 79. See 
Pithon. 

Penal code, severity of, under Chan ■ 
dragupta, 158. 

Perdiccas, a general under Alexander, 


46> 47, 5, 59; and the subjugation 
of the Malavas, 71, 72. 

Persepolis, 32, 368; Alexander’s 

behaviour at, 353; Hall of hundred 
columns at, 357. 

Persia, 198, 273; advance of, to the 
Indus, 30-34; conquest of, by 
Alexander, 1 ; influence of, on Asoka 
233 ; 

Petenikas, a tribe, 222. 

Peucelaotis (Pushkalavati), 35, 47, 51. 

T-hegeus (Phegelis), a chief in the 
Punjab, 38. 

Philadelphia (Ptolemy II), 168. 

Philip, son of Mac hatus, a comman- 
dei under Alexander, 51, 69, 70. 
appointed satrap of Taksha- 
slla, 56; the Malavas and the 
Kshudrnkas attached to the sa- 
trapy of, 73; satrap of Taksha£ila, 
65 76, 79; southern boundary of 
the satrapy of, 74; murder of, 77. 

Philip Arrhidaeus, gold coins of, 280; 
a tatradraJiarn of, 125. 

Philippus, 139, 149, 1 51. 

Philosophers, Indian, Greek writers 
on the, 1 06- 1 08. 

Philosophy in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 334-336. 

Philostratus, author of Life of Apo- 
llonius of Tyana, 83. 

Photius, abridgement of the work of 
Ctcsias by, 86. 

Phrataphernes. Satrap of Parthia, 
65. 

Phylarchus, 134, 139, 169. 

Piaclamsana (Priyadarsana), see 
Chandragupta, 139, 140. 

Pillar Edicts, 234; elaboration of the 
principles of Dhamma in the, 
213. 

Pimprama, the stronghold of the 
Adraistai, 38; submission of, to 
Alexander, 66. 

Pingala (Naga), 325; AsokU put to 
school under, 331. 

Pipphalivana, the republic of, 142. 

Piprahva stupa, gold tablet found 
at, 343- 

Pithon, 149, 1 51 ; Antigonus favoured 
by, 150. See Peithon. 

Pi(c)tinikas, a tribe, 217, 222, 223. 

Piyadasi, see Asoka, 207, 208. 

Piyadassana, 208, see Asoka 

Plataea, Persian defeat at, 3 2 , $ 54 * 

Pliny the Elder author of the Natu- 
ral History , 86, 89, 91 n , 135, 150, 
151, L53, l 53 n ii on the coral trade 
of India, 199; on the destruction 
of Kapisi by Cyrus, 30; on Diony- 
sius the envoy, 168; on the first 
Indian Grand Trunk Road, 272; 
on the Prasii, x6 ; on the Pan<Jyas, 



INDEX 


431 


44; on the strength of Ghandra- 
gupta’s army, 188. 

Plutarch, 41, 135, 139, 156, 166, 337: 
life of Alexander by, 88; on Alexan- 
der’s capture of Massaga, 50; on 
Alexander’s interview with the 
sages, 104; on Alexander in 
Persia, 352-353; on the altars of 
Alexander, 08; on ‘Andrakottos* 

1 41; on Chandragupta and Sel- 
eucus, 152; on the chariots under 
the iN'andas, 188; on the dislike 
the Nanda ruler by Chandragu- 
pta, 143; on the 'Mauryan revo- 
lution, 240; on the meeting of 
Chandragupta with Alexander, 14, 
133, 144; on the Nanda army, 16; 
on “Taxiles” 35. 

Pokharasati, 289. 

Polibothra, see Pataliputra, 273. 

Political outlook in India, 350- 
35-- 

Polybius, 138; on Antioclius and 
Subhagasena, 246. 

Polygamy, in Taxila, 103. 

Pompcius Trogus, 133; the account 
of, epitomised by Justin, 13. 

Popular lores, 338-339. 

Popular worship, 338. 

Porphyry, 138. 

Porus, (Paurava, Purushottama, the 
Elder) 15 n, 36, 37, 51, 52, 67, 

68, 79> >32, 139; and Ambhi, 4b; 
answer of, to Alexander, 56; 
Arrian on, 89-90 and the battle 
of the JLelum, 57-64, 126; the 
country west of the Peas commi- 
tted to his charge, 68; fight of the 
Kathains against, 66; the Glau- 
chukayanas, placed under the rule 
of, 64; image of Hercules (Herac- 
les) in front of the infantrv of, 
no, 3°5» 307 ; installation oi, by 
Alexander, 149; and Parvataka, 
147; satrapy of, under Alexan- 
der, yti; sent home to recruit 
fresh troops, 65. 

Porus (Paurava), the younger, 37; 
Hephaestion sent to reduce the 
territory of, 65-6. 

Poseidon, sea God, sacrifice to, by 
Alexander, 75. 

Posidonius, 273 ti. 

Potali (Potana, Podana), capital of 
the Asmakas, 18. 

Pottala, see Tauala, 41. 

Prachya (Prasioi), 315. 

Prachya dialect, the court language 
of the Mauryas, 312. 

j Prachya tract, 310. 

^ PradeSa, 227/1. 

' .Prade^ikas, (Pradesh tri), district 
officer, 22, 181, 182, 2:27, 227 


n ; presided over the Kkntakaio - 
dhana courts, 185. 

Pradyota, the son of Palaka, 20; 

capture of, by Udayana, 330/1. 
Pradyota, line of, 19, 20. 

Praesti (Proshfhas), 41. 

Prahlada, /. of Kapila, 336. 

Prakrit, 31 1, 312. 

Prakrit dialects, script of, 323; of 
the east, the language of the court 
of Asoka, 312 ; use of, 192 -193; 
the vehicle of expression by the 
Buddhists and Jams, 340. 
Prakrtaprakasa , the 340. 

Pranaya (benevolences), 184, 192, 
I( J9- 

Prascnajit, a king of the Iksvaku 
clan of Kosala, 17. 

Prasii (Prasi(o)ai, Prachyas), the 
eastern peoples, 9, 16, 19, 21, 23, 
24, 98n, 97, ML 144, 145, 150, 
153, !55, 157, *58, 172, 188, 315, 
350; Alexander’s idea of the 
conquest of, 87; Chandragupta* 
fiom the, 143; tiger in the country 
of the, 99. 

Prasna Upatmhad , 22. 

Pratxsakhya of Katyayana, 329. 
Ptdtisdkhyas, age of the, 327. 
Pratishthana, 223, 269. 

Pratwtdakas , (reporters), 227, and n. 
Princes, discipline and training of, 
176. 

Prisoners, annual release of, by Asoka, 

229, 239. 

Prithu, a legendary hero, 171. 
Priyadarsana, 175. 

Priyangu, 330. 

Provinces, administration of the, in 
the Mauryan empire, 182-183. 
Proshthas (Praesti), a tribe, 41. 
P£udo — Callisthcnes, 147. 

Ptolemy, son of Logos, 51, 177; a 
general under Alexander, 48; 
and the capture of Aornos, 53-55 ; # 
and the subjugation of the Miilavas, 
71; afterwards king of Egypt, 59; 
Ptolemy II (Philadelphus), ot Egypt 
(Turumaya,), 89, 168, 206, 207. 
Pulindas, a Kol tribe, 321. 

Pundra, textile manulacture in, 263. 
Pundravardhana, 1 6 1 . 
Pundravardhaniya, a sakha of the 
Godasa gana, 298. 

Punishments, 224; mitigation of, 
225. 

Punjab, river system of the, 28-30. 
Pupphapura, see Pataliputra, 143. 
Pura, the capital of the Gedrosians, 
77- 

Puraqas, on Mahapadmananda, 
13-14; on the successors of 
A£oka, 244; 



432 * 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Purana&hishthana, ( Pandrethan, ) 

219. 

Purana Kassapa, a Tlrthika teacher, 
295- 

Purana literature, 333. 

Puranic accounts, 135. 

Puri, capital of the Mauryas of 
Konkan, 248. 

Purnavarman, a descendant of Asoka, 
248. 

Purohita, 175, 176* 

Purus (Pauravas), 37, 147. 

Purushas, (Pulisas), agents of the 
king 200, 224-225, 227. 

Purushamedha, 289. 

Purushapura, (Peshawar), 223. 

Purva Nanda, interpretation of, 20. 

Pushkalavati (Peuce laotis), 35, 47, 
272; submission of, to Alexander, 
5i- 

Pushpadanta, a Sivagana, 329. 

Pushpapura (Pataliputra), 209, and 

n« 

Pushyadharman, 244. 

Pushyagupta, the Rashtriya of Chan- 
dragupta in Surashtra, 155; 160; 
construction of the Sudarsana 
lake by, 182. 

Pushy (p) ami tra, generalissimo of 
Brihadratha, 246, 247, son of 

Pushyadharman, 244; does away 
with Brihadratha, 189; 

Pygmies, a people in north west 
India, 83. 

Pyrrho, founder of the Sceptic system, 
in India, 81 • 

Pyrrhus, Indian mahouts in the army 
of, 318 

Pythagoras, 106; influence of Indian 
ideas on, 81. 

Pythias of Lydia, 358. 4 


Quetta, 153. 

‘Queen’s Edict’, 205. 

R 

Radhagupta, chief minister of Bin- 
dusara„ 1.67. 

Raghuvarmam , the, 334. 

Rahula, 285. 

Raichur, Asoka’s inscription in the 
district of, 203. 

Raja , a title of the head of the repub- 
lic, l 73i a title of the Sanghas of 
the Kurus and and the Panchalas, 
21. 

Rajadharmakaustubha , the Vishnu - 

dharmotlara quoted in, 140. 

Rajagriha, 269, 270; the council at, 
284; remains of, 349. 


Rajapatha , 270. 

Rajasdsana , and dharna, 198-199. 
Rajasekhara, 318; on the court of 
learning at Pataliputra, 325; on 
Upavarsha, 335. 

Rajasuya, a sacrifice, 171. 
Rajavalikathe, on Bhadrabahu, 16 1, 
Rajuka, an officer of the highest rank, 
22, 224, 225, 226, 227. 

Rajju, a source of revenue, 224. 
Rajjugrahaka , rope-holder, 224. 
nRakshasa, the Nanda minister, 15, 
146. 

Rama, a legendary hero, 1 7 1 . 
Rdmdyana , the, 19, 195, 208, 308. 
Rambakia, a village, colonisation of, 
by Hcphaestion, 77. 

Rampurva, 267, 370, 373, 377, 
Asokan column at 204, 205, 381, 
362; 365, 366, bull on the column 
at. 37°, 372, 376, 377. 382, 388; 
lion on the column at, 372. 

Rapson, on coinage in ancient 
India, 279; on the coins of Sophy - 
tes and Seleucus I, 127-28; 
Rashtra (Janapada), 224. 

Rashtnka (Rathika), 222, 223, 225. 
Rashtriya, 22, 223. 

Ratis (guhjas), a unit of weight, 127, 
279, 280, 281, 282 n. 

RawlinSon, on the Sattagydians, 
30-31- 

Republics (Sangha), in the Mauryan 
period, 173 ; tribes in N. W. 
India, 70-73 weakening of the, 
by Chandragupta, 337. 

Rhodes, Dcinon, a historian of, 89. 
Rigveda , the, 262, 264, 265, 279, 288, 
289, 343, 35°- 
River-gold, 95. 

Rituals, Asoka on the performance of, 

233, 238, 237 

Rock Edicts, 204, 212, 213, 222, 233, 

2 34. 250; V and XIII, 154, 206- 

207, 210-n, 217. 

Rohana in S. E. Ceylon, *256. 
Rostovt/eiT, on Chandragupta, 198; 

on t.'ie Hellenistic view of # the 
ownership of land, 177-178 n. 
Roxana, favouiite wife of Alexander, 
74. 

Royal decree, validity of, 174. 

Royal hunt, suppression of, by Asoka, 
239, 241. 

‘Royal Road’, 272. 

Rudradaman, 233; Girnar yinscrip- 
tion of, 134, 139, 155, 1 7 1, 199, 

208. 

Rummindei, 221, 313, Asoka’s 
inscription at 204 : 205, 213, , 

column at, 361, 362, 365. , 

Rupnath, Minor Rock Edicts at/ 
204, 233; column at, 363. 



INDEX 


433 


Rural administration in the Maur- 
yan state, 120. 

S 

Sabaragae see Ambashthas, 40. 

Sabbakami, Thera of Vaisali, 300. 

Sabus (Sabbas), sec Sambos, 41. 

Sages, Greek writers on the, 104- 
106. 

Sahadeva, a missionary, 216. • 

Sahajati, 269. 

Sahalya (Sahalin, Sukalpa), eldest 
son of Nanda, 23. 

Sahasram, Minor Rock Edicts at, 
204, 362. 

Satiyaputa, (Kosar ?) 255; identi- 
fication of the 238 n. 

Sailesvara, see Parvatesvara, 146. 

Saisunaga, 1 1, 280 n, 348. 

Saisunagas, 15, 16, 18, 19, 352. 

Sakas, 146; driving away of the 
Greeks from Bactria by, 1 3 1 ; end 
of the rule of, 136. 

Saka(d)tala, the minister of Nanda, 
14, 147; father of Sthulabhadra, 
297- 

Saketa, march of a Greek army to, 

. 355- 

Sakuni ofGandahra, 142. 

Sakya-Mauryas, origin of the, 142 n. 

Sakyaputra, 142 n. 

Salamis, Persian defeat at, 32. 

Salatura, Panini connected with, 

, 325. 

Salisuka, 244, 245, 246, 283 n. 

Salva, 310 

Samacharis, Jacobi on the, 161 n. 

Samaharta, collector -general, 179 ; 

1 81, 183, 198. 

Samdjas , 162, 237, 238. 

Samapa (near Jaugada), a centre of 
provincial administration, 223, 
225. 

Samaprablfaram, 289. 

Samatata, Asoka’s stupas in 222. 

Sampadi, 2i5«, 244. . 

Sambhutivijaya, a Nirgrantha, 297. 

Sambodhi, (Gaya) Asoka’s visit to, 
211. 

Sambo(u)s (Sabus, Sabbas), a king 
in the Punjab, 41 ; country of the, 
105; abandonment of his city by, 74. 

Samagraha , work of Vyadi, 327. 

Samkarshana, worship of, 305, 306. 

Samp ( r) ad ( t) i (Bandhupali ta, 

Vigatasoka), 244, 245, 283 n ; 
conversion of, to the Nirgrantha 
faith, 298. 

pamaxus, attempt of, to expel the 

* Macedonians from N. W. India, 
T50. 

Sammapasa, 289. 


Samsthadhyksha, market superintend 
dent, 277, 278. 

Samudra, a merchant prince 210 n. 
Samyaniyapatha, roads leading to 
market towns, 271. 

Samyaprasa, 289. 

Sanavasa, the teacher of Upagupta, 
300. 

Safichl, 215 n, 216, 345, 347, 371, 
374, 375, 37 Ji Asoka’s bene- 
factions to, 15, 210; Asokan 

column at, 361, 364; illustration of 
the avadanas at, 203 ; Minor Pillar 
Edicts at, 205; reliefs at, 389; 
stupa at, 379. 

Sandracottus, see Chandragupta, 

24, 101, 139, 152, 168, 315. 
Sandraphagos (Chandrabhaga), 315 
Sangaios (Sanjaya ?), installed in the 
place of Astes, 47. 

Sangala 68; capital of the Kathaians, 
captured by Alexander, 66’ 

Sangam period, 251 
Sangam, Tamil academy, 112 
Sangha, Buddhist, the 3; and Aioka, 
211,214,214,215,242, 243,245, 
285 ; and the Mahamatras, 225. 
Sangha, Corporation, 21, 173, 274. 
Sanghamitt(r)a, a d. of Asoka, 209, 
209 n, 218, 259. 

Sanjaya Belatthiputta, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Sankara on Purnavarman, 248. 
Sankasya, 300. 

Sankhayana Srauta Sutra, 288 
Sankissa, ASokan column at; 361; 
elephant on the column at, 370, 
37i, 376, 377- 
Sanskrit grammar, 326-329. 

Sanskrit learning, under the Nandas 
Jhd the Mauryas, 324-26. 
Sannidhata, the 179. 

Sarmanes (see Sramanas), 107, 163, 
293, 334- 

Sarnath, 346, 356, 375, 377, 3^3; 
Asokan column at, 361, 362, 364, 
365, 366; elephant at, 375; Minor 
Pillar Edicts at, 205, 302; mono- 
lithic rail at, 384-385; quadri- 
partite at 370 — 74. ^ ^ 

Sarre, on the Sattagydians" 31T* 
Sarvabhauma , 350. 

Sarvarthasiddhi, 146. 

S'jrvastivada, a Buddhist school, 
303 - 

SaSigupta (Sisikottos), an Indian 
mercenary leader, 46; and Chan- 
dragupta, 142 n. 

Satadhanus, 244. 

Satadharman, 283 n. 

Satavahanas, the, 246-47; title 
Piy^dassana taken by the, 208. 
Sati. # in Taxila, 103. 



434 ' 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Satiyaput(r)a, 43-44, 238, 250, 251; 
outside Asoka’s empire, 219. 

Satputes, 251. 

Sattagydians ( ‘Thatagus’ ), people 
in the seventh Persian satrapy, 

30-3 r > 33- 

Satthavahas , 274* 

Saubhuti, (Sophytes, Subhuta, 
Sopeithes) 69, 37; coins of, 126- 
127, 129; gold and silver “mines’* 
in the country di\ 29; Hellenistic 
influence on the coins of, 80; hun- 
ting dogs in the country of, 98; 
inspection of two month old babies 
tn the kingdom of, 102. 

Saunaka, author of the Rig Vida- 
prasisakhya , 329. 

Saura Bhagavad, 328. 

Sauraseni apabrahmsa, 317, 318. 

Sauvira (Sophir or Sphir), 269. 

Savaras, a Kol tribe, 321. 

Sayambhava. a Nirgrantha, 297. 

Schwanbeck, on the use of the Indica 
by subsequent authors, 91. 

Sciapodes, a people of North-West 
India, 83. 

Scriptures, seven texts from Buddhist 
212, and n. 

Scylax, a book on India by, 82-83. 
account of the voyage of, by 
Herodotus, 87. 

Sehwan (Sindimana?), 41. 

Seleucids, 2, 172, elephants on the 
coins of the, 375. 

Seleucus, a general under Alexander, 
59, 61, 137-138, 151, 153, 

271; allegiance of the Bactrian 
Greeks to, 130; and Chandragupta, 
63, 79, 89, 130, 151-153, 156. 

159, ^9, 219, 273, 353-354; coins 
of, 127; 129 Dcimachus sen* to 
the court of Bindusara by, 89 . 

Semiramis, 76. 

Sendpati , commander-in-chief, 189. 

Senart, 230; on Asoka’s adoption of 
Buddhism, 210 n. 

Seunachandra II, Yadava, Govin- 
daraja subordinate of, 248. 

Seven Pillar Edicts, the, 205, 216, 
228, 229, 232, 233, 236, 240. 

Seve/r*tiibe!f in India, according to 
Greek writers, 116. 

Sextus Empiricus, 81. 

Shadeunya , six fold policy, 187. 

Shabazgarhi, 203, 204, 205, 312-15. 

Shama Sastri, Dr. on the Arthasastra , 
190, 191, 200. 

•Shekel*, a weight, the siglos based 
on the, 124. 

Sibis, (Sivas, Siboi), a republican 
tribe in the north-western India, 
subjugation of the, by Alexander, 
38-39, 40, 7o; country, 262; 


Dionysus considered a Greek re- 
presentation of, 1 01. 

Siddapura, Minor Rock Edicts at, 

204, 223, 249, 313. 

Stla, Asoka’s stress on, 240. 

Silappadikaram , the on Madura, 250 

Simhasena, 160 and n 165. 

Sindh avas, 40. 

Sindi(o)mana (Sehwa?), capital of 
Sambos, 41, 74. 

JSin-Kiang, the city of Khotan, 318. 

oir William Jones, on the Greek 
names of Chandragupta, 139. 

Siri Dhammasoka (Aioka) 241. 

Sisikottas, see Sasigupta, 46, 142. 

Sisunaga, father of Kalasoka, 301. 

Sitadhyaksha , Superintendent of 

agriculture, 177, 197. 

Sivas, see Sibis, 39. 

Slave ( dasa ), 275. 

Slavery in India, 157; Greek writers 
on, in-112. 

Slokavarttika 328. 

Smith, V. A. on Mahendra, 2097*; 
on Asoka’s claim of Gods ming- 
ling with men, 234; on polishing 
of stone, 265; on the retirement 
of Chandragupta, 165 n; on the 
Satiyaputas, 238; on the terri- 
tories ceded to Chandragupta by 
Seleucus, 153. 

Smrti literature of Chandragupta’s 
time, 164. 

Snakes, Greek writers on. 97-98. 

Socrates, 106 and an Indian philo- 
sopher, 81. 

Sodrai (Sudras), 40. 

Sogdiana, conquest of by Alexander, 
45- 

Sogdianians, 33. 

Sogdoi, the subjugation of the, by 
Alexander, 74. 

Sopara, Anoka’s inscription at, 203, 

205. 

Sophagasenus (Subhagastna), 246. 

Sophystes, see Saubhuti, 29, 37, 69, 
80, p8, 102, 126, 127, 129. 

Sourasenaoi see Surasenas, 101, 
305 . 

South India, and Ceylon— 249 ff; trade 
of, 42. 

Spitaces, a nomarch, 37. 

Spooner, 345, 34^, 356, 357; on the 
Zoroastrian period in Indian 
History, 198. 

Sramanas, (Sramanai, Sannanes), 
106, 107, 163, 210, 234, 241, 247, 
293, 296, 297, 306, 334, 335; 

four kinds of, 294-295. 

Srauta Sutra, 284, 333. , 

Sr a van a Belgola, settlement of >! 
Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta at, 
165, 249, 297. 



INDEX 


435 

# 


Sravasti, the capital of Kosala, 183 
269; 210 n; Anathapindika, mer- 
chant prince of, 270. 

S(r)enis, guilds, 274, 275. , 

Srinagari, town, built by Asoka, 219. 

Srngdraprakdsa , a work of Bhoja, 

' 32O, 33°,. 34°- . 

Sruta-ke valin, Jain saint, 165. 

Stadia, a measure, 91, 92. 

State, the, and industrial and co- 
mmercial policy, 275-279. 

State landlordism, 197. , 

Statira, d. of Darius in. by Alexander, 

353- 

Stein A. 167. on the identification of 
places in the swat valley, 49; 
on the resemblance between the 
Khotanese and the Kashmiris, 
220. 

Stein O., 113, n, 174 n. 191; on 
the Arthasastra , 200; on Mega- 

sthenes and Kautilya, 196; 

Sthdnika , the 181. 

Sthulabhadra, son of Sakadala, 
297; Mahagiri, the successor of, 
298. 

Stone cutting, 265. 

Strabo, 33, 41, 45, 47, 89, 91,9111, 

94, 96, 98/1, io2«, 103 107, hi, 

1 16, 1 17, n. 135, 139, 153, 

154, 169, 262; extracts from the 

memoirs of Nearchus in the works 
of, 88; sources of, on the king’s 
hair washing ceremony, no; on 
the Cathaeans, 38; on Chandra- 
gupta, 162, on Chandragupta 
and Scleucus, 152, 153, 154; 

on the gold emroidered garments 
of the Indians, 264; on the 
hair washing ceremony, 162; on 
the Hylobioi, 334; on husband- 
men in India, 114, 115; on an 
incident in Sonhytes* court, 98; 
on the kingdom of Mousikanos, 
40; or^ law and deposits in India, 

1 1 2-1 13; on marriage among 
the Kathaians, 102; on marriage 
and occupation in India, 116; on 
Megasthenes’ account of the 
Indian Philosophers, 106; on 
Megasthenes at Patallputra, 
152; on the mission of Deimachus 
to the court of Bindusara, 168; 
on the Oxydrakai, 39 ; on 
Pafaliputra, 356 — 57; on the peo- 
ple of South India, 43; on petro- 
cles. 8q; on the position of the 
ruler of Takshasila 35, 36; on puni- 
shments, 279; on the size of 
India, 91; 

Stri-adhyakshsa mahdmatra , (ganika- 
dhyaksha), 226 

Stupa, 344, 384. 


Subandhu, a minister of £Ianda, 
Chandragupta and Bindusara, 329, 
330; a rival of Kautilya, 167; 
author of die Vasavadattd JVdtys - 
dhdrd, 330, 331. 

Subhadrangi, principal queen of 
Bindusara, 167; mother of 
Asoka (?), 208. 

Subhagasena (Sophagasenus) and 
Antiochus, 246. 

Subhuta sec Saubhuti, 69. 

Sudama cave, th£ 346, 385, 386. 

Sudras (Sodrai), a tribe, 40. 

Sudarsana lake, construction of the, 
by Pushyagupta, 155, 182. 

Sudracac (Oxydrakai), 39. 

Siidraka, 318. 

Suhastin, conversion of Samprati to 
Jainism by, 245. 

Sumana, elder brother of Asoka, 
klling of, 210. 

Sumanottara, 330. 

Sunga art, 384. 

Sunitha, 15. 

Surasena, 44. 

Surasenas (Sourasenoi), the 17, 19, 
honour of Ilerakles by the 101, 
305 - 

Surashtra, a part of Chandragupta’s 
empire, 155; a republic, 168, 173. 

Susa, 30, 159, 357. 

Susiana, 273. 

Suslma, a son of Bindusara, 219. 

Susruta, and the Arthasastra, 195. 

Sutrapitaka, 284. 

Suttas, the, 164. 

Suvarnabhumi 270; Asoka’s mission 
to, 274, . 

Suvarnagiri, a centre of provincial 
administration, 223. 

Suvarnakudya (Kamarupa), textile 

•manufacture in 262. 

Suvastu, the territory of the Assa- 
kenians, 35. 

Svarga, 230. 

Svasaraiya, 167. 

Svayambhunath, shrine of, 221. 

Syadvada, doctrine of, 298. 

Sybyrtius, satrap of Aracliosia, 89. 

Sydracae, see Oxdraki, 39. 

Sylvain Levi, 313; on the Arthasastra , 

Syrakousai (Oxydrakai), 39. 

Syria, Antiochus, king of, 168-169; 
revolt of Bactria and Parthia 
from 2. 

Syrian court, and the Mauryan 
court, 134-135- 

T 

Taittirlya Brdhmana , 268. 

Taittiriya samhitd , 288. 



43Q, 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Takshaiila (Takila), 35, 59, 64, 88, 
227; Ambhi of, 46; and Alexander, 
37 j 5 2 > 55 — 57; Aramaic inscri- 
ption at, 346, 352; and Asoka, 203, 
209, 282; coin finds at, 125; 

capital of Uttarapatha, 158 n ; 
223, 354 ; a centre of provincial 
administration under the Maur- 
yas, 223,354; description of, 103- 
104; Kautilya of the college at, 
325; Philip, the ^a trap of, 65; re- 
volt in, during the days of Bindu- 
sara, 167; sages near, 104-106; 
seat of Kunala’s viceroyalty, 220. 

Tambapanni, 219, 250 (Ceylon). 

Tamil (z), origin of the word, 322. 

Tamilakam (Dravida, Damirike) 

r j 43:4). 

Tamil literature, the Nanda and the 
Mauryas in, 253. 

Tamil poems, on Mauryan war 
chariots, 188. 

Tamralipti, 218; Asoka’s stupas in, 
222. 

Tamraliptika, sakha of the Godasa- 
gana, 298. 

Tamraparnl, see Ceylon, 43, 238. 

Tamraparnika, a pearl, 42. 

Tantrayuktis borrowed by the Tolka- 
ppiyam from the Arthasastra, 192; 
in the Arthasastra and Susruta, 
! 5 0 » 33 6 - 

Taprobane, see Ceylon, 43, 95. 

Taranatha, 244; on the age of Panini, 
327; on the period of rule of 
Nanda, 23; on the warlike acti- 
vities of Bindusara and Kautilya, 
167-168. 

Tarn, 58, 159 n; on the territories 
ceded to Chandragupta by Seleu- 
cus. 153-51- * 

Tarukkha, 289 

Tauala ( Patalene, Pottala ), a 
kingdom, 41) 

Taxila see Taxiles, (Takshasila), 35, 

* 37, 104-5, I2 5, 15^, 167, 220 
282,325, 346, 357, 354. 

“Taxiles” see Takshasila, 35, 103. 

Taxiles, (Ambhi), 47, 63, 64, 77- 
78, 79, 105, 139, 149- 

Termilaj^ (Tr^tmili), 321. 

Textile industry, the, 262-264. 

Thancsar, 1 9. 

“Thatagus”, see Sattagydians, 30-31 

Thathari, 281. 

Theistic movements in the Nanda- 
Maurya Period, 304-307. 

Theragdtha commentary , stories about 
Chandragupta in the, 134. 

Theravada, 215; ( Vibhaj yavada) 
school, 302. 

Thera vadins, 301. 

Thomas, F. W., 189, 191, 


Timosthenes, admiral of the fleet of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, 89. 

Tirthankaras, 165. 

Tirthikas, Indian sophists 295. 

Tissa 259. 

Tishya, asterism of Asoka’s birth 
207, 215 7i, 239. 

Tishyarakshita, 2157*. 

Tivala (Tivara), a son of Asoka, 214, 
2 43- 

Todeyya, 289. 

•Toleration, Asoka on, 235-236. 

Tolkappiyam , the 328; Tantrayuktis 
borrowed by the, from the Artha - 
sastra 192. 

Tosali (Dhauji), 223, 225. 

Town administration under the 
Mauryas, 18 1. 

Trade, under the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, 269—275. 

‘Translation compounds* in In- 
do- Ary an, 319. 

Tray!, 333. 

Triparadeisos (Triparadisus), parti- 
tion of, 139, 149, 150, 1 51. 

Tripitaka, 184, 284, 285. 

Triratna , 242. 

Trivarga, 194. 

Trogus, 135, 144; sources of, on 
Chandragupta, 143. 

Turamaya see Ptolemy II Philadel- 
phus of Egypt, 206, 207, 217. 

Tushaspa (Yavanaraja), 223; gover- 
nor of Girnar, 233; improvement 
of the Sudarsana lake by, 182. 

Tyriespes, a satrap under Alexander, 
4b, 65; ruler of Paropamisadae, 

74. 78. 

u 

Udayana, 330; capture of Pradyota 
by, 33°w. 

Udayi, son of Ajatasatru, I58n. 

Udichya dialect, 314, 3m; tract, 
3 IQ - 

Udyana, the territory of the Assakcni- 
ans, 35', and the Sakya Mauryas, 
142 n. 

Ugrasena, see Mahapadma, 15, 18, 
2 3- 

Ujjayini, (Ujjain, Ujjeni) 167, 224, 
227, 269, 317; and Asoka, 203, 
209; Buddhism in, before Asoka, 
300 ; a centre of provincial adminis- 
tration, 155, 223; SampratPs rule 
from, 245; Vasavadatta of, 330. 

Umarkot, 76. 

Upagupta, 203, 221; spiritual guide 
of Asoka, 213, 300; Thomas on, 
216 n. 

Upapatha , 270. 

Upasaka, 21 1. 



INDEX 


•437 


Upavarsha, a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25, 325; an author on 
Mimamsas, 335. 

Upayas, four instruments of policy 
187. 

Uposatha ceremonies, 215; day 214. 

Urasa, Arsakes, the chief of, 36, 

68 . 

Usinara, 310. 

Utpalini , a work of Vyadi, 327. 

Uttara, 274; a disciple of Mahagiri, 
298. • 

Uttarabalissaha, a garia founded by 
Balissaha, 298. 

Uttarakuru (Ottarakofrhas), 315. 

Uttarapatha, 26, 158. 

Uttiya, king of Ceylon , 257, 259. 

V 

Vachabhumikas ( go-adhyakshas ) con- 
trollers of cowpens, 228. 

Vadugar, 255. 

Vaed(d)a (Yakkha) 256, 257, 258. 

Vaikhanasa (Vanaprastha), 293. 

Vaikhdnasasastra , 334. 

Vaiiodhaka, 146. Vaisali (Visala), 
269 ; the Buddhist community at, 
302; capital of the Vriji country, 
19, 21; second Buddhist Council 
at, 299, 300-301. 

VaiSika kala, 337. 

Vajapeya, 289. 

Vdjasaneya{i)samhitd ', 268, 328. 

Vajasaneyi pratiSdkhya , work of Ka- 
tyayana Vararuchi, 328. 

Vakkula, stupa, 213W. 

Vakyapadiya , a work of Bhartrari, 

3 2 7* 

Valmiki, 208, and n. 

Vamadeva, aVedic Rshi 288. 

Vamaka, aVedic Rshi 287. 

Vamana, author of the Kavydlankdra - 
sutra vrtti , 330. 

M Vamba Moriyar” 134. 

Vanga, t&tile manufacture in, 262, 
263. 

Vararuchi, a scholar of the; Nanda 
period, see Katyayana, 25, 325, 

327, 33<™. 34°* 

Vamrucham Kavyam, the 330. 

Vardhamana Mahavira, 11. 

Varsha, a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25, 325. 

Varshakara, 15. 

Vasatis (O^sadioi), submission of 
the, to Alexander, 74, 40. 

Vasavadatta, 330. 

VdsavadaJd Naiyadhara , a work of 
Subandhu, 330, 331. 

Vasettha (Vasishthaj, a Vedic Rshi, 

V ' 287, 288, 293, 333. 

Vasishtha Dharmasutra, 293. 


Vasudeva, Garuda, pillar a# Vidi^a 
in honour of, 305. 

Vasudeva cult, 305, 306. 

Vatsa, (Kausambi), textile manu- 
facture in, 262. 

Vatsaraja, 330. 

Vatsyayana, 148, 308, 337; author of 
the Kamasulra , 195. 

Vayu purdna, reference to the, by 
Bana, 22-23. 

Vedangas, 333. # 

Vichdrasrem , the, of Mcrutunga, 136. 
Vidarbha (Varad(h)atata, an Aryan 
state, 321. 

Videha, 142, 308, 310; language in, 
3*3- 

Vidisa, 269 ; Asoka’s love with Devi 
at. 209; garuda pillar at, 305. 
Viduratha, a king of the Ikshvaku 
clan of Kosala, 17. 

Vidyadharas 253. 

Vigatasoka (Samprati?), 244, 245, a 
brother of Asoka (?) 208. 

Vihdra, 214. 

Vtharayalid , royal hunt, 162, 241. 
Vijaya, 257; and Ceylon, 256. 
Vijayasimha, the traditional con- 
queror of Ceylon, 44. 

Vijigishu, 3. 

Virkrama era, foundation of the, 136. 
Village government under the 
Nandas, 22, 181-182, 185. 
Vinayapitaka, 284. 

Vinaya texts, 302. 

Virasena, 244. 

Visakhadatta, the author of the 
Mudrarakshasa , 134. 

Vishakanyd poison maiden, 147. 

Vishaya , an administrative division 
under the Nandas, 22. 
Vishnudharmoiiara , the 146. 
Viihnugupta, see Kau^ilya, 146, 148 
191. 

Vishnupurdna , the, 134, 140; on 

Pushyamitra, 246. 

Vishti, 192, 199. 

Visvamitra, 288. 

Vitasoka, brother of Asoka, 214, 
and 21 r )ti. 

Vithi, a dramatic variety, 332. 
Vitihotras, the, exterminated by 
Mahapadma, 17, i9-2<5.^**^ 
Vratyas the, 10, 31 1. 

Vrijjika (Vriji) a republic, 19, 21, 1 73 
Vrisha, the vahana of Siva, 344. 
Vrishala, see Chandragupta, 139, 
I 4°, 294- 
Vrshasena, 244. 

Vrshni race, 306. 

Vyadi, a post-Panini grammarian, 
25, 3 2 5^ 327, 329, 33 r > 335- 
Vyddxpanbhdsha , 327. 
Vyddxparibhdshdvrtti , 327. 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


436 

Vyavafiara, 186. 

W 

Waddel, 356, 357- , 

Walsh, on the Taxila Hoard, 280 n, 
281 n. 

Whitehead, R. B., on currency in 
ancient India, 282; on the identi- 
fication of Sophy tes, 126, 128. 

Winternitz, 191, 192. 

Writing, origin and development of, 
322-324. 

Woman, present of an elephant to, 
by her lover, 96. 

Women, services of, to the king, 1 76. 

Woodwork, 264 — 65. 

X 

Xandrames (Agrammes, Mahapadma) 
14, 16, 23. 

Xathaoi see Kshatri, Kshatriyas, 
4°, 74- 

Xenophon, 12, 30. 

Xerxes, Achaemenian emperor, 32, 
368; equipment of the Indians 
in the army of, 86, 318. 

Y 

Yajnavalkya 193; on units of weight, 
279- 


Yajus samhita , 262, 264. 

Yakkha (Vaeda), 257. 

Yakkhas of Himavanta, 217. 
Yakshas, sculptural representations 
at Patna, 308, 332, 244-345 and 

*, 346*. 375, 378-379* 

Yasobhadra, a Nirgrantha, 297. 
Yafthala dagoba, 259. 

Yavakrita, 330. 

Yavana ( Ionians ), the, 146, 
318. 

« Yavanalipi, 26. 

Yayati, 330. 

(Y)erragudi, 223, 225, 234, 3*3; 
Asoka’s inscription at, 204, 205, 
206. 

Yogananda, 20, 147. 

Yojanas, 172. 

Yona, Greek, 35; 217, 222, 225; a 
tribe under Asoka, 154. 
Yuddhamsraushti, Augrasainya, a 
royal epithet of, 14, 15. 

Yukta , 200, 226, 227. 

Yunnan, South-west China, 319. 

Z 

Zabag, 254. 

Zachariae, 193. 

Zaradros (Hesidrus, Sutlej, Sutudri, 
Satadru), 28. 

‘Zoroastrian period* in Indian history, 
198. 



Plate II 







The Lion-Crowned Column of Basarh. 



Plato IT I 



The Lion-Crowned Column of Uuriya 


Nandangarh. 



















Plate X 



Elephant from 



im ai 






Lion from the abacus of Sarnath Capital. 



Plate XIV 








Yaksha from P$tna, front view 








Plate XX • 



Parkham Ysvksha. 


Plate XXI 



l)i<lar<';uij Yakslin, front view 






Plate XXV 







Terracotta from Pataliputra. 



1 



* 




jerraootra trom* I'ataliputra. 





Plate 1 XXVII 



w / 





Terracotta from Pataliputra 



Plate XXV1TI 


Terracotta from Patalipfitra 



Plate XXIX 











