j GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 

CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LI BRAR Y 

ACCESSION NO. 7 j S /. / 

CALL No. 934-013112 . _ 

D.G.A. 79. 


% 






AGE OF THE 

NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Edited by 

K. A. NILAKANTA S*STRI 


19359 



PUBLISHED FOR THE BHARATIYA ITIHAS PARISHAD 

by 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

PUBLISHERS A, HD BOOKSELLERS 


B A N A R AS 



Published by Sundarlal Jain for M /s. Motilal Banarsidass , Nepali Khapra , 
P ost Box 75, Banaras and printed by Shanlilal Jain for Swatantra 
Nava Bharat Press , Kadamkuan , Patna. 


'■anr ^'T. >*ce-a*ological 
IlmA K’i, »KLK2. 

Am. W 'XS.S.'] 

.. 3 W\\ „ 

Cal 


First Edition, 1952 


oa 


AL 


.Aa -* — — ifr Cf ‘ - - ~ - ■« 

Dp * % ^ - ”4* X 

O-' S ; 


To be had from 


1. Motilal Banarsidass, Post Box 75, Banaras. 

2. Motilal Banarsidass, Kinari Bazar, Delhi. 

3. Motilal Banarsidass, Bankipore, Patna. 



PRE FAC E 


The Bharatiya Itihas Parishad was founded in 1937 with 
the specific object, among others, of preparing a New History 
of the Indian People in twenty volumes. The scheme was 
initiated by Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Rector of the Parishad, 
and Sir Jadunath Sarkar, Editor-in-chief. Volume VI, 
THE VAkATAKA-GUPTA AGE (C. 200-550 A. D.) edited 
by Dr. R. C. Majumdar and Dr. A. S. Altekar was pub- 
lished for the Parishad in 1946 by Messrs Motilal Banarsi- 
dass of Lahore. 

The plan for the present volume, IV in the series, was 
finalised in 1941, and thanks to the cooperation of the scholars 
who were invited to contribute the different chapters to it, 
the manuscript became ready for the press in 1945, and it 
was despatched to Sir Jadunath Sarkar in April of that year. 
The printing of the book was commenced, but before much 
progress was made, the Publishers met with a serious disaster 
in the Lahore riots. For this reason and others of a similar 
nature, the printing had to be stopped and could only be 
resumed in 1950 after the publishers had successfully rehabi- 
litated themselves and found a new home in Banaras and 
Patna. 

Meanwhile at the suggestion of the Government of India 
the scheme for the New History of the Indian People came 
to be amalgamated in 1948 with another started by the Indian 
History Congress, one of the terms of the amalgamation being 
that the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad will not continue their 
series of the New History but may print or re-print the volumes 
already prepared. Accordingly the present volume is issued 
as an independent book styled AGE OF THE NANDAS 
AND MAURYAS. 

The names of the contributors of the different chapters 
are mentioned in the table of contents. I must thank them 
all for their valued cooperation and more for their patient wait- 
ing as the publication has been delayed so long for reasons be- 
yond control. I must also express my gratitude to Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad, now President of the Indian Union, who has throughout 



iv AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

taken a personal interest in the production and publication 
of the volume. Sir Jadunath Sarkar, although he felt con- 
strained to give up his place as Editor-in-chief in 1946, 
continued to make kind enquiries about the progress of the 
work and my thanks are also due to him. They are also 
due to Dr. N. P. Chakra varti, formerly Director-General of 
Archaeology, for permission to reproduce the map of Anoka’s 
Empire published by him in Ancient India , No. 4. I must 
also thank the Director-General of Archaeology and the 
other authorities mentioned against particular illustrations for 
their permission to reproduce them in the volume. The authori- 
ties of the British Museum kindly supplied the casts of the coins 
illustrated in Plate I. Sri Jayachandra Vidyalankar, Secretary 
of the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad, did me the favour of reading 
my chapter on Alexander’s campaigns in India and offering 
suggestions of value. The publishers, it will be seen, have 
spared no effort to make the volume worthy of their great 
standing among Indian publishers. The reader will notice 
that the transliteration is not uniform, but combines two 
systems using s-sh, and c-ch indiscriminately; this has been due 
in part to my ill health at the time I prepared the book for 
the press, and I crave the indulgence of the reader for any 
inconvenience he may feel on this account. 


Nile^var, Madras. 

26. 12. 1951. 


K. A. N. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Preface 


iii 

Table of contents 


V 

List of Plates and Maps 


X 

Abbreviations 


xi 

Page. 

Introduction by Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

— 

1 

CHAPTER I 

* India in the Age of the Nandas 

By Prof. H. C. Raych mdhuri 

I. Empire of Magadha 



9 

The Nandas 


11 

Mahapadma 



13 

Administration 


21 

Later Nandas 


23 

II. Regions beyond the Magadhan Empire 



26 

(1) North-West India A. Physical Aspects 

.. 

27 

B. The advance of Persia 


to the Indus 


30 

C. Successors of 

the 


Achaemenids 


34 

(2) The Far South 

— 

42 

CHAPTER II 

Alexander’s Campaigns in India 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Subjugation of the Swat valley 


47 

Aornos 



51 

Taxila 


55 

Battle of the Jhelum 


57 

After Jhelum 


64 

On the Beas 

, , 

66 

The Return 


68 

Republican tribes 

— 

70 

Voyage along the lower Indus 


74 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Exploration and return to Babylon 76 

Results 78 


CHAPTER III 


India in early Greek and Latin Literature 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 


Introductory 


81 

Scylax 



82 

Herodotus 


84 

Ctesias 


86 

Historians of Alexander 

C 

87 

Greek Ambassadors 


89 

India : Size 


91 

Climate 


92 

Rivers 


93 

Fertility of Soil 

t1 -. T 

94 

Minerals 


95 

Animals 


95 

Legends 


100 

People 


101 

Taxila 


103 

Sages 


104 

Philosophers 


106 

North-Western India 



108 

Arms 

.. 

109 

Skill in arts 


110 

Slaves 


111 

Deposits 



112 

Seven classes of people 



113 

Marriage and occupation rules 



116 

Food and drink 


116 

Crime and punishment 


117 

Pataliputra 



117 

Women in the Palace 


119 

Administration 


120 


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III 
Early Foreign Coins in India ( Nanda-Maurya Period) 
By. Dr. J. N. Banerjea 


123 



CONTENTS 




vn 


CHAPTER IV 


Chandragupta and Bindusara 

By ^Prof. H. G. Raychaudhuri 

Chan dragupj;a' 

_ 132 

Bindusara 4 : 

_ 165 

CHAPTER V 
Mauryan Polity 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Sources 

__ 171 

Empire of Magadha 

_ 172 

-Republics 

_ 173 

Foreign Models 

__ 173 

Royal Power 

__ 174 

The King 

__ 175 

Ministers and Council 

_ 176 

King not owner of land 

_ 177 

Bureaucracy 

_ 178 

Central offices 

_ 179 

District and Town administration 

„ 181 

Villages 

_ 181 

Provinces 

_ 182 

Finance 

_ 183 

Justice 

_ 185 

Foreign Policy 

_ 187 

Army 

_ 188 

Review 

_ 189 

Excursus on the Artha§astra 

_ 190 

CHAPTER VI 

Asoka and his Successors 

By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 

Sources 

_ 202 

Name 

_ 207 

Early life 

_ 208 

Adoption of Buddhism*^ 

_ 210 

Rock Edicts 

_ 212 

Pilgrimage 

_ 212 


viii 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Other edicts 

_ 213 

Tradition : Third Council 

— 214 

Buddhist Missions 

_ 216 

Khotan 

220 

Nepal 

_ 22’ 

Assam and Bengal 

22' 

Tribes 

22 

Administration 

_ 223 

Yuktas 

„ 226 

Anoka’s part 

228 

Religious policyi/ 

229 

Asoka’s Dharma 

__ 234 

The Successors of Asoka 

243 

CHAPTER VII 


South India and Ceylon 


By Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 


South India and Ceylon 

__ 249 

CHAPTER VIII 


Industry , Trade and Currency 


By Dr. U. N. Ghoshal 


Introductory 

260 

Industry 

261 

Trade 

__ 269 

The Organisation of Industry and Trade 

274 

State Industrial and Commercial Policy 

_ 275 

Currency 

279 

CHAPTER IX 


Religion 


By Dr. P. C. Bagchi 


Literary Background 

284 

^Brahmanism 

_ 287 

The ascetic movement 

_ 293 

The Ajivika and Nirgrantha movements 

__ 295 

^Buddhism 

__ 299 

Theistic Movements 

_ 304 



contents 


IX 


CHAPTER X 
Language and Literature 

By Dr. S. K. Chatterji and Dr. V. Raghavan 


I. Language 



308 

II. Learning, Literature and Popular Life : 

Brah- 


manical Learning 

. 

324 

Sanskrit Language 


325 

Sanskrit Grammar 


326 

Classical Sanskrit Literature and Fine Arts 


329 

Philosophy 


334 

Arthasastra 


336 

Kama-Sastra 


337 

Popular Worship 

T „-„ 

338 

Popular lores 


338 

Architecture 


339 

Prakrit, Buddhistic and Jain literature 

— • 

340 

CHAPTER XI 



Maury an Art 



By Dr. Niharranjan Ray 



I. Introduction 



342 

II. Socio-historical Background 



346 

III. Columns 


361 

IV. Animal Figures 

— 

369 

V. Alleged Mauryan Sculptures 

— 

378 

VI. Cave Architecture 

— 

384 

VII. Concluding Remarks 

. — 

387 

Bibliography 

— 

392 

Index 


401 



X AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

List of plates 

I. Foreign coins (British Museum) with key — P. 122. 

II. The Lion-crowned column of Basarh ( DA ) 

III. The Lion-crowned column of Lauriya Nandan- 

garh ( DA ) 

IV. Elephant Capital, Sankissa ( DA ) 

V. Bull Capital, Rampurva ( DA ) 

VI. Lion Capital, Rampurva ( DA ) 

VII. Samath Lion Capital ( DA ) 

VIII. Lion Capital, Sanchi ( DA ) 

IX. Rock-cut Elephant, Dhauli ( DA ) 

X. Elephant from the abacus of Sarnath Capital (DA) 

XI. Horse from the abacus of Sarnath Capital ( DA ) 

XII. Bull from the abacus of Sarnath Capital ( DA ) 

XIII . Lion from the abacus cf Sarnath Capital (DA ) 

XIV. Yaksha from Patna, front view ( Patna Mueum ) 

XV. Yaksha from Patna, back view ( Patna Museum ) 

XVI. Yaksha from Patna, front view ( Patna Museum ) 

XVII. Yaksha from Patna, back view ( Patna Museum ) 

XVIII. Stone torso of a Jaina image, Lohanipur ( Patna 
Museum) 

XIX. Baroda Yaksha, back view ( Mathura Museum ) 

XX. Parkham Yaks h a, ( Mathura Museum ) 

XXI. Didarganj Yakshi, front view ( Patna Museum ) 

XXII. Didarganj Yakshi, back view ( Patna Museum ) 
XXIII. Besnagar Yakshi ( Indian Museum, Calcutta ) 

XXIV. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 

XXV. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 

XXVI. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXVII. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXVI II. Terracotta from Pataliputra ( Patna Museum ) 
XXIX. Plans of Sudama and Lomas Rishi caves ( after 
Fcrgusson ) 

XXX. Lomas Rishi Cave, facade ( DA ) 

♦The copyright of all photographs vests in the authorities 
mentioned against each or in the Department of Archaeology 
of the Government of India ( DA ). 



abbreviations 


xi 


Maps 

1. North-Western India Page 80 

2. The Empire of Aioka „ 248 

List of Abbreviations 

ABORI. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute 

Ait. B. Aitareya Brahmana 

ASR } Archaeological survey of India, Annual Reports 
BMC. British Museum Catalogue 

BSOS. Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, 
London 

BS. Brahma Sutras 

Bom. Gaz. | Bombay Gazetteer 

CAI. Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India ( in 

the British Museum ) by John Allan, London, 
1936 

CHI. Cambridge History of India Vol. I. 

CIL Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. Vol. I. Ins- 

criptions of Ascka Ed. E. Hultzsch. 

CL. Carmichael Lectures 

DKA Dynasties of the Kali Age ( Pargiter, London, 

1913) 

DV. Dipavamsa. 

DPPN Dictionary of Pali Proper names 

EHI. Early History of India by V. A. Smith, ( 4 th 

Edition Oxford, 1924.) 

El or Eplnd. Epigraphia Indica 

HC. Harsha Charita 

Ind. Alt. Indische Alterthumskunde ( Lassen ) 

IC. Indian Culture 

JRAS. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland, London 
JHS. Journal of Hellenic Studies 

JNSI. Journal of Numismatic Society of India, Bombay 
JBORS. Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 
Patna 



xii 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


JASB. 

Jat, 

JISOA. 

KA. 

KS 

Mbh. 

NIA. 

MV. 

PE. 

PTS. 

RE. 

SBE. 

WZKM. 

ZDMG. 

ZII. 


Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 
Ja takas 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, 
Calcutta. 

Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 

Breloer, Kautilya Studien 

Mahabharata 

New Indian Antiquary 

Mahavamsa 

Pillar Edict 

Pali Text Society 

Rock Edict 

Sacred Books of the East 

Weiner Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgen- 
landes. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen landischen 
Gesellschaft, Leipzig 
Zeitschrift fur Indologie und Iranistik 


ERRATA 


Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

20 

21 

Brihakathd 

Brihatkathd 

46 

Beg. of Para 2 

326 

327 

51 

28 

fom 

from 

74 

12 

Alexander 5 

Alexander’s 

77 

13 

Lenonr.atus 

Leonnatus 

132 

26 

Chakravartain 

Chakravartin 

144 

4 

draw 

draws 

152 

13 

Indus 

Indus 

190 

25 

hapiness 

happiness 

248 

29 

amporium 

emporium 

318 

11 

Mriecchaktaika 

Mricchckatikd 

337 

2 

description 

descriptions 



INTRODUCTION 

The natural frontiers of India, the mountains and the 
seas that serve to emphasise her inherent unity, have seldom 
acted as barriers to her intercourse with foreign lands. The 
progress of Indian historical studies has shown that the isola- 
tion of India is a relatively recent feature, and that in the 
earlier epochs of her long and by no means uneventful history, 
she maintained live contacts with many lands, far and near, 
to the mutual advantage of both sides. The age of the 
Nandas and Mauryas (c. 400-185 B. C.) witnessed great 
changes sweeping over the face of Western Asia, over lands 
with which India had much to do from the dawn of history, 
and account must be taken of their effects, direct and indirect, 
on the political, economic and artistic life of India. In this 
seminal period when Indo-Aryan civilization may be said to 
have attained its maturity, India did not hesitate to borrow 
political and economic plans and artistic motifs from abroad, 
and put them to the most appropriate uses in her own institu- 
tions and monuments. Thus to view the history of India on a 
wider background and point to her contacts with her neigh- 
bours is by no means to detract from the independence and 
originality of her culture; but only to lay stress on the ca- 
tholicity of its outlook and taste, and its genius for drawing 
sustenance and strength from diverse sources. For in no single 
instance did borrowing result in mere imitation, but led to a 
thoughtful and harmonious integration of the borrowed feature 
with the indigenous setting in which it was placed. 

Alexander, Chandragupta, Chanakya, and ASoka domi- 
nate the period. The overthrow of the Achaemenid empire 
of Persia by Alexander, his campaigns in the north-west of 
India, intended perhaps more to complete and round off 
his conquest of Persia than to further a scheme of world 
conquest, and his early death (323 B. C.) followed by the 
partition of his extensive empire into large territorial mona- 
rchies formed a chain of events that in one way and another 
prepared the ground for the extension of the Mauryan empire 
in the North-West, and fixed the political map of the regions 


2 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with which that empire was to maintain a fairly lively in- 
tercourse for well over a century. The revolt of Bactria and 
Parthia from Syria ( c . 250 B. C.)was the only notable change; 
but during our period their independence w r as far from assured, 
and the revolts had little historical significance as yet to India 
except perhaps by inducing the distracted Seleucid rulers of 
Syria to maintain friendly relations with their powerful neigh- 
bours on the east, the Maurya emperors. The importance of 
Alexander’s Indian campaign has been both exaggerated and 
under-estimated. There w*as no Macedonian occupation of 
Indian territory wwth the name, and what there was of it 
lasted only a few years. Yet there ensued two abiding results. 
The monarchies and tribal republics of the North-West were 
much exhausted by their sanguinary conflicts with the invader; 
this paved the way for the easy establishment of the Mauryan 
empire in these lands by weakening their power of military 
resistance to the advance of the empire, and possibly also by 
teaching them that submission to a strong state within the 
country was the best protection against the recurrence of danger 
from outside. Secondly, the Macedonian episode opened an era 
of some centuries during which Hellenism was to be the domi- 
nant factor of government and civilization on the western con- 
fines of the Indian world. The contact between India and the 
Mediterranean world became more direct and constant. And 
this is a fact of immense significance not only to the history 
of India, but to that of the w orld. 

In marked contrast to the precise and detailed notices of 
Greek and Latin authors on Alexander and India, are the 
vague and contradictory legends which issue from various 
sources and constitute the only aid to our knowledge of 
Chandragupta and Chanakya. There is little reason to doubt 
the truth of the main story in its outline : an unusually 
valiant Kshatriya w r arrior and a Brahmin statesman of great 
learning and resourcefulness joined to bring about the down 
fall of an avaricious dynasty of hated rulers, and establish 
a new empire which made the good of the people the object 
of its chief concern; they freed the land from the foreign 
invader, and from internal tyranny, and established a state 
which in due course embraced practically the whole of India; 



INTRODUCTION 


3 


*1 

F 

together they organised one of the most powerful and efficient 
bureaucracies known to the history of the world. Kshatra 
’ (Imperium) and Brahma (Sacerdotium) came together and 
engaged in the most fruitful cooperation for the great good 
of the land and the people. The Arthasdstra of Kautilya 
(Chanakya) holds a place in the literature of Indian polity 
corresponding to that of the Mauryan empire in Indian 
history; there are two sides to both. The Mauryan empire £ 
was the culmination of a long centripetal development of 
which Magadha had become the nucleus for centuries; but 
its administrative system made new and bold departures from 
ancient practices and started innovations inspired by alien 
models, perhaps immediately Hellenistic, but traceable ulti- 
mately to Achaemenid Persia. Likewise, the Arthasdstra is the 
culmination of the Indian political thought of several genera- 
tions on the one side, while on the other, large sections of 
it were consciously based on the study of political practice, ■ 
a good part of it doubtless contemporary and foreign. 

The forty years of Asoka's rule form a great epoch not 

only in the history of India, but in the annals of mankind. 

In the remarkable series of his inscriptions found over the 

entire length and breadth of India, we hear the authentic 

voice of the great emperor explaining the purpose behind 

many of his actions. This enables us to check and control 

the numerous legends that have gathered round his name, 

f as around the names of all great leaders of humanity. One 

war of conquest was enough to turn the mind of this monarch 

for ever from all thought of war and military conquest, so 

sensitive was he to the sufferings of men, and indeed of 

° 4 

animals as well. He found instruction in the company of 

; the Sangha and solace in the religion of the Buddha. His 

\ abstention from war and conquest was by no means a mere 

1 negation of a part of the king’s duty as it was generally 

.understood; the true emperor was a conqueror ( vijiglshu ) 

according to the political theory of Ancient India, and Asoka 

accepted this ideal, and practised it vigorously for the rest of 

his life; only the conquest he pursued was of a higher order 

than that dictated by lust of power or territory ; he became 

a vijiglshu in the cause of Dhammavijaya. But he was no 



4 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


visionary who sacrificed temporal well-being in the pursuit of 
spiritual objects. He combined energy and benevolence, justice 
and charity, as no one else did. He bent all the material 
resources of his great empire to the ethical education of his 
subjects and to the organisation of peace within his realm, 
and universal amity and order throughout the world. Asoka 
strikes us as the most modern of all the great rulers of India. 

The work of the historian, unlike that of the novelist, is 
limited by the nature of his sources. Little or no evidence 
worth the name is forthcoming on many matters of interest 
in our period, and several questions that naturally rise in the 
mind as we recall its main events have to remain unanswered. 
Did Chandragupta deliver his attack on the Nanda empire at 
its heart and effect a revolution in the capital to start with, or 
did he begin by building up his power in the North-West at 
the expense of the Greeks and then proceed against the 
Nandas ? What exactly was the role of Kautilya in the events 
that led up to the abhisheka of Chandragupta ? How long did 
Chandragupta take to build up his empire, and who were the 
enemies, if any, who gave him fight ? Did he turn Jain and 
abdicate towards the close of his reign as Jaina legends allege ? 
What happened in the Mauryan empire during close upon 
three decades of Bindusara’s rule ? We hear little of that 
monarch besides his love of Greek wine and figs, and his futile 
effort to buy a Greek philosopher. Yet this king could not 
have lacked ability as soldier and statesman, for he successfully 
guarded the vast empire, perhaps even extended it into the 
Deccan, and handed it over intact to his successor. Was 
Asoka’s succession to the throne disputed ? Did he rule as 
emperor to the end of his life, or did he abdicate and live as 
a monk in his last years ? And why did not the empire, 
reared by three generations of exceptionally talented rulers, 
hold together for many years after Asoka’s time ? 

Historical truth is many-sided, and there is always scope 
for differences of interpretation of the evidence at hand; the 
scope for such differences is particularly wide in our period in 
which almost all the sources bear a certain bias — Brahmanical, 
Buddhist, Jaina — and offer divergent accounts of the same 
set of events. As nothing is gained and something may 



INTRODUCTION 


5 


be lost by an artificial smoothening of these differences, it has 
appeared best to leave untouched the slightly differing views 
of the contributors of the different chapters and give the 
reader the opportunity of realizing the difficulty of reaching 
categorical conclusions on complex issues. 

The account of the period opens with a chapter (I) on 
India in the Age of the Nandas from the pen of Prof. H. G. 
Raychaudhuri who reconstructs, with great ingenuity, from 
very meagre sources a vivid picture of the establishment of the 
empire of the Nandas and its polity; in his survey of the out- 
lying parts of India, he offers a succinct treatment of the 
political geography of North-Western India and of the 
advance of Persia and its rule on the banks of the Indus, 
and prepares the ground for the detailed study of the Indian 
campaigns of Alexander by the present writer (Chap. II)* 
The hardest fights in which that great Macedonian warrior 
engaged were all fought on Indian soil, and his Indian 
opponents, though they did not win victories against him, 
generally won his approbation of their fighting qualities. 
These campaigns have been treated at some length, and 
their place in the history of India and of the world has been 
adverted to above. Alexander was accompanied by several 
scientists and Iiterateurs whose writings communicated to 
Europe a vast amount of knowledge about India; they also 
formed the basis of many of the observations made by the 
ambassadors of the Hellenistic monarchs to the Mauryan 
empire, of whom Megasthenes is, of course, the most celebra- 
ted; in one chapter (III) all the notices of India by Greek 
and Latin authors bearing on our period have been brought 
together and reviewed also at full length with a view to put 
the reader in possession of most of the primary data now 
available; the chapter is followed appropriately by a com- 
prehensive note, by Dr. J. N. Banerjea, on the foreign coins 
of the period found in India. 

The thread of the main story is taken up again by 
Prof. Raychaudhuri in the chapter (IV) on Chandragupta and 
Bindusara. A brief criticism of the sources is followed by a 
discussion of chronology which may with advantage be read 
together with a further discussion of the same topic that 



6 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


follows in the chapter on Asoka (VI). Prof. Raychaudhuri 
holds that the classical sources were well aware of the over- 
throw of the Nandas by Chandragupta though it might appear 
to some that in speaking of his overthrow of the existing govern- 
ment and liberation of India they meant only the destruction, 
of the Macedonian domination in the Indus valley. He dis- 
counts heavily the part attributed to Chanakya in the internal 
revolution that resulted in the fall of the Nandas and the 
establishment of the Mauryan empire, and is inclined to con- 
sider Chandragupta as the hero of the drama. He has also* 
grave doubts about the age and authenticity of the Arthasastra*. 
But the whole of his narrative shows that he is quite fully 
aware of the possibility of other view's being taken on these 
subjects and of the need for putting before his readers all the 
available evidence to enable them to form their own opinions* 
A brief study of the Mauryan polity, based mainly on 
the Arthasastra y follows (Chap. V ) ; this sums up the state of 
government and administrative organisation as it was in 
the reigns of the first two emperors and provides the back- 
ground necessary for the proper appraisal of the innovations 
of Asoka in the administrative system, to w r hich references 
occur in the inscriptions of that ruler. The present w'riter 
is inclined to accept the Arihasaslra as a valid picture of con- 
ditions that prevailed in the Mauryan empire and has attemp- 
ted to explain the basis for this view in an excursus on the 
Arihasaslra at the end of the chapter. 

The chapter (VI) on Asoka and his successors, also by 
the present writer, aims at presenting the primary evidence 
arranged under convenient heads w'ith the necessary minimum 
of comment and criticism. The object has been to let the in- 
scriptions tell the story as far as possible and to accept le- 
gendary evidence only to the extent to which it works in 
with and is not contradicted by the inscriptions. Asoka’s- 
relations with the Sangha, the nature and content of the Dham- 
ma he propagated, the extent of success that attended his 
missionary efforts, and the question whether he was both 
monk and monarch at one and the same time have been? 
considered in some detail; the legends connecting Asoka with 
Kashmir, Khotan and Nepal have also been considered with 



INTRODUCTION 


7 


some care. All is darkness afteF Asoka; the faint gleams from 
late and diverse sources, the earliest being the Divydvaddna and 
Puranas, just render the darkness visible; no connected history 
is possible here; the available evidence has been summed up 
and the process of the dissolution of the Mauryan empire has 
been left largely to the imagination of the reader aided by the 
few scraps of evidence set forth at the end of the chapter. A 
brief account (Chap. VII) of South India and Ceylon rounds 
off the political history of the period; the vexed question of the 
identity and location of Satiyaputa has been discussed; and all 
the references to Nan das and Mauryas in early Tamil literature 
have been described in their proper setting and their historical 
value determined ; and the evidence of the early BrahrnI in- 
scriptions of the Tamil districts and of Ceylon, as also that of 
the Ceylonese tradition in the Mahdvamsa assessed. 

The remaining four chapters in the volume are devoted 
to studies of different aspects of the culture of the period. 
Dr. U. N. Ghoshal describes the Industry, Trade and Cur- 
rency of the times in a chapter (\ III) which is as well docu- 
mented, as it is replete with significant facts culled from va- 
rious sources and set forth with remarkable lucidity and 
cogency. A perusal of this chapter and portions of the 
chapter on Art which form an excellent supplement to it, 
may well set at rest the doubts, sometimes expressed by 
scholars, that the state of technical arts depicted in the pages 
of the Arthasastra appears to be too advanced for the age of 
the Mauryas; for relying only to a very little extent on the 
evidence of the Aithaidstra, the writers of these chapters have 
sought to trace the trend of development from earlier epochs 
up to and beyond the Mauryan epoch, and to indicate clearly 
the place of that epoch in the course of this development. 

In the chapter (IX) on Religion Dr. P. C. Bagchi makes 
a penetrating study of the ascetic movements in general, of 
Brahmanism, Ajlvikas and Nirgranthas, as well as of Buddhism 
and of the beginnings of theistic movements; he may appear 
to rely rather more on Buddhist texts than on other lines of 
evidence, but that has seldom stood in the way of the justice 
and truth of the interpretations offered by him. He has not 
included in the scope of his chapter forms of popular worship 



8 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


centring round flag-staffs, yakshas and so on, which have 
been noticed incidentally in the two succeeding chapters. 
The chapter (X) on Language and Literature and the life of 
the people is contributed by two scholars. Prof. Suniti Kumar 
Chatterji, the most competent linguist of India, offers a com- 
prehensive and critical survey of the distribution and deve- 
lopment of language and script in the various parts of Mauryan 
India. Dr. V. Raghavan’s contribution in this chapter on 
Learning and Literature and popular life is the necessary com- 
plement to that of Dr. Bagchi on Religion. Depending more or 
less on exclusively Sanskrit and Brahmanical sources, Dr. Ragha- 
van has produced a compact and illuminating account of the 
learning and literature of the age in their various branches, 
of the rites and forms of worship prevalent among the 
different strata of society, and of the habits, beliefs and 
modes of thought prevalent among the common people. 

The final chapter (XI) on Art from the pen of Dr. Nihar- 
ranjan Ray is a comprehensive and up-to-date survey of a 
difficult and interesting subject. The great acumen with 
which the author traces the development of the artistic tra- 
dition within the Mauryan period, even within a single 
reign, and adopts tests for the separation of the play of indige- 
nous from that of foreign inspiration will not escape the atten- 
tion of the discerning reader. Dr. Ray does not hesitate to 
declare as post-Mauryan several pieces that are generally held 
to be Mauryan on grounds of the material and technique 
which are hardly adequate in his eyes. His main thesis is that 
all the Mauryan art accessible to us is court art strongly mark- 
ed by extraneous influences, Hellenistic and Achaemenian. 

Viewed from any angle, the age of the Mauryan empire 
was an age of great endeavour and noble achievement. Poli- 
tically India became one, and the cultural unity in the 
midst of diversity that has always characterised her civilization 
became more marked than ever in this period. India was in 
the van of human progress, and one of her greatest emperors 
sent forth into the world the message of universal peace and 
love. It is to be hoped that the different chapters in this 
volume may help its readers in some measure to recall the 
life and happenings of that great epoch. 



CHAPTER I 


INDIA IN THE AGE OF THE NANDAS 
I. Empire of Magadha 

The dominant characteristic of the period with which 
we propose to deal is the rise and growth of a New Monarchy 
in Eastern India cf which we have a presage in the Aiiareya 
Brahmana : 

“In this eastern quarter ( prachyam disi) whatever kings 
there are of the eastern peoples, they are anointed for imperial 
rule ( sdmrdjya ) ; ‘Oh emperor’ (samrat) they style him when 
anointed.” 1 

The eastern peoples ( prachyas ) are not specified by the 
Brahmana in the same way as those of the South, the North 
and the Middle Country. But there can hardly be any doubt 
that they lived to the east of the dhruvd madhyamd dis and thus 
answer to the Pnsii of the Greek writers and the confederate 
nations who dominated the valleys of the lower Ganges and 
the Son. The most eminent among these nations was Magadha 
which embraced the modern districts of Patna and Gaya. 

Several factors contributed to the greatness of the new 
star in the firmament of Indian politics. It occupied a 
strategic position between the upper and the lower parts of 
the Gangetic plain. It possessed an impregnable fort in a 
mountain fastness and built another at the confluence of two 
mighty streams, the highways of trade and commerce in 
those days. It had a fertile soil and its resources included an 
elephant corps which was truly formidable. 

But advantages of position and material resources alone 
cannot raise a nation to eminence. It is the character and 
the spirit of the people “that give all their life and efficacy 
to them”. As in Western Europe, so in Magadha, we have 
a commingling of races and cultures. Kikatas and other 
Andryas blended here with priestly and fighting clans of Aryan 


i. Keith giffteda Br. t p 330. 



10 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


India as Celts did with Latins and Teutons in Gaul and 
some neighbouring lands of Western Europe. It is possible 
to detect two strands in the cultural as well as the ethnic 
texture of the Magadhan people. The same race that pro- 
duced fierce warriors and exterminators of princes and peo- 
ples listened to the quiet teachings of Mahavira the Jina and 
Gautama the Buddha. It played a part in the evolution 
of a universal religion as it did in the foundation of a pan- 
Indian empire. The wide outlook of the Magadhans was 
not a little due to the absence of the rigidity that marked the 
social polity that evolved on the banks of the Sarasvatl and the 
upper Ganges. In their realm Brahmanas could fraternize 
with Vratyas. Kshatriyas could admit plebeian (Sudra) girls 
to their harem, blue-blooded aristocrats could be done to 
death or otherwise deprived of the throne to make room for 
the child of a nagara-sobhinl , and a barber could aspire to im- 
perial dignity. 

Magadhan kings and statesmen were sometimes ruthless 
in their methods. But they had the wisdom to establish an 
efficient system of government in which high bureaucratic 
functionaries ( mahdmdtras ) as well as village headmen (grdmikas) 
had their share. Foreign observers speak with evident ap- 
probation of their judiciary, roads, irrigation works and 
care of alien residents. While not fighting shy of meta- 
physics, they laid great stress on exertion ( parakrama ) in this 
mundane life with the object of welding the diverse elements 
of greater India (Jambuvdipa) into a unit bound by political 
as well as cultural ties. Tliis was facilitated by the ancient 
idea of the all-encompassing Purus ha — later called Mahd 
purusha (The Great Being) — and his political counterpart the 
Sole Sovereign ( Ekardt or Chahravartin), In the Magadha 
minstrelsy the rulers of the Prasii had an instrument which 
they could use for popular education and inspiration in 
times of trouble and despondency. We owe much of our know- 
ledge of ancient times to these bards. 

The early dynastic history of Magadha is shrouded in 
darkness. We have occasional glimpses of war-lords and 
statesmen, some probably entirely mythical, others having 
more appearance of reality. True history commences with 



THE NANDAS 


11 


the famous Bimbisara of the Haryanka kula who launched 
his people in that career of conquest and aggrandisement 
which only ended when ASoka sheathed his swwd after the 
conquest of Kalinga. 

The family of Bimbisara was responsible for the fortifi- 
cation of a village at the confluence of the Son and the 
Ganges which grew into the city of Pataliputra and soon re- 
placed the old capital, Girivraja-Rajagriha. It also saw, and 
actively supported, the growth of the religious movements 
associated with Vardharnana Mahavira and Gautama Buddha. 

According to Buddhist tradition the Bimbisarids made 
room for a new line styled Saisunaga. The Puranic chro- 
nicles, however, do not distinguish between the two families 
and make Saisunaga the common ancestor of the kings belong- 
ing to both the groups. 

Saisunaga rule seems to have ended in a tragedy. The 
last notable ruler of the line fell a victim to a plot engineered 
by an all powerful official who had “advanced to too near a 
place in the confidence of the monarch”. 

The Nandas 

With the passing of the Saisunagas from the stage and 
the assumption of supreme authority by the regicide, who is 
no other than the famous founder of the Nanda line, we 
enter upon a new epoch in the history of this country. For 
the first time we have an empire which transcends the boun- 
daries of the Gangetic basin. It is not a loose assemblage 
of virtually independent states or feudal baronies which have 
a wholesome respect for the power and might of a roi soleil y 
but an integrated monarchy under an Ekarat (single ruler) 
possessed of vast resources in men and money. The old, 
almost uninterrupted, ascendancy of clans claiming the blue 
blood of Kshatriyas is at an end. The new ruler is a rtovus 
homo who wages a war to the knife on the Kshatriyas and 
rouses the relentless hostility of the most astute of the politically 
minded Brahmanas of the age. He incarnates, according to 
the Puranic chroniclers, the spirit of the Iron Age (Kali) and 
his accession is taken to mark a chronological epoch like the 
birth of Parikshit several centuries earlier. 



14 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the classical account of the pedigree of Alexander's Magadhan 
contemporary who was the predecessor of Chandragupta 
Maurya. Referring to this prince who occupied the throne 
of Pataliputra when, according to Plutarch, Chandragupta 
met Alexander in the Punjab, Curtius 1 informs us that “his 
father was in fact a barber, scarcely staving off hunger by 
his daily earnings, but who, from his being not uncomely in 
person, had gained the affections of the queen, and was by 
her influence advanced to too near a place in the confidence 
of the reigning monarch. Afterwards, however, he treache- 
rously murdered his sovereign, and then, under the pretence 
of acting as guardian to the royal children, usurped the 
supreme authority, and having put the young princes to death 
begot the present king”. 

There has been some difference of opinion as to whether 
“the present king” (Agrammes) of Curtius ruling in 326 B. C. 
refers to the first Nanda himself or to one of his sons. The 
classical testimony leaves no room for doubt on the point. 
Agrammes was born to the purple. His father had already 
usurped supreme authority and put the legitimate heirs to the 
throne to death. The description of “the present king” can 
hardly be applied to the first Nanda who was ganikdkushi - 
janmi (born of a courtesan) and whose father did not exercise 
sovereign power. We have therefore to conclude that Agram- 
mes, or Xandrames as he is called by Diodorus, belonged to 
the second generation of the usurping family and his father was 
the first Nanda, the Mahapadma-Ugrasena of Indian tradition. 

The murdered sovereign must have belonged to the line 
that preceded the Nandas on the throne of Pataliputra. The 
ruler who answers best to the description given by Curtius 
and Diodorus is Kakavarna-Kalasoka whose tragic end is 
alluded to in the Harshacharita , and whose sons — nine or ten 
in number — were, according to Buddhist tradition, ousted by 
Ugrasena Nanda. The name Agrammes is possibly a dis- 
torted form of the Sanskrit Augrasainva, “son or descendant 
of Ugrasena”. It may be noted in this connection that 
Augrasainya as a royal epithet may be traced back to the 


1. W Candle, Invasion of Alexander, p. 220. 



Aitareya Brahmana where it occurs as a patronymic of Yud- 
dhariisraushti . 1 

The rise of an all powerful official in the time of the 
later Saisunagas probably indicates that the system of ad- 
ministration had undergone remarkable changes since the days 
of Bimbisara. That monarch had exercised a rigid control over 
his mahdmdlras , dismissing those who advised him badly and 
rewarding those whose counsel he approved. The result of the 
“ purge” was the emergence of the type of official repre- 
sented by Varshakara and Sunitha whose rigour and efficiency 
are well illustrated in the Buddhist Texts. The situation 
must have changed considerably towards the end of the 
Saisunaga epoch. The career of Ugrasena reminds one of 
that of Bijjala in a later age, and his early relations with 
the preceding royal family had important points of resemb- 
lance with that between Cardinal Mazarin and the family 
of Louis XIII. If tradition is to be believed the office of a 
chief minister was maintained throughout the Nanda period, 
though the functionary in question never reached the pre- 
eminent position that Ugrasena occupied in the days of his 
royal master. Jaina and Hindu writers refer to a distinguished 
line of imperial chancellors from Kalpaka to Sakatala and 
Rakshasa. It is difficult to say if these traditional figures 
had any historical reality. They are not mentioned in con- 
temporary or semi-contemporary documents. But “advisers 
of the king”, very small in number, but most respected on 
account of their high character and wisdom, are mentioned 
by Greek observers who wrote about conditions in the fourth 
century B. C. 

Next to the “advisers of the king” probably stood the 
“generals of the army”. One official of this class, Bhadra- 
sala, finds prominent mention in the Milinda-Panho. The 
Nanda army was a powerful fighting machine and we are 
told by the classical writers that the last king of the line “kept 
in the field for guarding the approaches of his country, twenty 

I. The use of patronymics, or metronymics, instead of the personal 
name, is by no means rare in Ind»an history. The cases of Assakenus, 
Porus, Pandion show that in yeveral cases classical writers did not take the 
trouble of acquainting themselves with the perioral designations of princes. 


16 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


thousand cavalry, and two hundred thousand infantry, besides 
two thousand four-horsed chariots, and, what was the most 
formidable force of all, a troop of elephants which ran up 
to the number of three thousand ”. 1 Diodorus and Plutarch 
raise the number of elephants to four thousand and six thou- 
w sand respectively. The latter puts the strength of the army 
of the Gangetic nations at eighty thousand horse, two hun- 
dred thousand foot, eight thousand war chariots, besides six 
\ thousand fighting elephants. 

It is no wonder that the lord of such an immense host 
should aspire to be a sole monarch, an Ekarat , of the vast 
regions stretching from the Himalayas to the Godavari or its 
neighbourhood. The historians of Alexander speak of the 
most powerful peoples who dwelt beyond the Beas as being 
under one sovereign. Q. Curtius Rufus, for instance, gives 
the following particulars : “Beyond the river (Hyphasis or 
Beas) lay extensive deserts. . Next came the Ganges, the largest 
w river in all India, the farther bank of which was inhabited 
by two nations, the Gangaridae and the Prasii, whose king 
was Agrammes” 2 . The account of Diodorus is similar. But 
" he calls the king Xandrames instead of Agrammes. The 
account of Plutarch, or the English translation, seems to 
suggest that the “Gandaritai” (Gangaridae) and the “Pra- 
siai” had separate kings, and this is said to find support in 
the number of horses, war-chariots and fighting elephants 
assigned to the “kings” of the two nations, which is larger 
than those assigned to Agrammes-Xandrames by Curtius 
and Diodorus. But the number of foot soldiers remains the 
same in all the accounts. The discrepancies regarding the 
number of elephants etc. may be due to divergence of tra- 
dition rather than reinforcement by contingents supplied by 
an allied king. Pliny informs us that the Prasii surpass 
in power and glory every other people in all India, their 
capital being Palibothra (Pataliputra), after which some call 
the people itself the Palibothri, nay, even the whole tract 
of the Ganges. 

1. M'Crindle, Invasion, pp. 221-22. 

2. JhM. 



THE NANDAS 


17 


Jaina writers refer to the subjugation by Nanda’s minister 
of the whole country down to the seas : — 

Samudravasan sebhya asamudramapi sriyahS 
updyahastairakrishya tatah so'krita Nandasdt'n 
Puranic chroniclers speak of the extermination by Maha- 
padma of all kshatriyas. This is taken to imply that he up- 
rooted all the kshatriya families which ruled contempora- 
neously with the Saisunagas ( lulya*kalam bhavishyanti sarv: hy 
ete mahlkshitahy , viz.* the Ikshvakus, Pahchalas, Kaseyas, Hai- 
hayas, Kalirigas, Asmakas, Kurus, Maithilas, Surasenas, and 
the Vitihotras, 

Jhe Ikshvakus were the ruling clan of Kosala, roughly 
corresponding to modern Oudh. Thev* had been humbled by 
Ajatasatru, the son of Bimbisara. The history of the clan 
after the famous rulers Prasenajit and his son Viduratha is 
obscure. A passage of the Kathdsaritsagara refers to the camp 
(kataka) of Nanda in Ayodhya. Apparently the king had 
undertaken an expedition to Kosala. An important section 
of the Ikshvakus seems to have been driven southwards as 
they are found in the third or fourth century A. D. in 
occupation of the lower valley of the Krishna. 

The Pahchalas occupied the tract of country between the 
upper Ganges and the Gumti together with a part of the 
Central Doab. They do not appear to have come into hostile 
contact with the Magadhan monarchy before the rise of the 
Nandas, and must have been brought under control by that 
dynasty, as the evidence of the classical writers seems to suggest. 

The Kaseyas, or the people inhabiting the district round 
Benares, had come under the Magadhan sway as early as the 
days of Bimbisara and Ajatasatru. It is recorded in the Pu- 
ranas that a Saisunaga prince was “placed in Benares” when 
the founder of the line took up his residence in Girivraja, the 
Magadhan capital in early times. It was apparently from 
a descendant or successor of this prince that Nanda wrested 
control over the people of Kasi. 

The Haihayas are found in possession of a part of the 
Narmada valley down to mediaeval times. Their earlier 


i. Pargiter, DKA .. p. 23. 



18 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


capital was at Mahishmatl, which has been identified by 
Pargiter with the rocky island of Mandhata and by others 
with a town named Mahesvara on the northern bank of the 
Narmada within the boundaries of the Indore state. The 
subjugation of this region by the Nandas does not seem to 
be improbable in view of the Puranic statement about the 
humiliation of the rulers of the neighbouring realm of Avanti 
by their Saisunaga predecessors. But there is lack of confir- 
mation by independent witnesses. It has however to be 
remembered that both Malwa and Gujarat formed integral 
parts of the Magadhan empire in the days of Chandragupta 
towards the close of the fourth century B.C., and the way 
may have been prepared by the Nandas. 

The Kalirigas occupied the extensive territory stretch- 
ing from the river VaitaranI in Orissa to the VarahanadI 
in the Vizagapatam District. Its capital in ancient times 
was the famous city of Dantakura or Dantapura which has 
been identified with the fort of Dantavaktra near Chicacole 
in the Ganjam district, washed by the river Languliya 
(Langulinl). The conquest of a part of Kalinga by Nanda 
is suggested by the Hathlgumpha record. The phraseology 
of the inscription hardly supports the view held by some 
scholars that the Nandaraja mentioned therein is a local 
chief. The reference is doubtless to a conqueror who estab- 
lished his authority over a sannivesa (place) of Kalinga and 
constructed some irrigation works in the province. 

The Asmakas occupied a part of the Godavari valley 
with their capital at Potali, Potana, or Podana. The last 
form of the name reminds one of Bodhan to the south of 
the confluence of the Manjlra and the Godavari not very 
far from Nizamabad in the Hyderabad state. The exis- 
tence on the Godavari of a city called “Nau Nand Dehra” 
(Nandcr), a little to the west of the Nizamabad District, 
renders it probable that the dominions of the “Nine Nandas” 
may have embraced the classic land of the Asmakas, though 
independent confirmation by contemporary or semi-contem- 
porary writers is not available. 

The Kurus, as is well known, occupied the country to 
the west of the Panchalas stretching from the Ganges to the 


THE NANDAS 


19 


river Sarasvatl (modern Sarsuti) which flows past the sacred 
site of Kurukshetra near Thanesar. The subjugation of this 
territory by the Nandas is not expressly mentioned by any 
contemporary authority, but is rendered probable by the 
Greek evidence in regard to “the dominions of the nation of 
the Praisioi and the Gandaridai” which seem to have em- 
braced the whole tract of the Ganges. 

The Maithilas wer ' the people of Mithila, a city famed 
in the epics owing to its connection with the heroine of the 
Rdmayana and her father Janaka. It has been identified with 
the small town of Janakpur within the Nepal border, north 
of where the Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur Districts meet. 
The greater part of Northern Bihar, over which the power- 
ful confederation of the Vrijis (including the Lichchhavis) 
had exercised sway, had been annexed by Ajatasatru, and 
his successors are known to have graced Vaisali, the capital, 
with their presence on occasions. If the Puranic tradition 
has any value the chieftains of Mithila must have retained 
a certain amount of independence in the fastnesses of the 
Nepalese Tarai. The periodical floods from the Gandak, the 
Bagmatl and connected streams during the rainy season must 
have rendered this part of the country very difficult of access 
and it is not surprising that the forests of the Tarai should 
have sheltered an autonomous principality when the great 
city of Vai£al! fell before the onslaught of Ajatasatru. The 
Nandas attained greater success as they could operate from 
their base in Vaisali. 

The Surasenas, the Sourasenoi of Megasthenes, had 
their capital at Mathura on the banks of the Jumna. Their 
subjection to the Prasii appears very probable from the accounts 
of Alexander’s historians. 

The Vltihotras are closely associated with the Haihayas 
and the Avantis in Puranic tradition. Their sovereignty is 
said to have terminated before the rise of the famous line 
of Pradyota. If the Puranic statement, found in a later pass- 
age of the Bhavishydnukirtana , about the contemporaneity of 
some of the Vltihotras with the Saisunagas, has any value, 
the latter may have restored some scion of the old line when 
they took away the glory ( yasah kritsnam) of the Pradyotas. 



20 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


As already stated, the undoubted control that Ghandragupta 
Maurya exercised over Western India including the 
Girnar region makes it highly probable that the way had 
been left clear by his Nanda predecessors. Jain writers ex- 
pressly mention the Nandas among the successors of Palaka, 
the son of Pradyota of Avanti. 

Much of the information given above relating to the 
conquests of the first Nanda is derived from late works. But 
the evidence of Greek writers, taken together with the testi- 
mony of the Hathigumpha epigraph leaves no room for doubt 
that the dynasty that ruled over the eastern nations of India 
in the days of Alexander exercised sway over practically 
the whole of the Gangetic basin together with some portion, 
if not the whole, of Kalinga. Some ingenuity has been shown 
by certain writers in drawing a distinction between Purva 
Nandas (earlier Nandas) and Nava Nandas (new or later 
Nandas) and identifying a prince of the former group with 
the Nandaraja of Khara vela’s inscription. But the theory 
rests on an unjustifiable interpretation of the expression purva 
Nanda used by Kshemendra and other epitomisers and redac- 
tors of the Brihakatha . The Puranic as well as the Ceylonese 
tradition knows of the existence of only one Nanda line and 
all writers including those belonging to Jaina persuasion take 
the word Nava in the expression Nava Nanda to mean nine 
and not new, Purva-Nanda is the designation of a single 
king and not of a dynasty and he is distinguished not from 
the Nava Nandas but from a pseudo-Nanda (Yogananda), 
the reanimated corpse of king Nanda. 

Several Mysore inscriptions state that Kuntala, a territory 
which included the southern part of the Bombay Presidency 
and the contiguous portions of Hyderabad state and 
the state of Mysore, was ruled by the Nandas. But these 
are of comparatively modern date (c. A. D. 1200), and too 
much cannot be built upon their statement. It has however to 
be admitted that no satisfactory account is yet available of the 
expansion of the Magadhan empire beyond the Krishna and 
the Tuhgabhadra which must have taken place before the 
promulgation of the Asokan inscriptions of the Kurnool and 
Chitaldroog districts dated in the third century B. G. 



THE NANDAS 


21 


Administration 

We have very little information as to the way in which 
the vast dominions of the Nandas were administered.^ If 
tradition is to be believed the founder of the line clearly aim- 
ed at the establishment of a unitary state. The reference 
to the extermination of all the Kshatriyas, coupled with the 
use of the terms ekarat and ekachchhatra can have no other 
meaning. Greek writers, however, make separate mention of 
the Prasii and the Gangaridae, though hinting at their sub- 
jection to a common sovereign, and Arrian notices the exis- 
tence beyond the Beas of “an excellent system of internal go- 
vernment under which the multitude was governed by the 
aristocracy, who exercised their authority with justice and mo- 
deration”. The aristocratic government, to which the classi- 
cal writer refers, cannot fail to remind one of the sanghas of the 
Kurus, the Panchalas and others, mentioned by the Kautllya 
Arthasastra , who bore the title of raja (rajasabdopajlvinah) . The 
flourishing condition of the areas in question where “the 
inhabitants were good agriculturists”, the land exceedingly 
fertile and the internal government excellent, is in striking 
contrast with conditions prevailing in the home provinces of 
the Prasian (Magadhan) monarchy where “the king was 
detested and held cheap by his subjects”. It appears from 
the evidence that is available to us that Nandas allowed a 
considerable amount of autonomy to the people in the out- 
lying parts of their empire, e. g., the Gangetic delta and the 
territories lying beyond Oudh. But the home provinces em- 
bracing the ancient janapadas of Magadha (South Bihar), 
Vriji (North Bihar), Kasi (Benares), KoSala (Oudh) etc. were 
treated in the same way as the sultans of Delhi dealt with 
the metropolitan province and the river country of the Doab. 
The presence of the king not only in Pataliputra, the ca- 
pital of Magadha, but also in Visala or Vai^all, the capital 
of the Vriji country in North Bihar, is vouched for by tra- 
dition, and we have also an interesting reference to an en- 
campment at Ayodhya. The strong position held by the 
Nandas in the heart of their dominions as contrasted with 
their comparative weakness in the frontier regions is the 
theme of certain interesting anecdotes that the Buddhist 


22 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

commentator on the Great Chronicle of Ceylon, and other 
late writers tell of Chandragupta’s ambitious adventure on 
the threshold of his career. The stories no doubt belong to 
the domain of folklore and certain motifs have a surprising 
resemblance with the Alfred saga. But the central idea may 
have been based on genuine tradition. 

Greek observers of the fourth century B. C. and the 
epitomisers of a later age allude to a system of provincial 
government under officials styled nomarchs and hyparchs. 
A nomarch is a local ruler or governor of a nome or dis- 
trict. The word hyparch is sometimes used to denote a 
satrap. But the functionary in question is at times spoken 
of as a subordinate of a satrap. Though the officials are 
mentioned chiefly in connection with the Punjab in the days 
of Alexander and the Magadhan empire in the Maurya 
period, it is permissible to conjecture that the provincial system 
under the Nandas, specially in the districts under their 
undisputed sway, was not very different. In the third cen- 
tury B. C. we hear of administrative charges called dhdra> 
vishaya , janapada etc. under functionaries styled mahdmdtras 
rdjukas , prddesikas and rd^htriyas who seem to answer to the no- 
marchs and hyparchs mentioned by the Greeks, 
v The lowest administrative unit was the village. In the 
Prasna Upanishad , a later Vedic text, we hear of adhikritas 
appointed for gramas or villages by the samrdt or emperor. 
Grdmikas or village headmen find mention in the early Pali 
Canon who possibly correspond to these adhikritas . In the 
early days of the Magadhan monarchy the king appears to 
have kept himself in close touch with these village function- 
aries. We hear of a big assembly of thousands of grdmikas 
held by Bimbisara. There is no evidence that the Nandas 
followed this example and the detestation of the people, to 
which classical writers bear witness, ill accords with any close 
touch with life in the rural areas. Such a contact was only 
reestablished when Asoka in the third century B. C. under- 
took pious tours even to villages in outlying areas in pursuance 
of his policy of dhar mantis as ti. 

According to certain manuscripts of the Vdyu Parana , 
which is one of the oldest works of this class and is referred 



THE NANDAS 


23 


to by Bana in the seventh century A.D., the first Nanda ruled 
for twenty-eight years, and was followed by his sons who 
ruled for twelve years. Taranatha, too, assigns a period of 
twenty-nine years to Nanda. If this chronological scheme 
be accepted, the first Nanda could hardly have died before 
c. 338 B.G. as one of his sons was reigning in 326 B.C. and 
the dynasty must have come to power not earlier than c.367- 
66 B. G. But as stated above there is hardly any unanimity 
among our authorities, Puranic, Jain and Buddhist, regarding 
the reign period of Ugrasena Mahapadma and the total du- 
ration of the rule of his family. 

Later Xandas 

Among the sons of the first Nanda referred to in the 
Puranas, Sahalya or Sahalin seems to have been the eldest. 
Most of the Matsya Mss. spell the name as Sukalpa. But a 
Vayu Mss. gives the form Sahalya which, as pointed out by 
Barua, corresponds to Sahalin of the Divyavadana . The names 
of the sons of the first Nanda given in the Mahabodhivamsa 
are altogether different, and have not yet been confirmed 
from independent sources. The name of the last prince, 
Dhana Nanda is unknown to the classical writers who men- 
tion Agrammes or Xandrames as the name of the prince of 
the “barber” dynasty, who occupied the throne when Al- 
exander was on the banks of the Beas. 

Xandrames, the name mentioned by Diodorus, has been 
taken by some scholars to answer to the Sanskrit Chandramas, 
and identified with Chandragupta Maurya. But Plutarch 
clearly distinguishes between “Androkottos” and the king 
of the “Praisiai” in the days of Alexander, and his account 
receives confirmation from that of Justin. Xandrames or 
Agrammes was the son of a usurper born after his father 
had obtained the supreme authority among the Prasii, while 
Chandragupta was himself the founder of a new sovereignty, 
the first ruler of his dynasty. The father of Xandrames 
was a barber who could claim no royal ancestry . On the 
other hand, Indian writers are unanimous in representing 
Chandragupta as a scion of a race of rulers, though they 
differ in regard to the identity of the family and its claim to 



24 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


be regarded as of pure Kshatriya extraction. Jain evi- 
dence clearly suggests that the barber usurper is identical 
with the ndpita kumara or napitasu who founded the 
Nanda line. 

The figures of the eight princes who succeeded the first 
Nanda are rather shadowy and we do not know how far the 
tradition recorded by late writers can be accepted as sober 
history. The last of them is said to have been addicted to 
hoarding treasure. He amassed riches to the amount of 
eighty kotis. In a rock in the bed of the river Ganges he 
caused a great excavation to be made for the purpose of 
burying the treasures he had acquired. Levying taxes, along 
with other articles, even on skins, gums, trees and stones, he 
amassed further riches which he disposed of similarly. This 
account taken from the commentary on the Great Chronicle 
of Ceylon can claim some antiquity. Professor Nilakanta Sastri 
points out that a Tamil poem contains an interesting reference 
to the “very famous’’ Nandas “victorious in war, who having 
accumulated treasure first in beautiful Pataliputra hid it in the 
waters of the Ganges”. Hiuen Tsang, the famous Chinese 
pilgrim of the seventh century A. D. refers to “the five trea- 
sures of king Nanda’s seven precious substances” 1 . 

The accumulation of an enormous amount of wealth, 
to which all our authorities bear witness, probably implies 
a good deal of financial extortion and it is not surprising that 
the Nanda contemporary of Alexander “was detested and 
held cheap by his subjects as he rather took after his father 
than conducted himself as the occupant of a throne.” 

The oppressed people soon found a leader. Plutarch and 
Justin refer to a young lad named Androkottos or Sandro- 
cottus, doubtless identical with the famous Chandragupta, who 
visited Alexander in the Punjab, and showed a keen interest 
in the affairs of the Prasii. “Not long afterwards” he moun- 
ted the throne and “shook off from the neck” of India “the 
yoke of servitude” by overthrowing the existing government in 
India and expelling the prefects of Alexander. Indian chroni- 
cles introduce by his side another figure, a dvijarshabha named 


Watters, ii p 296. 



THE NANDAS 


25 


Kautilya or Chanakya, whom tradition represents as an in- 
habitant of Taxila. 

While some of the Indian writers* notably the author of 
the Sanskrit play entitled the Mudra-Rakshasa, are chiefly con- 
cerned with the battle of intrigue conducted by Kautilya, 
the Milinda Pan ho affords us a glimpse of the clash of arms 
between the contending forces of the Nandas and the Maur- 
yas. “There w*as Bhaddasala (Bhadrasala), the soldier in 
the service of the royal family of the Nandas, and he waged 
war against king Chandagutta ( Chandragupta ). Now in 
that w r ar, there were eighty corpse dances. For they say 
that when one great head holocaust has taken place by 
which is meant the slaughter of ten thousand elephants, and 
a lac of horses, and five thousand charioteers, and a hundred 
kotis of soldiers on foot, then the headless corpses arise and 
dance in frenzy over the battle field”. The passage contains 
a good deal of mythical embellishment. But we have here re- 
miniscence of the blood bath through w'hich Chandragupta 
had to wade to the throne. 

The glamour of the Nandas has been dimmed by the 
greater splendour of the succeeding dynasty. But it is well 
to remember what the kings of the line bequeathed to their im- 
mediate successors and to posterity. They had, to use the 
words of Smith, “compelled the mutually repellent molecules 
of the body politic to check their gyrations and submit to 
the grasp of a superior controlling force”. They developed 
a fighting machine that was used by the later rulers of Ma- 
gadha with terrible effect in resisting the onslaught of 
foreign invaders and carrying on the policy of expansion within 
the borders of India that had been inaugurated by Bimbisara 
and Ajatasatru. 

If tradition recorded by the epitomisers of the Brihat- 
kathd is to be believed, Pataliputra under Nanda rule became 
the abode ( kshetra ) of Sarasvati as w r ell as Lakshmi, the home 
of learning as well as of material prosperity. A galaxy of 
scholars — Varsha, Upavarsha, Panini, Katyayana, Vara- 
ruchi, Vyadi — is said to have added lustre to the age. While 
much of the traditional account may be mere folklore un- 
worthy of credence, we may well believe that the cultivation 



26 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of grammer received an impetus in this age. The scholia 
on Panini, presupposed by the great commentary of Patanjali, 
show acquaintance with the Yavana lipi , and it is by no means 
improbable that some of the predecessors of Patanjali are 
to be assigned to the Nanda Age. Kings of the line are cre- 
dited by certain grammarians with the establishment of a 
particular kind of measure (. Nandopakramani mdnani ) . 

In social matters the rise of Nandas may be regarded 
as symptomatic of a surging up of the lower classes. The 
Puranic chroniclers represent the dynasty as harbingers of 
Sudra rule and as irreligious (, adharmika ). The last state- 
ment is significant in view of the traditional connection of 
the family with Jain ministers and patriarchs. But the evi- 
dence on the point is of a character which makes it difficult 
to build too much on it. 

II. Regions Beyond the Magadhan Empire 

No account of India in the age of the Nandas is complete 
without a brief notice of the vast stretches of territory within 
the confines of this country that lay beyond the limits of their 
empire. Unfortunately, the exact boundary of the Nanda 
dominions cannot be determined with any amount of precision 
with the aid of available evidence. This is particularly true 
of the south. In the north the inclusion of the Ganges valley 
within the Nanda empire is, as already noted, suggested by 
Greek and Puranic evidence. We shall perhaps not be far 
wrong if we regard the upper reaches of the stream, that once 
flowed through the Ghaggar-Hakra bed, as forming roughly 
the boundary line between the Magadhan empire of those days 
and the autonomous tribes and kingships of the Uttarapatha. 
In the south Greek evidence is not of much help. Puranic 
testimony, as we have seen, hints at the incorporation into 
their empire by the Nandas of the principalities of all the 
leading Kshatriya families of the day, including in all pro- 
bability those of the south. Among the latter prominent men- 
tion is made of the Haihayas, Kalingas and Asmakas. 

Following this evidence, which comes from sources assign- 
able to the commencement of the Gupta Age, we may 



THE NANDAS 


27 


tentatively fix the southern boundary of the Nanda empire, or 
at least of the arena of its political and military activities, at 
the river Godavari. Barring some mediaeval Jaina treatises and 
inscriptions, of doubtful value for early times, there is hardly 
any evidence that the hegemony of the Nandas extended far 
beyond that famous river. Persian inscriptions, observations 
of Greek and Latin writers, supplemented by brief notices in 
Indian literature and epigraphs, enable us to say a few words 
about the two great regions of India — namely the Indus basin 
beyond the Ghaggar and South India beyond the Godavari — 
which, in the light of the evidence we have adduced, seem to 
have lain beyond the limits of the Nanda empire. 


(i) North- West India. 

A. PHYSICAL ASPECTS 

Bounded on the north by the Outer Himalayas; on the 
west, by the eastern Hindukush, the Safed Koh, the Suleiman 
and the Kirthar ranges; on the south, by the surging waters 
of the Arabian Sea and the “immense salt-water waste of the 
Rann of Cutoff and on the east by the sand-dunes of the 
Thar or the Great Indian Desert and the uplands and ridges 
of the Eastern Punjab, the extensive valley of the Indus and 
its feeders constituted a little world not much affected by the 
eddies and currents of Magadhan history before the rise of the 
Great Maury as. 

The country falls into three natural divisions : — (1) the 
mountainous regions extending from the upper reaches of the 
Sutlej to the basin of the Chitral and certain outlying rocky 
areas; (2) the fiat rolling plains of the Punjab intersected by 
a network of rivers and brooks; and (3) the almost rainless 
tract of the lower Indus and its delta, an important part of 
which now forms the province of Sind. 

The land described above presents great varieties of 
scenery. The eyes meet in the north the snow-clad speaks and 
glaciers of the Himalayas and the luxuriant vegetation that 
clothes the submontane region. A striking contrast to this is 
afforded by the plains of the Indus, which look like an 



28 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


‘‘interminable waste”, overgrown with tamarisk scrubs and 
ultimately merging in the great desert of Rajputana, the 
Registan of Sind and the sandy, surf-beaten shore of the 
Arabian Sea. The dreary and monotonous sight is only 
redeemed by the green verdure of the riverine fringes and 
‘‘endless expanse of waving crops of different shades of colour” 
that covers the country at the approach of the harvest 
season. 

The history of the region cannot be properly understood 
without a reference to its river-system. The central stream 
of the Indus, taking its rise in the heights of the Tibetan Pla- 
teau, meanders its course through the whole length of the 
land. It has not only given its name to our country but, 
according to some Greek writers, formed sometimes its north- 
western boundary. Near Attock in the north-western part of 
the Punjab it receives the combined waters of the Kabul and 
its confluents, including the Swat, the Panjkora, the Kunar 
and the Panjshir. The rivers which contribute most to the 
stream of the Indus, however, lie to the east and sweep through 
the plains of the Punjab proper, the “Land of the Five Rivers.” 
The nearest among the “Five Streams” is the Jhelum or Vita- 
sta, the Hydaspes of the Greeks. It adds to the wealth and 
beauty of the sunny vale of Kashmir and unites with the 
next stream, the Chenab, the ancient Chandrabhaga or 
Asiknl, the Akesines of the Greek writers, near Jhang. The 
whirling of waters produced by the confluence threatened to 
spell disaster to a flotilla of Alexander in the fourth century 
B. C. The next of the sister torrents, the Ravi, ancient 
ParushnI or Iravatl, the Hydraotis of the Greeks, rises in the 
Chamba State and falls into the united waters of the Jhelum 
and the Chenab. To the east of the Ravi flows the Beas, 
ancient Vipas or Vipasa, the Hyphasis of the Greeks, which 
is now an affluent of the Sutlej, Sutudri, or Satadru, the Hesi- 
drus or Zaradros of the Greeks. The five streams mingle 
their waters into the Panjnad and join the Indus above Mithan- 
kot. The mighty river then sweeps on into the Arabian sea 
through a number of shifting channels. Traces of old river 
beds are found in several directions and remains of ancient 
cities stud the neighbourhood. 



THE NANDAS 


29 


During winter the rivers of the Punjab look comparatively 
small but at the approach of the hot season, when the snow 
of the mountains begins to melt, and particularly when the 
monsoons burst, the streams are lashed to fury and rush 
through their wide beds “in uncontrolled vagary”. Large 
tracts of the country assume an almost oceanic character. 
Greek writers, as we shall see, bear ample testimony to the 
vagaries of these rivers and their effect on the landscape. 

Although drained by a large number of rivers the soil of 
the Punjab is comparatively poor. The scarcity of regular 
rainfall and the absence of sufficient facilities for irrigation in 
early times added to the difficulties of extensive cultivation. The 
forest-clad sub-montane region, including the country round 
Taxila, has, however, been noted for its fertility since times 
long gone by. Besides agricultural products, salt added to 
the wealth of the Indus basin, being found embedded in rocks 
particularly the Salt Range, and the delta of Sind. No trace 
of gold mines has been found in this region, but the metal was 
met with in the sands of the Indus, and the Kabul rivers and 
the upper reaches of several other streams. 

The gold-washing industry is no longer remunerative. 
But Herodotus informs us that in the fifth century B. C. “India”, 
i. e. f the Indus valley, paid a tribute of 360 talents of gold-dust. 
The existence of gold and silver “mines” in the countries of 
Sophytes and Mousikanos and certain other regions was re- 
ported to the companions of Alexander and the Chinese pil- 
grims of the seventh century A. D. The forests of Gandhara 
supplied teak for a Persian palace, and the country in general 
ivory for its adornment. Alexander, too got timber for his 
flotilla from the hilly region flanking the north of the Punjab. 

Geographical factors exercised a controlling influence 
upon the history of the Land of the Five Rivers as on the 
rest of the country. The mountains on the west and the 
north that frown on the riparian plains afforded shelter to 
fighting clans, who turned every rocky eminence into a 
citadel of defence and braved the wrath of the mightiest 
conqueror of antiquity. The numerous streams and rivulets 
that intersect the plains made each doab or strip of territory 
between two sheets of water nourish centres of autonomous 



30 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


political life. The mighty Indus with its confluent streams 
at times promoted an opposite tendency. They served as 
highways for ambitious rulers who sought to compel the 
political molecules of the Punjab and Sind to submit to one 
controlling force. The story of the mineral and agricultural 
wealth of the country must have been carried by travellers 
and merchants beyond its border so as to reach the ears of 
the King of Kings who held his court at Susa and Ekbatana 
from the sixth to the fourth century B. G. The riches of India 
and the lack of political cohesion among the children of the 
soil invited invasion from outside. The existence of a cen- 
tralised monarchy in Iran indicated the source from which 
it was to come. 

B. THE ADVANCE OF PERSIA TO THE INDUS. 

Some sort of military activity in India and its border- 
land and even conquest of a well defined territory in this 
direction are attributed to Cyrus (558-529 B. C.), the founder 
of the Persian empire, by Xenophon and other writers. But 
the evidence points to the inclusion within the dominions of 
the first Achaemenid of only the Kabul valley as far as the 
Indus. We learn from Pliny that Cyrus destroyed the famous 
city of KapisI and Arrian tells us that “the district west of the 
Indus as far as the Kophen (Kabul). . submitted to the Persians 
and paid tribute to Cyrus”. KapisI, the Ka-pi-shih of Hiuen 
Tsang and Ki-pin (cf. Greek Kophen) of other Chinese texts 
stood at or near the junction of the Ghorband and the Panj- 
shir. The eastern part of the realm of Ki-pin comprised, 
according to later writers, K’ien-t’o-lo or Gandhara. Classi- 
cal writers thus make it clear that the region between the 
Panjshir and the Indus, embracing ancient KapisI or Ki-pin 
and Gandhara proper (Peshawar district), was under the sway 
of Cyrus, a fact that accords with the appearance of Gadara 
or Gandhara among the subject peoples in the earliest epi- 
graphs of Darius (522-486 B. C.). 

Another eastern people who owed allegiance to the Per- 
sians were the “Thatagus” or the Sattagvdians. They toge- 
ther with the Gandarians, the Dadicae and the Aparytae con- 
stituted the seventh satrapy. Herzfeld is inclined to regard 



THE N AND AS 


31 


the Sattagydians as an Indian people located in the Punjab. 
Rawlinson, however, thinks that they lived near the Aracho- 
sians (of Kandahar) and occupied a part of south-eastern 
Afghanistan. According to Sarre they are to be located in the 
Ghazni and Ghilzai regions. Dames placed them in the Hazara 
country. The exact position of the Sattagydians still remains 
uncertain and the matter cannot be finally decided until the 
discovery of fresh evidence. 

A more famous name that occurs in several inscriptions of 
Darius in the list of subject peoples is Hidu (Hindu), which 
corresponds to the “Indians” of Herodotus. The circum- 
stances leading to their subjugation, as described by the fa- 
mous Greek historian, are too well known to need recount- 
ing. We are told that “the Indians, who are more numerous 
than other nations w T ith which we are acquainted, paid a 
tribute exceeding that of every other people, viz., 360 talents 
of gold-dust. This w f as the twentieth satrapy.” Herzfeld 
takes Hidu to refer to Sind. The description of Herodotus 
that “the tribes of India are more numerous than any other 
nation and do not all speak the same language”, taken together 
with the information that they paid an amount of tribute 
exceeding that of every other people, suggests that the twen- 
tieth province of the Achaemenid Empire could not have been 
confined within the narrow limits of modern Sind. If the 
sandy tract, which is said to have lain ‘eastward of India 5 refers 
to the desert of Rajputana, then we have probably to in- 
clude a considerable portion of the southern Punjab, if not 
the whole of the central as well as the lower Indus valley within 
the borders of the twentieth satrapy. It may no doubt be 
argued in this connection that certain words of Megasthenes 
and Arrian suggest a more restricted dominion. The former 
says that “the Indians had never engaged in foreign warfare, 
nor had ever been invaded and conquered by a foreign power, 
except by Hercules and Dionysus and lately by the Macedo- 
nians”. Arrian also makes the statement that “according to 
the Indians, no one before Alexander, with the exception of 
Dionysus and Hercules, had invaded their country .” As both 
these writers often take the Indus to be the western boundary 
of India proper, their statements may be taken to imply that 



32 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the Persian dominion in the east did not extend beyond the 
mighty Sindhu. But it has perhaps been rightly pointed out 
that “Alexander’s historians may have been inclined to 
minimise the accomplishments” of the Persians “in order to 
bring into greater prominence the achievements of the famous 
Greek invader.” In any case we should give more weight to 
the contemporary testimony of Herodotus than to the 
observations of Megasthenes and Arrian who wrote in much 
later ages. 

The empire which Darius ruled with wisdom and vigour 
did not long survive his death. Xerxes, who succeeded his 
father in 486 B. C. and reigned till 465 B. C., had to face a 
sea of troubles. Rebellions broke out on all sides. We learn 
from a Persepolis inscription, usually assigned to the period 
between 486-480 B. G., that he destroyed the temple of the 
daivas. This, in all likelihood, has reference to India. It 
is, however, difficult to determine whether the Achaemenian 
ruler proclaimed a jihad in honour of Ahuramazda or was 
faced with a rebellion of the far-eastern province of his em- 
pire, the land of the Deva-worshippers. That the monarch 
succeeded in retaining some hold over the Indian provinces 
is amply attested by the fact that the people of Gandhara as 
well as the Indians figured in the vast host that he led against 
Hellas in 480 B. C. 

The discomfiture that the fleet and army of Persia suffer- 
ed in the fight against the Greeks at Salamis and Plataea, My- 
cale and Eurymedon, clearly indicated that her days of con- 
quest and ascendancy were over. The weak and incapable 
successors of Xerxes found more delight in the boudoirs of the 
harem than on fields of battle. The direction of state affairs 
gradually passed into the hands of ambitious women or all- 
powerful officials. Murder of princes, rebellions of satraps 
and popular outbreaks lined the path of national decline. But 
genius for intrigue and possession of gold enabled the agents 
of a corrupt and effete system to continue for sometime to 
wield an influence which the valour and enterprise of their 
antagonists failed effectively to eradicate. 

The Achaemenians succeeded in retaining some control 
or influence over the tribes of the Indian borderland till 330 



THE NANDAS 


33 


B. C. when their hegemony was finally extinguished by Al- 
exander. Strabo informs us, on the authority of Eratosthenes, 
that “the Indus was the boundary between India and Ariana, 
which latter was situated next to India to the west and was in 
possession of the Persians at that time” (i. e. when Alexander 
invaded India). 

Indian contingents fought side by side with the Persians 
against the Hellenic host at Guaganiela. Arrian refeis to 
three distimt groups of Indians who responded to the trumpet 
call of Darius III Codomanus (333-330 B. C.). The Indians 
who were neighbours of the Bactrians (of the Bulkh region), 
possibly the inhabitants of Kajusl-Gandhara, wore arrayed with 
the Bactrians themselves and the Soguianians < of the Samar- 
kand territory) under the command of Bc.ssus, the satrap of 
Bactria. A second group of Indians styled the “Indian hill- 
men” or “mountaineer Indians”, possibly the Sattagvdians 
or people of the principality of Sambos in Sind, were placed 
with the Arachosians (of the Kandahar area) under Bersaentes, 
Satrap of Arachosia. Besides these, we have pointed reference 
to a third group, viz. Indians on this side of the Indus, appa- 
rently those of the twentieth satrapy, who came to the help of 
the Persian king with a comparatively small force of fifteen 
elephants. 

In the huge Persian army that Darius pitched against 
Alexander the Indians occupied the centre where the great 
king himself took up his position. They obviously enjoyed, 
in a special measure, the confidence of the sovereign and had 
the honour of protecting his person with his kinsmen, “the Per- 
sians whose spears were fitted with golden apples, the ‘trans- 
planted’ Carians and the Mardian bowmen.” Nor did they 
Delie the trust reposed in them. When the attack began and 
the great king himself took to flight some of the Indians, 
together with the Persian cavalry, fell upon the enemy with 
great impetuosity and threatened one contingent (the army 
of Parmenio) with total annihilation. The timely help of 
Alexander saved the situation. 

It is interesting to note that two important sections of 
Indians who joined the army of Darius III fought under the 
banner of the satraps of Bactria and Arachosia. This possibly 


34 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


implies that their territories were committed to the charge 
of those two satrapies. The amalgamation of two, or even 
three, provinces is a feature of the administrative history of the 
later Achaemenids. Like the Dandopanaiasamantas , mention- 
ed in Kautiliyan Arlhasdstra , Indian lieges furnished contingents 
to the paramount power in the hour of its need. The great 
provincial satraps had the assistance of district officials or lo- 
cal potentates of the rank of nomarch and hyparch. A number 
of these functionaries are mentioned as ruling in the 
Kabul and Indus valleys on the eve of the Macedonian inva- 
sion of 326 B. C. Alexander did not meet with any Persian 
satrap after he crossed the Indus. But hyparchs and nomarchs 
were to be found as far as the Salt range. Some of the chiefs 
assumed the full insignia of sovereignty and even styled them- 
selves Basileus or king. The hold of the Persian king and 
satraps had by this time grown very weak. Each petty princi- 
pality or chiefship cherished “with a passionate tenacity its 
individual life and. . political ambition, making wars and 
alliances as the interest of the moment might dictate.” 

C SUCCESSORS OF THE ACHAEMENIDS 

The little states in North-western India and the border- 
land that rose on the ruins of the Persian Empire may be group- 
ed under three heads : (a) kingships, mainly of a tribal charac- 
ter, in the region between the Kunar and the Ravi, with a so- 
litary hill-state apparently under oligarchical rule; (b) the 
autonomous tribes east of the Ravi and south of the junction 
of the Jhelum and the Chenab; and (c) monarchies and one 
state under ‘diarchy’ in the lower Indus valley below Mithan- 
kot, in parts of which Brahmanas seem to have exercised con- 
siderable political influence. 

The first group begins with the principalities in the hill 
country drained by the northern affluents of the Kabul river 
comprising the valleys of the Kunar, the Panjkora and the 
Swat, occupied by the Aspasians, the Gaureans and the As- 
sakenians respectively. The name Aspasian is derived from 
the Iranian ( Aspa\ horse, corresponding to the Sanskrit * Aha t* 
or 'AsvakcL . They were thus identical with, or kindreds of, 
the Assakenians or Asvakas. The ruler of the Aspasians is 



THE NANDAS 


35 


styled a hyparch. The chief wealth of the people seems to have 
consisted in cattle, 230,000 of which were captured by 
Alexander. 

The territory occupied by the Assakenians lay in the Swat 
valley and was known in the Gupta Age as Suvastu and Udya- 
na. The royal seat of the country was Massaga, a great city 
well fortified both by nature and art. It was surrounded by 
a wall of 35 stadia in circumference, built of sun-baked brick 
on a foundation of stone w'ork. Towers and engines had to 
be erriployed by Alexander to bring about its fall. The Assa- 
kenian king had a powerful army of 20,000 cavalry, more than 
30,000 infantry and 30 elephants. He was probably in alli- 
ance with the king of Abhisara, as his brother, when attacked 
by Alexander, took shelter with the latter. 

Somewhere in the rugged country to the west of the In- 
dus stood the small hill-state Nysa “at the foot of Mt. Meros.” 
Holdich locates it on the lower spurs and valleys of Kohi-Mor 
in the Swat country. The Nvsaeans are alleged to have been 
Greek colonists, descendants of men who came to India with 
Dionysus. The presence of a Yona or Greek janapada on the 
Indian borderland in the days of the Buddha is vouched for 
by the Majjhima-nikdya. The people of Nysa lived under an 
aristocratic government and their laws received the approba- 
tion of Alexander. The members of the Governing Body 
numbered 300. Akuphis held the office of the President at 
the time of the Macedonian invasion. 

The old territory of Gandhara w^as in the latter part of the 
fourth century B. C. divided between two hyparchs viz., those 
of Pushkalavatl and Takshasila or Taxila. Piishkalavati, or 
Peuc laotis of the Greeks, lay to the west of the Indus in the 
modern district of Peshawar. Taxila stood in the eastern part 
of ancient Gandhara. The oldest city of that name is probably 
represented by the present Bhir mound near Saraikala, 20 
miles north-west of Rawalpindi. It was a great and prosper- 
ous city in those days, “the largest of all which lay between 
the river Indus and Hydaspes (Jhelum).” Plutarch, giving an 
exaggerated estimate of the size of the realm of “Taxiles”, says 
that it was “as large as Egypt, with good pasturage, too, and 
in the highest degree productive of beautiful fruits”. Strabo 



36 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

refers to its “most excellent laws” and speaks of it as spacious 
and very fertile, adding that “some say that this is larger 
than Aegypt.” The wealth of the country is testified to by 
the fact that one of its chiefs presented to Alexander 200 silver 
talents, 3,000 cattle for sacrificial offering, over 10,000 sheep 
and 30 elephants. The succeeding ruler gave Alexander and 
his friends golden crowns and 80 talents of coined silver. The 
attitude of Taxila towards its neighbours throws welcome light 
on interstate and inter-tribal relations in the later half of the 
fourth century B. C. It entertained no friendly feelings towards 
Pushkalavatl and was actually at war with “Abisares” (the 
Abhisara chief) and “Porus” (the Paurava) both of whom held 
sway beyond the river Jhelum. It is difficult to determine 
the exact political status of the ruler of Taxila at the time of 
Alexander s invasion. Arrian styles him a hyparch but Strabo 
calls him a basileus . It is possible that he was one of the sub- 
ordinate governors or vassal chiefs of the Persian empire and 
took advantage of the collapse of Achaemenian authority to 
declare his independence. The cases of several nawabs of the 
eighteenth century furnish us with close parallels. 

“ I he hilly region above the TaxTla country was occupi- 
ed by Arsakes or the chief of Urasa (Hazara district) and 
Abisares or Prince of Abhisara (Punch and Nowshera distri- 
cts;.” It is interesting to note that like many of his brother 
chieftains on the borderland Arsakes is described as a hyparch . 

The ruler of Abhisara, on the other hand, is styled by 
Arrian as a Basileus or king. He was a very powerful prince 
and a man of shrewd political sense. He seems to have been 
a member of a powerful combination of chiefs consisting of 
Porus, Arsakes and possibly Assakenus. He was no friend of 
the king of Taxila and is known to have led an expedition against 
the Cathaeans and other self-governing tribes of the Punjab in 
alliance with Porus. He sensed the danger of the Macedonian 
invasion and tried to stop the invader at the gate of India. 
Thus he sent help to the frontier city of Ora and gave shelter 
to the brother of Assakenus. When Alexander actually arriv- 
ed at Taxila he sent envoys offering his submission and yet 
before the battle of the Hydaspes (Jhelum) he made prepa- 
rations for joining his forces with Porus. 



THE NANDAS 


37 


To the south-east of Taxila between the Jhelum and the 
Ravi lay the twin territories of the Purus or Pauravas, a peo- 
ple already famous in the Rig Veda. The realm of the elder 
of the two chieftains roughly corresponded to parts of the mo- 
dern districts of Gujarat and Shahpur. It was an extensive 
and fertile region containing three hundred cities. The 
second Paurava or Porus, styled a hyparch by Arrian, governed 
a principality between the Chenab and the Ravi. A man of 
undaunted courage, brave as a lion, Porus the Elder towered 
like a triton among minnows. The king of Taxila on the west 
and his own nephew or cousin, styled the Younger Porus, on 
the east were both afraid of him. The Cathaeans and other 
self-governing tribes also had a wholesome respect for his pro- 
wess. Diodorus informs us that he was in alliance with Em- 
bisaros (Abisares or king of Abhisara) and in the battle of the 
Hydaspes he received help from Spitaces, a nomarch who possi- 
bly owed him allegiance. The army he marshalled against 
Alexander numbered more than 50,000 foot, about 3,000 horses 
and above 1,000 chariots and 130 elephants. 

Not far from the domains of the Pauravas stretched the 
principality of the nomarch Sophvtes or Saubhuti. It included 
a mountain composed of fossil salt sufficient for the whole of 
India; Saubhuti is therefore sometimes represented as the “lord 
of the fastness of the Salt Range” stretching from the Indus 
to the Jhelum. Classical writers, however, agree in placing 
his territory to the east of the Jhelum. Wc have some coins 
of this potentate bearing on the obverse the royal head and 
on the reverse the figure of a cock. The issue of coins, like 
the assumption of the title of Basileus by the chief of Taxila, 
may point to the assumption of the rank of an independent 
king. Both Curtius and Diodorus agree that the people of the 
kingdom of Saubhuti lived under good laws and customs and 
beauty was held by them in the highest estimation. “Offi- 
cers were appointed to discriminate between children with 
deformed or defective limbs and those with perfect and healthy 
constitutions and features. The former were put to death, 
and the latter were reared, not according to the will of the 
parents but according to the wishes of the state. In contracting 
marriages they did not seek an alliance with high birth nor 



38 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


did they care whether a bride had dowry or a handsome for- 
tune, but made their choice by the looks and other advantages 
of the outward person. The inhabitants were therefore held in 
higher estimation than the rest of their countrymen and also 
excelled in wisdom . 5,1 

With the Pauravas and Saubhuti we take leave of the 
tribal chieftains, who held sway on the borderland and the 
western Punjab under the titles of hyparch , nomarch and, more 
rarely, Basileus. We now come to the territories of the autono- 
mous clans. We have to mention first the Glauganikai or 
Glausians, whose country lay to the west of the Chenab close 
to the territory of the Pauravas. In their land were no less 
than thirty-seven cities; of these, the least populated had 
above five thousand inhabitants many of them had over ten 
thousand. There was also a large number of populous vil- 
lages . 1 2 We have next to mention the Kathaioi or Cathaeans, 
who are placed by some on the far side of the Chenab and the 
Ravi. The name possibly stands for the Sanskrit Katha. A 
brave and warlike race, the Cathaeans had their stronghold 
at Sangala, probably situated in the Gurudaspur district not 
far from Fathgarh, though some prefer the claims of Jandiala 
to the east of Amritsar, or that of Lahore itself. The people 
had a keen sense of beauty. Strabo, on the authority of One- 
sicritus, tells us that they chose the handsomest person as their 
king, and had customs that remind one of the realm of Sau- 
bhuti. Other observations of Onesicritus on the Cathaeans 
will be cited later. 

Not far from the Cathaeans on the eastern side of the Ravi 
lived the Adraistai. Their main stronghold was Pimprama. 
Between the Ravi and the Beas we find mention of a chief 
named Phegeus or Phegelis. The name of the king probablv 
answers to the Sanskrit Bhagala, known from the Ganapatha 
as a designation of a royal race of Kshatriyas. 

Below the junction of the Jhelum and the Chenab, in the 
Shorkot region of the Jhang district lay the territory of a peo- 
ple, called the Siboi. They were probably identical with the 

1. M c Crindle Invasion pp. 219, 279. 

2. Arrian (Loeb) II 63, 65. 



THE NANDAS 


39 


Siva people mentioned in the Rig Veda and the Sibis of the 
later literature. They were dressed with skins like Herakles 
and had clubs for their weapon, and further branded their 
cattle and mules with the mark of a club. 1 The nation mus- 
tered 40,000 soldiers to oppose Alexander. This people had 
the Agalassoi as their neighbours. Their army too numbered 
40,000, besides 3,000 horse. Curtins tells us that “three largest 
rivers in India washed the line of the fortifications of their 
stronghold. The Indus flows close up to it, and on the south 
the Akcsines unites with the Hydaspes.”- 

Below the confluence of these ri\< rs, on the confines of 
a waterless tract and along the Ravi and the Chenab lived the 
people called Malloi. Their name, as is well known, repre- 
sents the Sanskrit Malava. Closely connected with them in 
Sanskrit and Greek literature were the Oxydrakai or Oxydra- 
cae (variously called Sydracae, Sudracae, Svrakousai) or the 
Kshudrakas. Strabo informs us that they were regarded as 
the descendants of Dionysus, judging from the vine of their 
country and their bacchanalian procession. Panini refers to 
the Malavas as living by the profession of arms. Arrian in- 
cludes them among self-governing Indians ands ays that they 
were the most numerous and the most warlike of the Indians 
in these parts. The evidence of Strabo seems to suggest that 
the Kshudrakas were ruled by petty kings ( basileus ), compar- 
able to the Rajas among the Lichchavis and the Mallas of Eas- 
tern India. Arrian in one passage refers to the mayors of the 
cities and rulers of districts ( nomarchai ) among them, who 
were entrusted with full power to negotiate with foreign po- 
tentates. Before the invasion of Alexander the Malavas and 
the Kshudrakas were often at war with one another. But at 
the approach of the common enemy they decided to join for- 
ces. According to Curtius the combined army numbered 
90,000 foot, 10,000 cavalry and 900 war chariots and they 
placed at their head a brave warrior of the nation of the Kshu- 
drakas. A somewhat different account is given by Diodorus 
who says that the two nations at first mustered a force of 80,000 

I Geography of Slabo (Loeb) VII n. 

2. M’Crtndlr, Invasion p 233. 



40 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


foot, 10,000 horse and 700 chariots and cemented their alliance 
by intermarriages, each nation taking and giving in exchange 
10,000 of their young women for wives; but subsequently a 
dispute arose among them regarding leadership and they drew 
off into adjoining towns. Arrian’s narrative seems to imply 
that Alexander reached the territory of the Malavas before 
any help could come to them from their neighbours. 

The territory on the lower Chenab, situated between the 
confluence of that river with the Ravi and the junction with 
the Indus respectively was occupied by several autonomous 
tribes, such as the Abastenoe, also called Sam- 
bastai, Sahara :>ae (Ambashthas), the Xathroi (Kshatri) 
and the Ossadioi (Vasati). The Ambashthas find prominent 
mention in Sanskrit and Pali literature, including the great 
epics, along with the Si bis, the Kshudrakas, the Malavas and 
the Sindhavas. Curtius and Diodorus both agree that they 
were a powerful people with a democratic government. Their 
army consisted of 60.000 foot, 6,000 cavalry and 400 chariots 
in Alexander’s time. The Xathroi and the Ossadioi possibly 
the Kshatris and Vasatis of Sanskrit texts, do not seem to, 
have shared the eminence of their famous neighbours. 

Below the confluence of the five rivers lived the Sodrai 
£nd the Massanoi. The river Indus seems to have separated 
the territories of the two. The Sodrai are, in all probability, 
the Sudras of the epic, a people closely associated with the 
Abhiras dwelling on the Sarasvati. 

The major part of Sind from Sukkur to the delta was divi- 
ded among a number of potentates of whom the most impor- 
tant was Mousikanos. The capital of this prince is usually plac- 
ed at or near Alor. His country was reported to be the richest 
in India and Arrian tells us that Alexander much admired it 
and its capital. Strabo gives interesting information about 
the kingdom of Mousikanos on the authority of Onesicritus 
and this will be reproduced elsewhere. 

From the account left by Arrian it appears that the “Bra- 
chmans” or Brahamanas exercised considerable influence in 
the country. They instigated a revolt against the Macedo- 
nian invader. Nearchus informs us “that the Brachamanes 
engage in affairs of state and attend the kings as councillors”* 


THE NANDAS 


41 


Not far from the territory of Mousikanos lay the princi- 
pality over which Oxykanos or Portikanos held sway. Arrian 
calls him a nomarch. The inhabitants of the region are styled 
by Curtius Praesti, possibly the Proshthas of the epic. 

In the mountainous country adjoining the kingdom of 
Mousikanos ruled Sambos, called Sabus by Strabo and Sabbas 
by Plutarch. His capital was Sindimana or Sindomana, 
which has been identified, with little plausibility, with Sehwan, 
a city on the Indus. Arrian informs us that Sambos and Mou- 
sikanos were at enmity with one another. Sambos was appoin- 
ted satrap of the Indian hillmen by Alexander; but if Plutarch 
is to be believed he rose in rebellion at the instance of the gy- 
mnnsophists. This hints at the fact that “naked philosophers’ 
who were either Brahmanas or followers of the Jina had con- 
siderable political influence in the country of Sambos. Con- 
ditions therefore were not unlike those in the realm of Mousi- 
kanos. Diodorus makes explicit mention of a nation and count- 
ry of the Brahamanas in the neighbourhood of the Sindian 
chiefships. He also places at the extremity of the “country 
of the Brahmanas” a city, called Harmatelia, which, as the 
evidence of Justin suggests, was ruled by a chief named Am- 
bigerus. 

In the delta of the Indus lay the territory of Patalene, re- 
ferred as Pottala and identified with Tauala of Diodorus. The 
capital probably stood near the site of Bahmanabad. Dio- 
dorus tells us Tauala had a political constitution like that of 
Sparta. The army was commanded by two kings belonging 
to separate families, while a Council of Elders directed the 
affairs of the state with supreme authority. One of the kings 
in the time of Alexander is styled by Curtius Moeres, a name 
that sounds like Mori\a or Maurya of Indian records. 

To sum up, North-West India presented on the whole a 
picture of disunion when the Xandas held sway in the Ganges 
valley. Constant references to hyparchs and nomarchs , how- 
ever, indicate that, as in the eighteenth century, agents of a 
defunct empire were, with few exceptions, still content with 
the subordinate titles they had in the palmy days of the 
rule of their former imperial masters. The time was ripe 
for interference from powers that dominated the tableland 



42 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of Iran on the west and the valley of the Ganges in 
the east. 


2. The Far South 

In comparison with the North-West our information re- 
garding the Far South of India beyond the river Godavari in 
the age of the Nandas is extremely meagre. The region falls 
into three well-marked natural divisions: (1) The high land 

enclosed between the Western and the Eastern Ghats, which 
has its ‘orographical apex 5 at the Nilgiri where the great moun- 
tain systems of the south merge into one another; (2) a narrow 
strip of territory on its west extending as far as the shores of the 
sea, intersected by numerous coves and creeks, but “unbroken 
by the passage of any considerable river' ’ ; and (3) the broader 
eastern sea-board embracing the fertile deltas of the Godavari, 
the Krishna and the Kaveri as well as the “open treeless 
plains” of Madura and Tinnevelly. 

The two low-lying strips of territory overlooking the Ara- 
bian Sea and the Bay of Bengal respectively are “filled with 
luxuriant vegetation, nourished by sea-borne mists and va- 
pours”, bedecked with groves of palm and cocoanut and adorn- 
ed in places by a number of backwaters, lagoons or lakes. They 
afford a most picturesque sight to the traveller. The wide expa- 
nse of the tableland of the interior, “in some parts mountainous 
and wooded, in others flat and undulating, with stretches of 
rich crop-growing fields as well as sterile soil'*, also presents a 
beautiful and diversified scenery. The south became justly 
famous for its natural wealth. The maritime belts are in many 
places exceedingly fertile and produced abundant crops of 
cereals. Ancient ports are found scattered all along the coast- 
line through which a brisk trade was carried on with the countr- 
ies of the west and the east from bygone times. Among the 
chief articles of commerce pepper, beryl and pearls were highly 
prized in Europe. The last-mentioned articles find promi- 
nent mention in the works of the Classical authors since the 
days of Megasthenes. Kautilya, too, refers to pearl called 
Tamraparnika, “that which is produced in Tamraparnl,” 
besides articles produced in Pandya-kapata and the cotton 
fabrics of Madura. 



THE NANDAS 


43 


It is the wealth of the Far South, rather than the annals 
of its people, their manners and customs, religion and philo- 
sophy, that interested the earliest foreign observers. The con- 
temporaries and immediate successors of Alexander seem to 
have had some vague knowledge of the south. A place called 
Keras is mentioned by Aristotle. But its identification with 
Kerala or Chera is not beyond doubt. Onesicritus, however, 
gives a description of the island of Taprobane (Tamraparm 
or Ceylon). Eratosthenes in his description of India in the 
days of Alexander informs us that the most southerly part of 
India was occupied by the lands of Goniaci and Taprobane 
was seven days’ sail from this place. He gathered the informa- 
tion that the most southerly capes of India rose opposite to 
the region of Meroe, from treatises written by men who had 
been to that region. Nearchus speaks of the setting of the Bears 
and if Megasthenes is to be believed this was a phenomenon 
observed in the southern parts of India. Aristobulus shows 
acquaintance with the product; of “the southern land of India, 
(which i like Arabia and Aethiopia bears cinnamon, nard and 
other aromatic products.” Straoo speaks of the people of the 
south as being like the Aethiopians in colour, but he does not 
specify his authority. Megasthenes speaks, in one of his doubt- 
ful fragments, of the Andrae (Andhras) who “possessed nume- 
rous villages, thirty towns defended by walls and towers, 
and supplied their king with an army of 100,000 infantr. , 2,000 
cavalry and 1 ,000 elephants.” The tribe is referred to in cer- 
tain Brdhmana texts and is found in historical tirnf*s in the re- 
gion watered by the lower courses of the Godavari and the 
Krishna. Mention is also made of a tribe called the “Modu- 
bae” who are placed beyond the “Modogalingae”. They 
are apparently identical with the Mutibas, a Dasyu tribe asso- 
ciated by the Brdhmana texts, referred to above, with the An- 
dhras. 

The extreme south of India to which the designation 
Tamilakam or Dravida (Damirike of Greek writers of the 
earliest centuries A. D.) was applied in post-vedic times con- 
sisted of four independent principalities in the third century 
B. C. These were the Cholas, the Panel yas, Keralaputra and 
Satiyaputra. Of these Satiyaputra does not seem to have 



44 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


been mentioned by any author historically or traditionally 
assignable to the Nanda period. We shall therefore content 
ourselves with a brief notice of the three remaining regions. 

The Chola country proper comprised the districts of Tri- 
chinpoly and Tanjore and was watered by the river KaverL 
The fame of the country in the age of the Nandas is vouched 
for by the celebrated grammarian Katyayana. 

The Pandya country is represented by the modern dis- 
tricts of Madura, Ramnad and Tinnevelly together with the 
southern part of the Travancore state. It was drained by the 
rivers Kritamala or the Vaigai and the Tamraparnl. Like 
th " Cholas, the Pandyas too are mentioned by Katyayana. He 
derives the name of the country from the famous Pandu. Me- 
gasthenes also refers to the Pandaian (Pandya) country and 
repeats some confused traditions regarding the connection of 
the land with the North, with Surasena, Mathura and He- 
rakles. The Pandyan people were distributed in 365 villagee 
and on every day of the year a village brought the tribute to 
-the treasury, “so that the queen (represented by the Classical 
writers as the daughter of Herakles) might always have the 
assistance of those men whose turn it was to pay the tribute 
in coercing those who for the time being were defaulters in 
their payments.” 1 It is interesting to note that the chief or- 
naments of the Pandyas were made of sea-pearl. Arrian tells 
us that the Pandya queen received from her father 500 ele- 
phants, 4,000 horses and 130,000 cavalry. Pliny tells us that her 
descendants ruled over 3,000 cities and commanded an army 
of 150,000 foot and 500 elephants. According to the same au- 
thority Pandya ‘is the only race in India ruled by women.’ 
Later writers, however, refer to more than one such territory. 

If the Mahdvarhsa is to be believed the Pandya kingdom 
and its capital, were in existence even in the time of Vijaya- 
simha, the traditional conquerer of Ceylon, who is represented 
as a contemporary of Buddha. In this region we should per- 
haps place the land of the Coniaci, whose name may represent 
Kumarika of Indian writers. The identification with Dha- 
nushkoti is less plausible. 


i. .\f ‘Grind le, Megasthene s and Arrian , p. 159. 



THE NANDAS 


45 


Kerala, the third among the classic realms of the Far 
South, corresponds roughly to south Malabar and seems to 
have extended down to central Travancore. As already stat- 
ed, its identification with Keras of Aristotle is problematical. 

Kerala may have embraced within its boundaries a dis- 
trict styled Mushika. In a passage of Strabo, Onesicritus 
is said to have represented the “country of Mousikanos” as the 
most southerly part of India. The territory of the famous Mousi- 
kanos, the contemporary of Alexander, was, as is well known, 
located in the lower Indus valley. But it is not improbable 
that Onesicritus had heard also of the Mushikas in the Far 
South and corrupted the name into Mousikanos. It may be 
pointed out in this connection that both Baharampur in the 
Murshidabad District of Bengal and Brahmapur in Ganjam 
have been corrupted into Berhampur by British officials. 



CHAPTER II 


ALEXANDER S CAMPAIGNS IN INDIA 

After Alexander’s conquest of Bactria and Sogdiana, the 
Indian satrapy was the only province of the Persian empire 
into which he had not carried his arms. Of this province he 
must have gained some valuable knowledge from Sisikottos 
(Sasigupta), the Indian mercenary leader who transferred 
his services from Bactria to her conqueror. Alexander also 
received an embassy in Sogdiana from Omphis (Ambhi) of 
Takshasila (Taxila) which offered him the alliance of the Indian 
prince and sought the foreigner’s aid against his powerful 
neighbour Porus, the first recorded instance of an Indian seek- 
ing foreign aid against fellow Indians. 

At the end of the spring of 326 B. C., Alexander started 
on his Indian expedition leaving Amyntas behind with 3,500 
horse and 10,000 foot to hold the land of the Bactrians. He 
crossed the Central Hindu Kush in ten days following the 
main road from Balkh to Kabul, and reached the rich and beau- 
tiful valley of Koh-i-Daman, where he had already founded 
an Alexandria, which he now strengthened with fresh rec- 
ruits from the neighbourhood and from among his war-worn 
soldiers. He placed Nicanor in charge of the city, and ap- 
pointed Tyriespes satrap of the area, dispositions intended, 
as was usual with Alexander, to secure his rear before advanc- 
ing further. 

Alexander then proceeded to Nikaia (Greek for ‘city 
of victory’), a place that lay most likely on his route to the river 
Kabul. Here he offered a sacrifice to the goddess Athena, 
and met an Indian embassy headed by the king of Takshasila 
which ‘brought him such presents as are most esteemed by the 
Indians’ and gave him also all the elephants they had with 
them, twenty-five in number. 

After leaving Nikaia and at sorJe distance from the city 
on the way to the Kabul river, Alexander divided his army, 
and sent one part of it under Hephaestion and Perdiccas to the 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


47 


Indus, along the course of the Kabul river, with instructions 
to take Peucelaotis (Pushkalavatl, near Charsadda, N. E. of 
Peshawar) and other places on the way by force if they would 
not submit of their own accord. When they reached the Indus 
they were to make necessary preparations for the transport 
of the army across that river. We have the name of only one 
tribal chief, Astes, in the Peucelaotis region (the Yusufzai coun- 
try) who ventured to offer resistance, and paid for it with his 
life. His city was captured after thirty days, and in his place 
was installed Sangaios (Sahjaya ?) who had quarrelled with 
him some time before and gone over to Taxiles. The boats 
built by the Greeks on reaching the Indus were such as could 
be taken to pieces and reassembled on reaching another river 
(Curtius). 


Subjugation of the Swat Valley 

With the rest of the army Alexander set forth on a hard 
campaign in the mountains in order to secure the flank of his 
main line of communication. The people of these mountain 
tracts are called Aspasians, Gauraians and Assakenians by 
Arrian. The first and last of these terms are variants of the 
same tribal name, Asmaka, a name known to Yarahamihira’s 
list of tribes in North-Western India; the other rendering of 
the name into Asvaka is supported by the fact that the Greeks 
translated it into Hippasioi (Hypasioi in Strabo). It is note- 
worthy that the Pushto name for the Yuzufzai still continues 
to be Asip or Isap. The Gauraians were doubtless closely 
connected with them and took their name from the river Gaurl 
(Panjkora), the Gouraios of the Greek texts. They were all 
obviously Indian tribes and are so described by the Greek 
writers. 

The route taken by Alexander along the Khoes is not 
easy to follow in its details, but doubtless his operations led 
him for a considerable distance up the large and populous 
valley of the Kunar, where he fought many hard battles. In 
an encounter before the first important city taken by the in- 
vaders, Alexander was slightly wounded in the shoulder. The 
city was razed to the ground and all its inhabitants, excepting 
thos# who managed to escape to the hills, were put to the 



48 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sword. Craterus and some other infantry officers were left be- 
hind to complete the subjugation of the district, while Alex- 
ander advanced to attack the Aspasians, who abandoned their 
capital on hearing of his approach, and were pursued with 
great slaughter to their mountain refuges. 

Alexander then crossed the mountains to the east and 
entered the Bajaur valley. Here Craterus rejoined him 
after carrying out his orders, and w r as asked to find fresh in- 
habitants for the city of Arigaion which occupied an advan- 
tageous site, but had been burnt down and deserted by its ori- 
ginal residents. Meanwhile Ptolemy, the son of Lagos, spotted 
the main Indian camp and brought news of its whereabouts 
to Alexander, who planned an attack against it in three divi- 
sions, one of which he led ‘in person against the position occu- 
pied by the main body’ of the Indian forces. Confident in 
the strength of their numbers, the Indians descended from the 
high ground they held to meet the invader on the plain below 
and sustained a defeat; the number of prisoners taken by the 
conqueror is said to have been no less than 40,000; then were 
captured also 230,000 oxen, from which Alexander chose the 
best to be sent over to Macedonia for use in agriculture. After 
the subjugation of the Aspasians, Alexander moved, according 
to Curtius, to the city of Nysa; Arrian records the visit in de- 
tail, but gives no indication of the position of Nysa, and is 
openly sceptical not only of the legendary details, but of the 
existence of the city itself. The inhabitants of Nysa offered 
no resistance, but sent an embassy with presents and claimed 
kinship with the Greeks on the score that their city had been 
founded by Dionysus and named after his nurse, Nysa, and 
that the Nysans were the descendants of his followers; the 
mountain near the city also bore the name Meros (thigh) 
because Dionysus grew, before his birth, in the thigh of Zeus. 
Nysa had remained a free city with its own laws ever since, and 
Alexander should permit them to continue as they were. ‘It 
gratified Alexander to hear all this 5 from Akuphis, the leader 
of the Nysan deputation, and he was not inclined to be too 
critical of legends that were pleasing to the ears of his soldiers, 
and promised him the glory of excelling the achievements of 
Dionysus. So he offered a sacrifice to his divine predecessor 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


49 


and confirmed his colony in the enjoyment of its ancient laws 
and liberty as an aristocratic republic. When Alexander 
asked for three hundred horsemen from Nysa and one hundr- 
ed of their best men to accompany him, Akuphis 
smiled and agreed readily to give the horsemen, but 
offered two hundred of the worst men of Nysa instead 
of the hundred best demanded by Alexander. The reply 
by no means displeased Alexander who took the cavalry 
and waived the other demand. He made a pilgrimage to 
Mount Meros (Koh-i-Mor ?) where his followers rejoiced at 
the sight of the ivy and laurel and wove chaplets of them for 
their heads while they joyfully chanted hymns to the divine 
forerunner of Alexander. 

Marching across the land of the Gauraians and crossing 
the river Gaurl (Panjkora), a difficult task owing to the depth 
and swiftness of the stream, Alexander appeared before 
Massaga, ‘the largest city in those parts’. Thus began the 
war in the upper Swat region against the Assakenoi. This 
powerful confederation commanded extensive territory in- 
cluding the whole of Swat, Buner and the valleys to the north 
of Buner, and extending right up to the Indus. It had an army 
of 20,000 cavalry' 1 , and more than 30,000 infantry besides 30 
elephants. Yet, it seems to have relied for defence against the 
invader not on fighting in open battle, but on the fortifications 
of its walled towns. The Greek accounts of the war contain 
details of several places besieged and taken by Alexander, but 
their position can seldom be fixed with confidence on modern 
maps. Stein, who knew the country very well, suggests that 
they ‘were probably situated in the main Swat valley; for this 
at all times must, as now, have been the most fertile and popu- 
lous portion of the territory’. 

The siege of Massaga (Maiakavatl ?) the capital of the 
Assakenoi, lasted for four days; at the outset Alexander was 
wounded in the leg, ‘though not severely’, by an arrow from 
the besieged ; but the Greek engines of war battered down 
the defences and inflicted great losses on the besieged, and 
their chief fell on the fourth day ‘struck by a missile from an 


i. Lassen and Stein give a,ooo . 



50 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


engine’. Among the besieged were 7,000 mercenary troops, 
who had no inclination to continue the arduous defence, 
especially after the death of the ruler of the city, and they 
started negotiations with Alexander; they were allowed to hill, 
leave the city, arms in hand, and encamp on a neighbouring 
on condition that they changed sides and accepted service 
under Alexander. But they had no wish to aid the foreigner 
against their countrymen and planned an escape by night to 
their homes; Alexander heard of this, surrounded their camp 
and cut them to pieces. Diodorus and Plutarch state that 
Alexander’s conduct on this occasion was a ‘foul blot on his 
martial fame’; he had made separate peace with the merce- 
neries to escape the serious losses they inflicted on his forces, 
and then fell upon them treacherously. Massaga itself, de- 
prived of its best defenders, was taken by storm, and according 
to Arrian, the mother and daughter of its ruler became prison- 
ers of war. Curtius . records a story that the queen of the 
city, who had an infant son whom she placed on Alexander’s 
knees was treated indulgently by the conqueror, rather ow- 
ing ‘to the charms of her person than to pity for her misfor- 
tunes’. He adds that afterwards she gave birth to a child who 
received the name of Alexander. Justin mentions that the 
Indians called the queen ‘the royal harlot’. 

The final stages of the campaign in the Swat valley cen- 
tred round Bazira (Bir-kot) and Ora (Udegram). Koinos 
was sent to Bazira, which was expected to surrender, and three 
other generals against Ora, with instructions to invest the 
place until the arrival of Alexander. Bazira, which stood 
on a lofty eminence and was strongly fortified, offered resis- 
tance to Koinos, and on hearing this, Alexander started to 
conduct the operations there himself. But then he learned of 
attempts to reinforce Ora, set on foot by Abhisares, the king 
of Abhisara, territory east of the Indus. Alexander directed his 
march to that city first, and ordered Koinos to join him there 
after fortifying a position before Bazira and leaving there a 
garrison strong enough ‘to keep the inhabitants from undis- 
turbed access to their lands’. A sortie by the defenders of 
Bazira after the departure of Koinos was unsuccessful and they 
were confined more rigorously than before within the walls 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


51 


of their city. Ora was captured at the first assault with little 
loss to the invader, who took over all the elephants he found 
there. The news of the fall of Ora led the inhabitants of Ba- 
zira to abandon their city at dead of night and seek re- 
fuge in the more inaccessible heights of th6 neighbouring moun- 
tains. This was the end of the campaign in the Swat valley; 
Alexander turned Ora and Massaga into strongholds for guard- 
ing the country round about, and improved the defences of 
Bazira, before marching south towards the Peshawar valley 
to follow the line taken by Hephaestion and Perdiccas dow r n 
the Kabul river. 

These generals had fortified a town called Orobatis (not 
identified) on their way to the Indus. Alexander now appoin- 
ted Nicanor satrap of the country west of the Indus, and receiv- 
ed the submission of Peucelaotis (Pushkalavatl), the ancient 
capital of Gandhara, stationing a garrison of Macedonian 
soldiers in the city under the command of Philip. 
Alexander then spent some days reducing minor strongholds, 
some on the way to the Indus, and some on its right bank, ac- 
companied by two local chieftains Kophaios and Assagetes 
(Asvajit ?). 


Aornos 

Before crossing the Indus, Alexander had still to deal with 
the last stronghold of the Assakenoi at Aornos to which they 
had all flocked for refuge. This place has been most satis- 
factorily located by Stein in the mountain ranges of Pir-sar 
and Una-sar, which answer to all the topographical details 
contained in the Greek accounts of Alexander’s operations 
against Aornos, accounts derived ultimately fom Ptolemy, 
the son of Lagos, who took a prominent part in those opera- 
tions. 

A word may be said at this stage about political condi- 
tions in the North-West frontier of India at the time of Alexan- 
der’s invasion ; the Assakenoi and their neighbouring and allied 
tribes were supported by Abhisares, and probably also by 
Porus, in their resistance to the invader; Abhisara proper is 
the name of the hill country between the upper Jhelum and the 
Chenab; but the ruler of this territory at this time seems to have 

.19559 



52 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


extended his sway in the west into Hazara (Ursa) up to the 
Indus, and on the east his territory might well have included 
parts of Kashmir. The ruler of Takshasila whose territory 
lay between the kingdoms of Abhisares and Porus, was on no 
friendly terms with them, and, as we have already seen, he 
welcomed the invader, hoping to have his support against his 
local enemies. It is not surprising then that the Assakenoi 
prepared themselves to defend their independence in a re- 
gion impregnable because of its physical features and in close 
proximity to the territory of Abhisares, and that Alexander 
did not feel free to accept the welcome of Taxila until he had 
overthrown this last and most redoubtable stronghold of the 
tribes whose subjugation was the chief aim of the arduous 
campaigns he had fought in the Swat valley. 

To get at this stronghold on the eastern frontier of the 
Assakenian country, Alexander had to move some way up the 
right bank of the Indus to Embolima (Amb), a city within two 
marches of Aornos. Here he deft Craterus with a part of the 
army to gather into the city as much corn as possible and all 
other requisites for a prolonged stay, in order that the Mace- 
donians, having that place as a base, might by protracted 
investment wear out those holding the rock, in case it should 
not be taken at the first assault. Alexander himself then ad- 
vanced to the rock, taking with him the archers, the Agrian- 
ians, the brigade of Koinos, the lightest and best armed of the 
phalanx, two hundred of the companion cavalry and one hun- 
dred horse-archers’. He fixed his camp on the second day 
very near the rock. 

Aornos is described by Arrian as a mighty mass of rock, 
6,600 ft. in height with a circuit of about 22 miles; Diodorus 
halves the circuit, puts the height at 9,600 ft., and says that 
it was washed by the Indus on its southern side. ‘It was as- 
cended’, says Arrian, ‘by a single path cut by the hand of man, 
yet difficult. On the summit of the rock there was, it is also 
said, plenty of pure water which gushed out from a copious 
spring. There was timber besides, and as much good arable 
land as required for its cultivation the labour of a thousand 
men’. A report was current that this stronghold was once 
assaulted in vain by Hercules who had to abandon the attempt 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


53 


on the occurrence of a ‘violent earthquake and signs from hea- 
ven’, and this is said to have made Alexander the more eager 
for the capture of the stronghold. But it should be noted that 
Arrian discredits the story and says c my own conviction is that 
Herakles was mentioned to make the story of its capture all the 
more wonderful’. 

At first Alexander was at a loss how to proceed to the at- 
tack, when some people from the neighbourhood came to him, 
offered their submission and undertook to guide him to the 
most accessible portion of the rock, from which the assault on 
the main eminence would not be difficult. Alexander accept- 
ed their guidance and sent with them Ptolemy with a select 
body of light-armed troops, telling him that on securing the 
position he was to signal to him and to hold it with a strong 
force. Traversing a rough and difficult route which led most 
probably up the valley to the west of the Danda-Nurdai spur, 
Ptolemy succeeded in occupying the indicated position on the 
height known as Little Una, unobserved by the defending forces 
on the heights of Pir-Sar. He fortified his position with a 
palisade and a trench, and signified his success to Alexander 
by means of a beacon raised on a height from which it would 
be seen by Alexander. Alexander did see it, and he moved 
forward the next day with his army along the route that Pto- 
lemy had taken; but the defenders soon saw what had happen- 
ed and sent their men to the heights of Danda-Nurdai to ob- 
struct the ascent of Alexander, which they did successfully, and 
then turned round and attacked the position held by Ptolemy 
higher up; after severe fighting in the latter part of the day, 
the Indians failed to carry Ptolemy’s fortifications and retired 
at nightfall. 

During the night, Alexander secured the aid of an Indian 
deserter and sent a letter to Ptolemy asking him not to be con- 
tent on the following day with just holding his position but to 
attack the Indians in the rear when they sought to obstruct the 
passage of the main army up the hill. At daybreak he started 
again, and succeeded, after a hard fight in forcing a passage 
and effecting a junction with Ptolemy’s men. But the assault 
on the main rock (Pir-Sar) could not be undertaken without 
much toil in filling up a ravine that lay between his position 



54 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and the height held by the defenders. This task was begun 
the next day and Alexander himself supervised the operations 
of cutting stakes and piling up a mound towards the main rock. 
The mound was advanced to a length of 200 yards as a result 
of the first day’s work, but progress became necessarily slower 
in the depths of the ravine. The Indians attempted to ob- 
struct the progress of the work and, though by their sallies 
they inflicted some losses on the enemy, their main object was 
foiled by the missiles of the Greeks shot from engines which 
were being advanced along the mound as each section of it 
was completed. The work of piling up the mound went on 
for three days without intermission, and on the fourth a few 
Macedonians succeeded in forcing their way up a small hill 
and occupying its crest on a level with the rock. The work 
on the extension of the mound was continued until it was joined 
three days later to the small hill near the rock that had passed 
into Greek occupation. Seeing the extraordinary skill with 
which these daring operations were carried out and the success 
which attended them, the Indians began to feel that further 
resistance was hopeless and sent a messenger to Alexander 
offering to surrender the rock if he granted them terms of capi- 
tulation. While the negotiations were dragging on, the be- 
sieged formed plans of dispersing to their several homes under 
cover of night; Alexander saw this, allowed them to begin 
their retreat without any obstruction, and then with a picked 
body of seven hundred troops scaled the rock at the point 
abandoned by the defenders. The surprise was complete; 
many of the Indians were slaughtered, and many others fell 
over the precipices and were dashed to death; ‘Alexander thus 
became master of the rock which had baffled Herakles him- 
self’. He celebrated his success by offering sacrifice and wor- 
ship to the gods and erected altars dedicated to Minerva and 
Victory. He also built a fort and gave command of it to Si- 
sikottos before setting out to complete the conquest of the 
Assakenoi and rejoin his main forces on the banks of the In- 
dus. The siege and capture of Aornos may be placed round 
about the month of April 326 B. C. 

From Aornos, records Arrian, Alexander went in pur- 
suit of the fleeing defenders of Aornos, who were led by a 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


55 


brother of the Assakenian chief killed in Massaga. The 
fugitives had taken refuge in the mountains with an army and 
some elephants. When Alexander reached Dyrta he found 
the city and its environs deserted, and thereupon he detach- 
ed certain troops to reconnoitre the surrounding country and 
secure information about the enemy, particularly his ele- 
phants. Dyrta has not been identified, but the fact that a new 
road had to be made, without which the march across the 
country to the Indus would have been impracticable, seems 
to point to the central parts of Buner as the scene of the ope- 
rations. From captives Alexander learned that the Indian 
prince had crossed the Indus and taken refuge with Abhi- 
sares, leaving his elephants at pasture near the Indus. These 
he succeeded in capturing with a loss of only two animals killed 
in the chase by their falling down a precipice. He also dis- 
covered a lot of serviceable timber, which he caused to be 
floated down the Indus to the bridge constructed long be- 
fore this by the other section of the army. 

When Alexander reached the bridge at Ohind, at the end 
of sixteen marches, he gave his army a rest of thirty days, enter- 
taining them with games and contests. Here he was met by an 
embassy from Ambhi of Takshasila who had recently succeed- 
ed to his father’s throne, but was awaiting the arrival of Al- 
exander to assume sovereignty. The embassy brought pre- 
sents consisting of 200 talents of silver, 3,000 fat oxen, 10,000 
sheep or more and 30 elephants; a force of 700 horsemen also 
came to the assistance of Alexander from the same prince and 
brought word that Ambhi surrendered into Alexander’s hands 
his capital Takshasila, ‘the greatest of all the cities between the 
river Indus and Hydaspes’. Alexander then offered sacri- 
fice to the gods on a magnificent scale and found the signs 
favourable for his crossing into India proper, the first European 
to set his foot on Indian soil. 

Taxi la 

As the invader approached Takshasila a strange incident 
occurred. When he was at a distance of some four miles from 
the city, he was met by a whole army drawn in battle order 
and elephants ranged in a line; Alexander suspected treachery 



56 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and instructed his troops to prepare for a battle; but Ambhi 
seeing the mistake made by the Macedonians, left his army 
with a few friends and contrived to explain to Alexander, with 
the aid of an interpreter, that he meant not to fight, but to 
honour his foreign ally whose protection he had been solicit- 
ing for so long and with so much persistence. He surrendered 
himself, his army and kingdom into the hands of Alexander, 
and got them back as his favoured protege. 

Alexander was entertained in Takshasila for three days 
with lavish hospitality, and on the fourth day he and his friends 
received presents of golden crowns and eighty talents of coined 
silver (Curtius). In his turn Alexander showed his gratifica- 
tion by sending to Ambhi a thousand talents from his spoils 
of war c along with many banqueting vessels of gold and silver, 
a vast quantity of Persian drapery, and thirty chargers 
from his own stalls, caparisoned as when ridden by himself’. 
Thus did a fraction of the loot from the store-houses of the old 
Persian kings find its lodgement in the palace of Takshasila. 
But Alexander’s liberality on the occasion displeased some of 
the Macedonian generals, though it secured for him an addi- 
tional force of five thousand men and the unfailing loyalty of 
a most useful ally. Embassies from Indian princes met Alexan- 
der herewith presents and declared their submission to him; 
even Abhisares of the hill country sent his brother. Only 
Porus (Paurava), bearer of a great name coming down from 
the age of the Rigveda, sent a defiant reply to Alexander’s mess- 
age and said he would meet the invader at the frontier of his 
territory, but in arms. Porus was the ruler of a considerable 
kingdom, and its expansion was doubtless causing some stir 
among the neighbouring kings and tribes, and bringing about 
the political alliances and groupings among them at the time. 

Preparing to leave Takshasila for the encounter with Porus, 
Alexander offered the customary sacrifices and celebrated a 
gymnastic and equestrian contest. He sent Koinos back to 
the Indus to dismantle the bridge of boats and bring it over 
to the Jhelum river, the ancient (Vitasta, the Hydaspes of the 
Greeks) . He posted Philip, the son of Machatus, at the head 
of a garrison, as satrap of Takshasila and its neighbourhood, 
and began his march to the Jhelum with his own army and the 



ALEXANDER'S CAMPAIGNS 


57 


Taxilan contingent of 5,000 men commanded by their king 
in person. The route lay in a south-easterly direction over 
difficult country and was about a hundred miles in length. On 
his march Alexander found a defile on his road occupied by 
Spitaces, a nephew of Porus, with a body of troops; these he 
soon dispersed, and then completed his march without encoun- 
tering any further opposition; Spitaces fought later on the 
side of his uncle and fell in the battle of the Jhelum. 

Battle of the Jhelum 

Alexander fixed his camp in the vicinity of the town of 
Jhelum on the right bank of the river; it was the spring of 326 
B. C. Porus had ranged his entire forces on the opposite side, 
and stationed posts at various points up and down the river to 
watch the enemy’s movements and give the alarm when he 
attempted to cross the river. The Paurava’s army drawn from 
the populous villages of his principality was an imposing force. 
Arrian records that in the final encounter with Alexander, he 
employed all his cavalry, 4,000 strong, all his chariots, 300 
in number, 200 of his elephants, and 30,000 efficient infantry. 
We should add to these numbers the 2,000 men and 120 cha- 
riots he detached earlier in the day under his son’s charge to 
meet the enemy as he was crossing the river, as also the con- 
siderable section of the army he left behind in his original camp 
to oppose the crossing of the troops that Alexander left behind 
in his camp on the opposite bank. Alexander’s army on the 
other side was made up of many elements: the heavy-armed 
Macedonian infantry carrying the long spear in phalanxes; 
and the highly disciplined cavalry; the ‘Companions’ of the 
king who were drawn from the aristocracy of Macedon and 
formed the core of the force. The original 2,000 Companions 
were much reduced in numbers and the four hipparchies into 
which they were now reorganised contained only one Mace- 
donian squadron each. There were also mercenary soldiers 
in thousands from the Greek cities and half-civilized hill-men 
from the Balkan lands serving as light troops. ‘But mingled 
with the Europeans were men of many nations. Here were 
troops of horsemen, representing the chivalry of Iran, which 
had followed Alexander from Bactria and beyond, Pashtus 



58 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and men of the Hindu Kush with their highland-bred horses, 
Central Asiatics who could ride and shoot at the same time; 
and among the camp followers one could find groups repre- 
senting the older civilizations of the world, Phoenicians inherit- 
ing an immemorial tradition of ship-craft and trade, bronzed 
Egyptians able to confront the Indians with an antiquity 
still longer than their own* (Bevan). The battle of Jhelum 
was indeed a battle of the nations. Alexander’s army had 
already become ‘a school for the fusion of races*. Of the num- 
bers in Alexander’s force we have no certain knowledge. Tra- 
dition counts 120,000 in his camp, and this number included 
camp followers, traders and scientific experts, besides the Asia- 
tic wives of the Macedonian soldiers and their children. Tarn 
estimates the number of fighting men at some 35,000 and adds 
that the known formations of Alexander render any much 
greater number impossible. All our authorities agree that 
his cavalry decidedly outnumbered that of Porus. 

Alexander soon saw that it was impracticable to cross 
the river in the face of so powerful and vigilant a foe, for the 
very sight of Porus’ elephants would have thrown his cavalry 
into confusion. He had therefore to resort to a ruse and to 
steal a passage, as Arrian puts it. He sought at first to divert 
the attention of Porus by dividing his army into several co- 
lumns with which he made frequent excursions in different 
directions, as if searching out a spot for easy passage across 
the river. At the same time he sent out foraging parties into 
the country and gathered provisions in large quantities, so as 
to lead the enemy to think that he intended to await a more 
favourable time when the melting of the snow on the moun- 
tains would stop, the river would be low and the crossing ea- 
sier. The numerous feints of Alexander kept Porus at first 
perpetually on the move in the nights, and finally he became 
indifferent to the threats of crossing that never materialised. 
‘When Alexander had thus quieted the suspicions of Porus 
about his nocturnal attempts’, he completed his plans for 
crossing the river at a point some sixteen miles above his camp. 
The spot chosen was completely screened from the view of 
Porus’ camp by a remarkable bend in the river, a thickly wood- 
ed island in its middle and a bluff on the opposite bank. And 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


59 


Porus’ men had become so used to the noises on Alexander’s 
side of the river that the actual preparations for the crossing 
were carried out with hardly any concealment and without 
the sentries of Porus suspecting anything unusual; a thunder- 
storm and a heavy downpour of rain also helped to drown the 
sound of arms and the shouting of orders. 

The actual day chosen for the crossing was advanced by 
the news that Abhisares of the hill country was, notwithstand- 
ing his recent embassy to Takshasila, hastening with his army 
to the assistance of the Paurava, and it was important to force 
the encounter before the allies joined their forces. 

Alexander laid his plans with care and precision. A 
strong division under Craterus and the troops of Takshasila 
were left behind in the main camp with orders to remain there 
as long as they saw the elephants on the opposite bank, but 
to attempt the passage of the river ‘with all possible speed’ 
whenever they should see the elephants withdrawn. Half way 
between the main camp and the island were posted the merce- 
nary cavalry and infantry under three commanders. Meleager, 
Attalus and Gorgias, with instructions to cross to the other 
side in detachments as soon as they saw the Indians fairly en- 
gaged in battle. Alexander took the bulk of the army includ- 
ing the Companions under his own command and marched 
to the selected spot keeping at a considerable distance from 
the river bank to avoid detection by the enemy. Towards 
daybreak the storm subsided and the rain ceased. The army 
crossed over to the island in boats and skin rafts specially pre- 
pared for the cavalry, without being noticed by enemy sentr- 
ies. Alexander himself crossed over in a thirty-oared galley 
accompanied by Ptolemy, afterwards king of Egypt, Perdic- 
cas, the future regent, Lysimachus, later king of Thrace, and 
Seleucus who was to inherit Alexander’s Asiatic empire; there 
also were the body-guards and one half of the hypaspists. The 
movements of the troops were concealed by the woody island, 
until, having passed it, they came within a short distance of 
the left bank. Then they were perceived by the Indian sen- 
tinels who rode off to convey the news to their camp. Mean- 
while Alexander, who was the first to disembark, formed 
the cavalry into line as they came up and moved forward at 



60 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


their head; but he soon discovered that he had not yet reached 
the mainland, but was still on another island separated from it 
by a channel, usually shallow, but swollen into a formidable 
stream on account of the rain. A ford, barely passable, was 
at length found and the infantry crossed over breast-deep in 
water and the horses swam across with only their heads above 
the stream. On this occasion Alexander is said to have ex- 
claimed: ( 0 Athenians ! Can you believe what dangers 
I undergo to earn your applause ? 9 Then crossing over, Al- 
exander drew up his forces in order of battle. He posted the 
body-guards and cavalry on the right wing, and the horse- 
archers in front of them; next to these were placed the infan- 
try with the archers and javelin-men at each extremity of the 
phalanx. 

Having made these dispositions, Alexander led his 5,000 
cavalry forward at a rapid pace; he asked the archers to 
hasten at the back to give support to the cavalry, while the 
infantry were to follow at ordinary marching pace in regular 
order. He decided to avail himself of his superior strength in 
cavalry, and was confident of defeating the entire army of 
Porus or keeping it engaged till the infantry came up; if, on 
the other hand, at the news of his marvellous crossing the enemy 
took to flight, he would be able to overtake and destroy the 
fugitives quickly. But the Paurava was no craven. When 
he received intelligence of the crossing, his first thought was 
to come up with the enemy, if possible, before he completed 
the landing; and he immediately sent one of his sons with 2,000 
cavalry and 120 chariots to go and contest the passage. But 
Alexander had made even the final passage before he came up. 
When he saw the prince advancing, Alexander thought that 
Porus was approaching with his whole army and sent the horse- 
archers to reconnoitre. When he discovered the real strength 
of the advancing force he charged with all his cavalry and 
overwhelmed it; 400 Indians fell, Porus 9 son among them. 
The chariots were no help on ground loosened by the rain and 
fell into the hands of the enemy, horses and all. When the 
survivors went and reported to Porus that Alexander had him- 
self crossed the river with the strongest division of his army, 
he was perplexed for a while by the necessity of meeting Ale- 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


61 


xander’s attack and defending the passage of the river against 
Craterus at the same time. He took a quick decision, and 
leaving a part of his elephants to check Craterus, he advanced 
to the decisive conflict with Alexander with the bulk of his 
troops. Beyond the swampy ground near the river, Porus 
found a tract of sandy soil on the Karri plain, suited to the 
movements of his forces, and there he drew up his army for 
the battle. He relied chiefly on his elephants and he placed 
them in the front of his line at intervals of a hundred feet; be- 
tween and behind the elephants were ranged the infantry with 
huge bows capable of shooting long arrows with great force, 
though the looseness of the ground due to rain handicapped 
them badly on this occasion. One half of the cavalry was 
posted on each flank and the chariots in front of them, 

Alexander, when he perceived the Indian troops drawn up 
in battle order, made his cavalry halt, to allow time for the 
infantry to come up and rest a while after their march, while 
he himself rode round the ranks considering the plan of attack 
to be followed. His aim was to make full use of the cavalry 
arm, in which he was superior, and to deprive Porus of the 
advantage he expected from the elephants and from his nume- 
rous infantry. He posted himself with the main body of ca- 
valry on the right, and stationed Koinos with two squadrons 
on the left. He would begin the battle with an attack on the 
enemy’s left wing, which he anticipated would draw out the 
enemy cavalry from the right for its protection, and in this case 
Koinos was to fall on their rear. His own phalanx command- 
ed by Seleucus and others was not to take part in the action 
until they saw the Indian cavalry and infantry thrown into 
disorder by his cavalry charge. The course of the battle an- 
swered Alexander’s expectations at every point. The 1,000 
horse-archers were first ordered to deliver the attack and the 
shower of their arrows and the charges of their horses threw 
Porus’ left wing into some confusion; Alexander then charged 
with the rest of his cavalry; the Indian cavalry of the right 
wing was summoned to the relief of the left and was taken in 
the rear by Koinos. Thus the Indian cavalry had to fight on 
two fronts, and the movements involved threw their ranks into 
confusion, and Alexander pressed his attack home before they 



62 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


could recover and complete their formation, whereupon they 
‘broke from their ranks and fled for shelter to the elephants 
as to a friendly wall 5 . The elephants were then urged against 
the Macedonian cavalry, but were soon met by the phalanx 
which advanced to take advantage of the confusion; but the 
shock of the charging elephants was too much even for the 
close formation of the phalanx and lor some time wrought 
havoc among the Greek forces and afforded a chance to the 
Indian cavalry to rally and renew the attack. But another 
charge from Alexander’s cavalry once more broke their ranks 
and drove them back upon the elephants. The engagement 
now became crowded into a narrow space, and the elephants 
being pressed from all sides became uncontrollable; many of 
them lost their drivers, and maddened by wounds, they turn- 
ed their fury against friend and foe quite indiscriminately. 
The Macedonians who retained a wide and open field on the 
whole suffered less from the elephants as they eluded 
their attack by giving way when they charged, and followed 
them and plied them with darts when they retreated. At 
length many of the elephants were killed and the rest spent 
with wounds and toil, ceased to be formidable. Then Al- 
exander ordered a general charge of horse and foot and the 
battle ended in a decisive victory for him. By this time the 
Macedonian divisions on the right bank had crossed over, 
and being fresh, were employed in the pursuit of the retreating 
Indians on whom they inflicted great slaughter. 

The losses on the Indian side were indeed terrible; but 
the Greek accounts seem to exaggerate them while they are at 
great pains to conceal the losses on their own side. ‘The loss 
of the Indians in killed’, affirms Arrian, ‘fell little short of 20,000 
infantiy and 3,000 cavalry, and all their chariots were broken 
to pieces. Two sons of Porus fell in the battle, and also 
Spitaces, the chief of the Indians of that district The ele- 

phants, moreover, that escaped destruction in the field were 
all captured. On Alexander’s side there fell about 80 of the 
6,000 infantry which had taken part in the first attack, 10 of the 
horse-archers who first began the action, 20 of the Companion 
cavalry, and 200 of the other cavalry’. Propaganda is not 
so modern an art as we may imagine! But the most decisive 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


63 


proof of the desperate nature of the struggle with the elephants 
and of the impression it produced on the minds of Alexander’s 
generals is found in the course of subsequent events. The gene- 
rals soon developed a stout opposition to further advance into 
India, and Seleucus, who had seen something of the Indian 
elephants in the battle of the Jhelum, when he became king 
was ready to cede whole provinces in order to secure an ad- 
equate number of these noble animals for his army. 

Porus himself, mounted on a tall elephant, not only direct- 
ed the movements of his forces but fought on to the very end 
of the contest; he then received a wound on his right shoulder, 
the only unprotected part of his body, all the rest of his person 
being rendered shot-proof by a coat of mail remarkable for 
its strength and closeness of fit; he now turned his elephant 
and began to retire. Alexander who had observed and ad- 
mired his valour in the field was anxious to save his life and 
sent Taxiles after him on horseback to summon him to surren- 
der; but the sight of this old enemy and traitor roused the in- 
dignation of the Paurava, who gave him no hearing and would 
have killed him, had not Taxiles instantly put his horse to the 
gallop and got beyond the reach of Porus’. Even this Alexan- 
der did not resent; he sent other messengers till at last Me- 
roes, an old friend of Porus, persuaded him to hear the message 
of Alexander. The Indian king, overpowered by thirst and 
fatigue, dismounted and took a draught of water; when he 
felt revived he allowed himself to be led to Alexander’s pre- 
sence. When the conqueror heard of his approach he rode 
forward with a few of the Companions to meet him and ad- 
mired his handsome person and majestic stature. He saw 
too with wonder that Porus did not seem to be broken or abased 
in spirit, but advanced to meet him as one brave king would 
meet another after contending with him in the defence of his 
kingdom. Alexander, who was the first to speak, requested 
Porus to say how he wished to be treated. ‘Treat me, O Al- 
exander! as befits a king’ was the answer of Porus. Pleased 
with it, Alexander replied; ‘For mine own sake, O Porus ! 
thou shalt be so treated, but do thou, in thine own behalf, ask 
for whatever boon thou pleasest’ to which Porus said that every- 
thing was included in what he had asked. Alexander not 



64 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


only reinstated Porus in his kingdom, but added to it terri- 
tory of still greater extent. Thus the Paurava took his place 
in the world-empire of Alexander for a time by the side of his 
old enemy, the king of Takshasila. Possibly Alexander meant 
that they should be a check on each other. 

The actual date of this important battle is not free from 
doubt; the Greek texts are conflicting and modern commen- 
tators are also divided; the middle of May 326 B. C., rather 
than July, seems to have the best support. 

Alexander honoured with splendid obsequies those who 
had fallen in battle, and made the customary offerings to the 
gods in acknowledgement of the victory and held the usual 
games and contests. He founded two cities, Nikaia, the city 
of victory, on the battlefield, and Boucephala on the opposite 
bank of the river, whence he had put out to cross the river at 
dawn and where Alexander’s stalwart old horse Boucephalus 
had met his end. It was his fixed policy to knit the various 
provinces of his far-flung empire by means of these cities of 
European men. Craterus was left behind with a part of the 
army to build and fortify the new cities. Later, Alexander 
seems to have struck a coin to commemorate the battle, show- 
ing him on a galloping horse in pursuit of Porus’ elephant; 
two specimens of the coin are known so far. 1 

After Jhelum 

When Alexander took the field again with a select divi- 
sion of horse and foot, he invaded the land of the Glausai or 
Glauganikai (Glauchukayanas) as they were called, a free 
tribe on the western bank of the Akesines (Ghenab) living 
in thirty-seven cities of between five and ten thousand inhabi- 
tants each and a multitude of villages. These people were 
now placed under the rule of the Paurava against whom they 
had maintained their independence for so long. From here 
Taxiles, now reconciled to Porus, was sent back to his capital. 
The Raja of Abhisara, who could not join the Paurava before 
the battle of the Jhelum, now sent his brother with forty ele- 
phants and a money present to renew the protestations of his 


i. See the Note on Early Foreign Coins in India (below). 



ALEXANDER'S CAMPAIGNS 


65 


friendship to Alexander and offer the surrender of himself 
and his kingdom into his hands; Alexander demanded the pre- 
sence of Abhisares in person, adding that if he failed to come 
Alexander might go himself with his army to look for him. 
Envoys came also from another Porus across the Chenab, per- 
haps a relative, but no friend, of the great Paurava. Here 
too Phrataphernes, the satrap of Parthia, joined Alexander 
with the Thracian troops that had been left with him. At 
the same time urgent messages reached him from Sasigupta 
at Aornos stating that the Assakenoi had risen in rebellion 
against their governor Nicanor and slain him; Tyriespes, the 
Iranian satrap of the neighbouring province on the west, and 
Philip, perhaps the same as was satrap of Takshasila, were 
asked to go and quell the insurrection and restore order. Here 
was a warning that the empire was becoming too unwieldy 
for effective control. 

Keeping close to the hills to avoid wide crossings of the 
streams, Alexander still found the Akesines (Chenab) difficult 
to cross; it was July and the rains were in full swing; the strong 
current of the river over a rocky bed, somewhat less than two 
miles in width, caused some losses to Alexander in the cross- 
ing; it is said that the other Indian name of the river, Chandra- 
bhaga, sounded ominously in Greek ears . 1 And he had to 
leave Koinos behind to manage the rest of the transport ac- 
ross, and to send the Paurava home to recruit fresh troops and 
elephants and rejoin him with these. Alexander now pressed 
on to the next river, Hydraotes (Ravi), ‘not less in breadth 
than the Akesines, but not so rapid’, leaving garrisons at suit- 
able places along his route to secure his communications. From 
the banks of that river he despatched Hephaestion with enough 
troops into the territory of the younger Porus, who had 
abandoned his country with a handful of followers when 
he learned of the esteem of Alexander for the other 

Paurava. Hephaestion was to reduce the territory of the 
fugitive Porus and of all the independent tribes on the banks 
of the Ravi, and add it to the kingdom of the great 
Paurava; he was also to build the walls of a city on the Chenab 


I. Alexandrophagus, devourer of Alexander. 



66 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


where Alexander was to settle some of his war-worn veterans 
on the return. 

Alexander crossed the Ravi and entered the land of the 
Kathaians (Kathas), who were among the best fighters in the 
Punjab and had gathered their allies for the defence of their 
fortified capital, Sangala (not yet identified). These warlike 
Kshatriya tribes had proved their mettle a short time before 
against Porus and Abhisares when they marched against them ; 
would they prevail against the new-comer from farther west ? 
Within two days of his crossing the Ravi, Alexander had re- 
ceived the submission of Pimprama (unidentified), the city 
of the Adraistai (Adhrshtas or, according to Jayaswal, Arishtas). 
But the Kathaians of Sangala camped under shelter of a low 
hill outside the city and offered a determined resistance from 
behind a triple barricade of wagons. Finding his cavalry 
of no avail against the enemy, Alexander led the infantry on 
foot and after much hard fighting, compelled the Indians 
to seek refuge behind the city walls. Alexander now closely 
invested the city, and Porus joined him with a force of 5,000 
Indians and several elephants; the besieged made a plan of 
escape by night across a shallow lake on one side of the city, 
but it was betrayed to Alexander, who fell upon the fugitives 
and forced them back into the city, after inflicting losses on them. 
Military engines then began to batter the walls, but before a 
breach was effected, the Macedonians carried the walls by es- 
calade. The city was taken, many of the Kathaians were killed, 
and more taken prisoner. The desperate nature of the fight- 
ing is clear; the Greek accounts admit an unusually large 
number of slain and wounded in Alexander’s army; and Al- 
exander razed the city to the ground. The inhabitants of 
two neighbouring cities, the allies of the Kathaians, escaped 
a similar fate by abandoning their cities in good time. 

On the Be as 

Alexander asked Porus to garrison the country and him- 
self pushed on to the Hyphasis (Beas) , byond which, it was 
reported, lay an exceedingly fertile country inhabited by brave 
agriculturists enjoying an excellent system of government 
under an aristocracy which exercised its power with justice and 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


67 


moderation; besides, the land was well stocked with elephants 
of superior size and courage. While he was encamped on the 
Beas, Alexander was told by a chieftain named Bhagala 
(Panini knew the name) about the extent and power of the 
Nanda empire, and Porus confirmed his statements. Such 
information whetted Alexander’s eagerness to advance fur- 
ther; but his troops, especially the Macedonians, had begun 
to lose heart at the thought of the distance they had travelled 
from their homes and the hardships and dangers they had been 
called upon to face after their entry into India. And at the 
Beas the army mutinied and refused to march further. Al- 
exander convoked an assembly of the officers and sought to 
rouse their enthusiasm by recounting the glory of their past 
achievements, by demonstrating how very near they h id 
come to dominion over the whole world, what rich rewards 
awaited them at the completion of their task, and what dangers 
might imperil their young empire if they left some nations 
unconquered; he cajoled and flattered them, — all in vain. After 
a long and painful silence, Koinos summoned up courage 
to speak for the whole army. ‘You see yourself’, he said, ‘how 
many Macedonians and Greeks started with you, and how 
few of us are left. From our ranks you sent away home from 
Baktra the Thessalians as soon as you saw they had no stomach 
for further toils, and in this you acted wisely. Of the other 
Greeks, some have been settled in the cities founded by you, < 
where all of them are not willing residents; others still share 
our toils and dangers. They and the Macedonian army have 
lost some of their numbers in the fields of battle ; others have 
been disabled by wounds ; others have been left behind in diffe- 
rent parts of Asia, but the majority have perished by disease. 

A few only out of many survive, and these few possessed no 
longer of the same bodily strength as before, while their spirits 
are still more depressed. All those, whose parents are still 
living, have a yearning to see them — a yearning to see their 
wives and children — a yearning to see were it but their 
native land itself, a desire pardonable in men who would re- 
turn home in great splendour derived from your munificence 
and raised from humble to high rank, and from indigence 
to wealth. Seek not, therefore, to lead them against their 



68 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


inclinations, for you will not find them the same men in the face 
of dangers, if they enter without heart into their contests with 
the enemy. 5 He exhorted Alexander to return home first, and 
then form a fresh expedition if he wished it. He also uttered 
an ominous warning against the visitations of the deity which 
no man can foresee and guard against. The army applauded 
the speech, Alexander resented it, and in his wrath announced 
that he was going forward himself with those who would follow 
him willingly while the rest might go home and tell their friends 
that they had left their king in the midst of his enemies. He 
withdrew into his tent and shut himself in for three days. The 
mood of the soldiers did not change, and Alexander recognised 
that after Jhelum and Sangala his army had no desire to meet 
another Aratta people across the Beas , who had more and 
better elephants than Porus. It was a severe blow to Alexan- 
der, who saved his face by offering a sacrifice preliminary to 
crossing the river and finding the omens unfavourable to the 
enterprise. He then proclaimed his decision to return, and 
the army received it with tears of joy and grateful shouts. 

The Return 

Alexander built twelve colossal altars to the gods who 
had led him thus far as a conqueror, and then, after a solemn 
sacrifice and games, he began to retrace his steps to the Ravi 
and the Chenab. Plutarch records, it is not clear on what 
authority, that even in his day the kings of Magadha continued 
to hold these altars in veneration. All traces of them have 
disappeared long since. 

The country west of the Beas was committed to the charge 
of Porus — ‘Seven nations in all, containing more than 2,000 
cities’. While he was making preparations on the Chenab 
for his voyage to the sea, he received another embassy from 
Abhisares accompanied by Arsakes, ruler of the neighbour- 
ing country of Urasa; Abhisares himself was ill and could 
not come, as the ambassadors Alexander had sent to him 
attested. Abhisares was now made satrap of his own domi- 
nions and Arsakes placed under him. Here too Alexander 
received welcome reinforcements, comprising 5,000 Thracian 
cavalry, 7,000 infantry sent by Harpalus, the king’s cousin 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


69 


and satrap of Babylon, and 25,000 suits of armour inlaid with 
silver and gold which were at once distributed to the troops 
who badly needed them. After another sacrifice he recrossed 
the Chenab and reached the Jhelum where he repaired the 
damage caused by the rains to his two new cities and attended 
to other affairs of the country. 

Somewhere near the land of the Kathaians lay the country 
of Saubhuti, the king who issued the well-known series of silver 
drachms bearing his name in Greek as Sophytes; the name 
of his country Subhuta is mentioned by Panini. Its exact 
location is uncertain; Arrian puts it on the Hydaspes, while 
others place it farther East. Gurtius records a dramatic in- 
terview between the tall and handsome Saubhuti and Alexan- 
der in which Saubhuti offered his submission to the conqueror, 
whom he entertained with splendour afterwards. The fa- 
mous hunting dogs of his country were exhibited to the foreig- 
ners who were greatly impressed by them. 

On the Jhelum Alexander completed his fleet by impress- 
ing all available country craft and constructing a large number 
of galleys, with the excellent timber that was ready, and the 
necessary transports for horses. In the end there were 800 
ships in all. As these preparations were being made, Koinos 
fell ill and died, a loss both to Alexander and the army. 
Alexander took with him on the ships all the hypaspists, the ar- 
chers, the Agrianians and the corps of the horse-guards. The 
rest marched in three divisions, Craterus on the right bank, 
Hephaestion with the elephants on the left, and Philip, 
satrap of the territory west of the Jhelum, following at an inter- 
val of three days; the Nysian cavalry were now sent back to 
Nysa. The naval squadron was commanded by Nearchus, 
Alexander’s own ship being piloted by Onesicritus. The 
start was made early in November 326 with due solemnity and 
in proper order as Alexander poured libations out of a golden 
bowl to the Hydaspes, the Akesines and the Indus, and to 
Heracles and Ammon. The vast procession moved towards 
the sea as the wooded banks of the river echoed the shouts of 
the rowers and the beats of the oars. The people who had 
thronged the banks to see the strange spectacle followed the 
fleet to a considerable distance, for they had never before seen 



70 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


horses on board ship; and the extraordinary mixture of races 
and garbs among the crews must have furnished a picturesque 
sight. 

On the third day Alexander halted at a place where Cra- 
terus and Hephaestion had pitched their camps each on his 
side of the river. All of them waited there for two days till 
Philip joined them and then he was sent off to the Akesines 
in advance, the other generals being instructed to follow him. 
The Malloi (Malavas) and the Oxydrakoi (Kshudrakas) were 
getting ready to give a hostile reception to the invader, and 
Alexander wanted to press on quickly and attack them before 
they completed their dispositions. On the fifth day after 
starting again from that place, Alexander came to the con- 
fluence of the Hydaspes and the Akesines. The courses of 
t rivers in the Punjab and Sindh have changed so completely 
that it is altogether impossible to follow the descriptions of the 
ancient historians with the aid of modern maps. The con- 
fluence of the two rivers which most probably occurred much 
earlier in their course in Alexander’s time than at present, was 
a thundering rapid on a narrow bed full of dangerous eddies 
and whirlpools; the very noise of the waters unnerved the sai- 
lors and the best exhortations of the pilots were of no avail; 
many ships were damaged, and* two of them sank with the 
greater part of their crew. But soon the river began to widen 
out and the fleet was moored in safety in a roadstead on the 
right bank, away from the current. The damaged crafts were 
repaired and Nearchus was ordered to sail downward till he 
reached the confines of the land of the Malloi where all the 
troops were to gather together and await orders. 

Republican Tribes 

Alexander himself landed with a body of picked troops 
and made an inroad against the Siboi (Sibis) and the Agalassoi 
(Agrasrenis) to prevent their joining the powerful confederacy 
of the Malloi lower down the river. The Sibis, a wild people 
clad in skins and armed with clubs, who claimed descent 
from the soldiers of Hercules, made their submission when 
Alexander encamped near their capital. Their neighbours, the 
Agalassoi, were not so amenable; they had mustered an army 


ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


71 


of 40,000 foot and 3,000 horse and offered battle. They fought 
hard in the field and in the streets of their city, and many 
Macedonian soldiers fell; this roused the fury of Alexander, 
who set fire to the city and massacred large numbers of the 
inhabitants, condemning many others to slavery; a bare 3,000 
sued for mercy and were spared. 1 Alexander then rejoined 
the fleet. 

From his camp below the confluence of tbe Jhelum and 
the Chenab, Alexander planned a great drive against the 
tribal confederations of the Malavas, and their allies, the 
Kshudrakas, who lived farther tot he East along the Beas. 
While he himself with his favourite troops would deliver the 
main attack, Kephaestion, who had gone in advance, and 
Ptolemy, who was to follow behind, would prevent the enemy’s 
attempts to escape in either direction. Nearchus was to take 
the fleet to the next confluence of the Chenab with the Ravi, 
where all forces were to assemble again at the end of the cam- 
paign. 

Alexander struck across fifty miles of waterless desert and 
completely surprised the first city of the Malavas he came 
against; the men, who were abroad in the fields unarmed, 
offered no resistance and were simply butchered; the rest were 
shut up in the city, guarded by a cordon of cavalry round the 
walls till the infantry came up. Then Perdiccas was sent for- 
ward to the next city, which he was to invest without attempting 
to storm the place till Alexander came up. The first city was 
now carried by assault, the citadel in the centre of it holding 
out somewhat longer; practically all the garrison were killed. 
Meanwhile Perdiccas reached the city against which he had 
been sent, and found it deserted ; he rode in hot pursuit of the 
fugitives and overtook and killed some, but the bulk of them 
managed to escape him to the marshes of the river and beyond. 

Soon Alexander came up and joined the pursuit; many 
of the Malavas were overtaken and slain while crossing the 
Ravi, but others made good their escape to a position of great 
natural strength which was also strongly fortified; here they 
were attacked by Peithon, who carried the fortress by assault 


i. Diodorus xvii, 96 



72 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and made slaves of all who had fled to it for refuge. The next 
place to be attacked was a city of the Brahmins to which the 
Malavas had flocked; here the resistance was desperate and 
most of the five thousand defenders sold their lives dear, only 
a few being taken prisoners. After a day’s rest for the army, 
Alexander resumed the pursuit and, when he found the cities 
empty, he had the jungles scoured for fugitives, and his sol- 
diers had instructions to kill everyone that was caught, unless 
he surrendered voluntarily. He himself marched against the 
chief city of the Malavas; learning that they had recrossed the 
Ravi and were ready to obstruct his passage, Alexander has- 
tened to where they had dawn up in battle array, some 50,000 
in numbers according to Arrian, on the right bank of the Ravi; 
he plunged into the stream with his horse, and the Malavas, 
not aware of the weakness of the force which Alexander took 
with him, withdrew from the bank without opposing the pas- 
sage; when they saw the true position they returned to the 
fight. But Alexander kept them engaged with light charges 
till his infantry came up. The Malavas now withdrew into 
the nearest stronghold, being hotly pursued by the enemy. In 
the assaults that followed the next day, the main walls of the 
city were yielded with little resistance; the citadel held out, 
and in the assault on it Alexander exposed himself in a way 
that nearly cost him his life; scaling ladders were few, and 
Alexander got up one of them, being the first to appear on the 
wall, a conspicuous target because of his shining arms; to es- 
cape the danger, he jumped within the citadel and only a few 
of his companions could join him there at once; they maintain- 
ed an unequal contest for some time, but the arrows of the 
Malavas killed some of them, and Alexander himself was deeply 
wounded in the chest, and fainted with loss of blood when the 
arrowhead was pulled out by Perdiccas. Possibly Alexander 
adopted the desperate expedient to keep up the morale of his 
troops in this difficult war. The danger to their king madden- 
ed the Greek troops and wdien they managed to gain the citadel 
by scrambling up the earthen walls and breaking In the gates, 
they did not spare man, woman or child. 

When Alexander was still here, recovering from the 
wound, the rumour spread to the main camp that he had 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


73 


died of it. Even when he had himself conveyed to their 
midst in a few days, they still doubted if he was really 
alive; to carry conviction to his soldiers, he rode a 
horse when he should have been conveyed in a litter and 
walked some distance to his tent, and there was universal joy 
and relief in the camp. Curtius gives a long account (IX 6) 
of the generals’ friendly impeachment of Alexander’s rashness, 
and his defence; T measure myself not by the span of age, but 
by that of glory’. 

What was left of the Malava people after the decimation 
of the war sent in their submission now, and the Kshudrakas, 
who had been holding aloof so long as the swiftness of Alexan- 
der’s movements left them no chance of going to aid the Mala- 
vas, also sent their representatives with full authority to con- 
clude a treaty with the invader. These ambassadors, a hundr- 
ed in number, says Curtius, ail rode in chariots and were men 
of uncommon stature and of a very dignified bearing. Their 
robes were of linen and embroidered with inwrought gold and 
purple. Alexander accepted their excuses and entertained 
them on a sumptuous scale before he sent them back; they 
returned in a few days "with presents for Alexander which con- 
sisted of 300 horsemen, 1,030 chariots, each drawn by four 
horses, 1,000 Indian bucklers, a great quantity of linen cloth, 
100 talents of steel, some tame lions and tigers of extraordi- 
nary size, the skins also of very large lizards, and a quantity of 
tortoise shells’. Alexander, demanded, according to Arrian, 
a thousand of their best men as hostages, and when they came, 
he did not like to keep them but sent them back. The two 
nations which had thus formally submitted were attached to 
the satrapy of Philip. But the campaign against the Mala- 
vas was no unalloyed success. As a record of mere slaughter 
it stands out unique even in the blood-stained annals of Al- 
exander’s Indian campaigns. The deep wound in his chest, 
the result of a desperate expedient, left him weakened and 
indirectly hastened his end. The stout opposition encounter- 
ed among the Brahmins of the Punjab and the cities of the 
Malavas was indeed the beginning of the reaction that was 
soon to wipe out all traces of Alexander from India and to 
establish the empire of the Mauryas. 



74 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Voyage dong the lower Indus 

The progress of the flotilla down theChenaband the Indus 
cannot be traced ; nor can the confluences of the rivers men- 
tioned by the Greek writers be identified. Arrian mentions the 
junctions of the Ravi with the Chenab, and of the combined 
stream with the Indus. More ships were built, and more 
tribes submitted along the course, the Abastanoi, (Ambash- 
thas), Xathaoi (Kshatriyas) and Ossadioi (Vasatis). The 
confluence of the Indus and the Chenab was fixed as the sou- 
thern boundary of the satrapy of Philip; a city was founded 
there and d ckyards constructed. Complaints reached about 
this time against Tyriespes, the satrap of Paropamisadai, and 
he was replaced by Oxyartes, the father of Roxana, Alexander* 
favourite wife. 

The country below the last confluence differed from the 
Punjab in its political and social conditions, which have been 
noted with surprise by the Greek writers. There were no free 
tribes here, but principalities ruled by kings whose Brahmin 
counsellors had great influence with them and the people. 
Alexander first sailed down the river to the ‘royal seat’ of the 
Sogdoi, where he founded another city with dockyards for the 
future trade of the city. He appointed Peithon, the son of 
Agenor, satrap of the lower Indus valley and the sea-board. 

The greatest king of this region was known to the Greeks 
by the name Musicanus (Muchukarna ?). He did not offer 
his submission or even send presents, but when surprised by 
the sudden arrival of Alexander in his country, he adopted the 
course of prudence, tendered his submission and was confirmed 
in his territory though a garrison was installed in the citadel 
of his capital (Alor?), which Craterus was to fortify adequately. 
Alexander then took a number of cities with much booty, all 
from a chieftain named Oxycanus who was made prisoner. 
Sambus had abandoned his capital Sindimana when he heard 
that Alexander had made friends with his arch-enemy Musi- 
canus; his relatives explained the situation to Alexander and 
offered presents, which w*ere accepted. But the most irrecon- 
cilable enemies of the foreigners in this region were the Brah- 
mins (Brahmanako nama Janapadah- Patahjali) and one of 
their cities was carried by storm and all its inhabitants put to 



ALEXANDER'S CAMPAIGNS 


75 


death. Meanwhile Musicanus, acting probably on the advice 
of his ministers, threw off his allegiance; Peithon who was 
sent against him suppressed the revolt with a strong hand. He 
destroyed some cities and placed garrisons in others; he took 
Musicanus captive and produced him before Alexander, who 
ordered that he should be executed along with his instigators. 

Then came the ruler of Patala and the delta country and 
offered his submission. He was sent back to his capital with 
orders to prepare for the reception of the expedition. Dio- 
dorus states that in this region there were two hereditary kings 
and a council of elders; if that was so, one of them set out to 
meet Alexander and gain time, while the other was preparing 
for a flight; for Alexander found Patala totally deserted when 
he came to the city. From here, Craterus was sent away with 
a large section of the army with all the elephants by the route 
leading through the Mula pass, Arachosia (Kandahar) and 
Drangiana (Seistan). With the rest of the army Alexander 
continued his course downstream and reached Patala in the 
middle of July 325 B. C.; when he found the city deserted, he 
sent his emissaries to overtake the fugitives and persuade them 
to return in safety to their lands and cultivate them as for- 
merly, and so most of the people did return to their homes. 

At Patala the Indus divided into two large rivers. Al- 
exander foresaw a big future for the city and Hephaestion was 
directed to build a citadel and a harbour there. Alexander 
set out with some ships to explore the western arm of the river; 
the task was rendered difficult by lack of knowledgeable pilots, 
the whole country having been deserted by its inhabitants, and 
by the damages to his fleet due to a storm and the bore, the 
tidal wave that rushes with great violence up the mouths of some 
Indian rivers. Some native pilots were at last discovered and 
the vessels were steered to the open sea. Alexander offered 
sacrifices int^vo islands in the river to some gods as prescribed 
by the Egyptian oracle of Ammon, and in the open sea he sacri- 
ficed bulls to the sea god Poseidona nd after pouring a liba- 
tion he flung the golden goblet into the sea, praying for the 
safety of Nearchus and his fleet in the ensuing voyage. When 
he returned to Patala, he found that Peithon, who had been 
left behind to settle colonists in the newly fortified cities and 



76 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


suppress the last embers of rebellion, had arrived after com- 
pleting the task. 

Exploration and return to Babylon 
Alexander now explored the eastern branch of the river, 
found that it gave easier access to the sea, and came by a 
large sized lake, on the shore of which he caused a harbour 
to be built, as a starting point for Nearchus; he ordered wells 
to be dug along the coast and provisions to be collected. The 
exact location of this lake is not easy to decide; it may have 
been the Rann of Cutch or the Samarah lake to the west of 
Umarkot. Alexander returned to Patala and completed his 
plans for leaving India. The Cretan Nearchus, who had suc- 
cessfully navigated the rivers during a long voyage of little less 
than a year, was to bring the fleet from the mouth of the Indus 
along the coast into the Persian Gulf andr ejoin him at the 
mouth of the Euphrates, while he himself would march with 
the army by land across Gedrosia keeping as close to the fleet 
as practicable; he is said to have chosen this difficult route 
because no one hadt raversed it except thel egendary Semir- 
amis and Cyrus, who escaped with just a few followers and 
he wanted tos urpasst hem. 

Nearchus was timed to start with the N. E. monsoon (late 
October) ; but the local tribes became threatening after Al- 
exander’s departure and he sailed down the eastern arm of the 
Indus late in September and had to cut his way across a sand 
bar at the western mouth; contrary winds detained him for 
twenty- four days at ‘Alexander’s harbour’, somewhere near 
Karachi. When the monsoon arrived he sailed again, moving 
continuously along an unknown hostile coast where he had 
to land often for water and provisions. After traversing about 
a hundred m les, he came to a good harbour at the mouth of 
the Hab river; beyond it he coasted along the country of the 
Oreitai, and at a place called Kokala he came by a store of 
provisions deposited for the fleet by Alexander, and established 
contact with Leonnatus, who was fresh from an important 
victory against the Oreitai. There was an exchange of men 
between them, and the fleet was repaired and victualled be- 
fore Nearchus sailed again. 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


77 


Alexander started in September for his famous march 
through Southern Gedrosia (Mekran). His plan was to support 
the fleet, which needed support, by digging wells and forming 
depots of provisions at convenient points. When he reached 
the Arabios (Hab) he found the country deserted, as the Arabi- 
tai tribesmen had fled in terror. Crossing the river, he 
entered Las Bela, the land of the Oreitai, who offered a slight 
and ineffectual opposition to his progress. One of their vill- 
ages, Rambakia, pleased Alexander by its situation and He- 
phaestion was instructed to colonise it with Arachosians 
(Curtius). When he passed on to the country of the Gedrosi, 
he appointed Apollophanes satrap over the Oreitai and left 
Lenonnatus to reduce the country and help in thes cheme of 
colonisation. Leonnatus fought a pitched battle with the 
tribesmen, inflicting great losses on them, a nd the satrap desig- 
nate, Apollophanes, was among those who fell on his side. 
Alexander with the rest of the army crossed intoJGedrosia, and 
kept as close to the coast as possible to be able to serve his fleet. 
The route lay across a burning arid desert, and the obstacle of 
the mountain range ending in Gape Malan seems to have 
forced him into a more appalling region inland, up the valley 
of the Hingol. ‘The blazing heat and the want of water’, 
says Arrian, ‘destroyed a great part of the army, and especially 
the beasts of burden, which perished from the great depth of 
the sand, and the heat which scorched like fire, while a great 
many died of thirst’. The guides lost the way, and marching 
was possible only by night on account of the day’s heat; ‘they 
ate the baggage-animals and burnt the carts for firewood’. 
At last they worked their way to the coast near the harbour of 
Pasni, where they found good drinking water. They reached 
Pura, the capital of the Gedrosians, sixty days after they had 
left the country of Oreitai, and then the army had some rest. 

Alexander was advancing into Karmania, when tidings 
reached him that Philip, the satrap of the Indian country, 
had been murdered by his rebellious mercenaries; he heard 
also that the Macedonian body-guards of Philip had put his 
murderers to death. He could then do no more than send a 
message to Taxiles and Eudemus, a Thracian commander, 
asking them to assume charge of the province until he could 



78 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


send a satrap to govern it. About this time Craterus joined 
him with his division of the army and the elephants. Here 
also Alexander’s anxiety about the fleet was allayed by Near- 
chus coming over to meet him and tell him of his strange en- 
counters with whales and savages and of the safety of all the 
fleet except four vessels lost in the voyage. At the reunion 
all the past hardships were forgotten and some days were given 
to a round of feasting and sports. Then the army and the 
fleet proceeded to Susa, which they reached in the spring of 
324 B. C. The death of Alexander in Babylon in the following 
year put an end to his project of world empire. 

Results 

The consequences of Alexander’s invasion of India have 
been exaggerated out of all proportion by some writers and 
altogether denied by others. That Alexander meant to rule 
his Indian conquests as integral parts of his empire is clear from 
his division of the country into satrapies on the Persian model 
and from the great care he bestowed on the settlement of colo- 
nies of his followers at strategic points and on the location of 
dockyards and harbours along the Indus to foster the growing 
trade of the future. Arrian’s account, as we have seen, enables 
us to distinguish five separate divisions of the conquered country ; 
first there was the Paropamisadae with an Alexandria, under 
the Caucasus for its capital, ruled at first by Tyriespes and 
later by Oxyartes; the second was under Philip, the son of 
Machatus, at first satrap of Takshaiila, in charge not only 
of the principality of Ambhi but also of what had been the sat- 
rapy of Nicanor in the lower Kabul valley; to his charg e was 
also given all the territory up to the Jhelum on the east and 
the confluence of the Indus and the Chenab in the south; the 
third province was the extended dominion of the Paurava 
where he was both king and satrap; the fourth was the satrapy 
of Peithon, the son of Agenor, which covered the Indus valley 
below the confluence and extended to the Hab on the west; 
lastly, there was the territory of Abhisara in Kashmir in a some- 
what less intimate relation to the empire. We can hardly 
doubt that, if Alexander had lived to a normal age, the connec- 
tion of the satrapies with the rest of the empire would have been 



ALEXANDER’S CAMPAIGNS 


79 


maintained and developed. As it is, we do not know if Al- 
exander even appointed a permanent successor to Philip 
as he intended. His generals recognised, soon after his death, 
that they were not equal to the task of maintaining their hold 
on all the territories that Alexander had brought under his 
sway; perhaps even Alexander felt the need for readjustments 
in the face of growing troubles in India after his return. In 
withdrawing from the Indian provinces and transferring 
Peithon to the west of the Indus in the second partition of the 
empire (321 B. C.) his successors evidently carried out what 
they knew to have been his own wish in the matter. The 
garrisons ofEuropean soldiers and the colonists in the different 
cities found their surroundings becoming more and more un- 
congenial and they rapidly faded from most of the stations. 
Only Eudemus at the head of the Thracian band of soldiers 
continued for some time as leader of the Hellenes in India; 
but even he quitted the scene by 317 B. C., taking with him 
the war elephants of Porus whom he had slain treacherously. 
Taxiles also disappeared from view soon after, we do not know 
how. And some years afterwards Seleucus surrendered his 
distant provinces to the Indian emperor in exchange for war- 
elephants. 

But the invasion itself, though it lasted less than two 
years, was too great an occurrence to leave things just as they 
were. It showed clearly that an emotional love of indepen- 
dence was no match to the disciplined strength of a determined 
conqueror, though we should not fail to note that in this ins- 
tance the states of North-Western India had^o contend against 
one of the greatest generals of the world. , It left the warrior 
tribes of the Indus river system weakened and broken, and 
thus paved the way for the easy extension of Mauryan ruld 
"Tt^demonstrated the need for a wiser political policy on the 
part of the Indian rulersr\ Who can doubt that the lessons 
of the invasion and the example of Alexander go far to account 
for the career of Chandragupta and the establishment of his 
empire ? At any rate the role of Taxiles does not recur in 
Indian history for the next fifteen centuries. Lastly, though 
India was not Hellenized at any time in the sense in which 
Western Asia w r as, there was much active contact between 



80 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


India and the Hellenistic kingdoms, and in the realms of art, 
currency and astronomy India became a debtor; the fine silver 
coins of Sophytes with their Greek legends and their Attic 
weight standard are among the earliest witnesses to this de- 
velopment. On the European side, the expedition of Alexander 
brought a vast increase in the knowledge of India, which was 
for the most part carefully recorded by contemporaries, and 
availed of by later writers now accessible to us. ‘Not a few of 
Alexander’s officers and companions were men of high attain- 
ments in literature and science, and some of their number 
composed memoirs of his wars, in the course of which they 
recorded their impressions of India and the races by which 
they found it inhabited’ (M’Crindle). Some wild tales indeed 
gained currency; but when all subtraction is made, the extent 
of new knowledge acquired was considerable. But even here 
exaggeration is easy; it has been said that the age of Alexander 
must take rank with that of Columbus as a time when a new 
world was discovered to Europe. But Alexander did not dis- 
cover an unknown world; Greece and India had known each 
other for many generations, and trade contacts and other rela- 
tions had long been established through the medium of the 
Persian empire. And Craterus in his journey from the Indus 
valley to Karmania evidently followed an already established 
route, though the navigation of the Indus, and the rounding 
of the coast of the Makran and the Persian Gulf by Nearchus, 
were a distinct gain to geography and trade, and the march 
of Alexander across Gedrosia a marvellous achievement of 
daring and leadership. The actual gain in the knowledge 
about India was much greater under Alexander’s successors 
than in his own day; but he founded the empire which, even 
when it broke up, long retained in its parts, the impetus his 
genius had given it. 





North 









CHAPTER III 


INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 

1 . Introductory 

India and Greece met in the Persian empire some two 
centuries before the time of Alexander. Even earlier, Indian 
ideas seem to have travelled far into the West and influenced 
Pythagoras and his followers; true, we cannot now say by what 
channel this contact was made, but the similarities between 
Pythagorean thought and that of the Upanishads, and between 
the organisation and ceremonial of the Pythagorean fraternity 
and the ancient ascetic orders of India are too close to be treated 
as chance coincidences or the results of parallel developments. 
Aristoxenus (c. 330 B. C-), a Greek writer on harmonics and a 
pupil of Socrates, is known to have mentioned the visit of an 
Indian philosopher to Athens and the meeting between him and 
Socrates at which the scope of philosophy was discussed; and 
the celebrated simile of the rope and the snake, which is found 
in Sextus Empiricus and nowhere else in Greek or Latin litera- 
ture, has been traced to Pyrrho, the founder of the Sceptic sys- 
tem, who accompanied Alexander to India. 1 

The accounts of any country and its people by foreign obser- 
vers are of great interest to the historian of the country; for they 
enable him to know what impression the country made upon 
the minds of such observers and to estimate with greater con- 
fidence the part played by it in the general history of the world. 
And where, as in the case of ancientjadia, the native sources 
of history fail him partly or altogether at some points, the writ- 
ings of foreigners gain great value in his eyes. Yet it is easy 


i . Richard Garbe, The Philosophy of Ancient India, pp. 39 — 46, seems 
to me to give a much more balanced criticism of earlier writers, particularly 
of Leopold von Schroeder, than A. B. Keith, Pythagoras and the Doctrine 
of Transmigration, JRAS, 1909, pp. 569 — 606. See also Radhakrishnan, 
Eastern Religions and Western Thought , pp. 140 — 42. Like Garbe, I would re- 
strict the scope of my observations to Pythagoras and his school. For Aris- 
toxenus cited by Eusebius, see Rawlinson, India and Greece in Ind. Art and 
Lett i-n\ X {T936}, pp. 57 — 3 . For Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus. S.J. Warren, 
Het Slang en Truw voorbeeld by Sextus Empiricus en in Indie, Yersl. en Med . 
der kon. Ahad. tan Wetemchappen , Amsterdam, IV, ix, pp. 230 — 244. 



82 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


to exaggerate the value of the Greek writings on India. The 
Greek writers did evince a commendable interest in observing 
and recording facts; but they were also credulous purveyors 
of all the fable and gossip that came their way. The few who 
wrote before the invasion of Alexander did so mostly from hear- 
say and had little direct knowledge of India. The scientists 
and men of action who accompanied Alexander must have 
found most of their time taken up with planning, marching 
and fighting in a hostile and unknown country, and the 
wonder is that they succeeded in doing what they did to make 
India known to their countrymen; and the lands they traversed 
were but the fringe of Hindusthan far from the genuine cen- 
tres of Hindu culture in the heart of the country. The am- 
bassadors of the Hellenistic kings who came after Alexander, 
in particular Megasthenes, had better opportunities of study- 
ing the country and its people as their missions took them into 
their midst. But being ignorant of the language of the people, 
they must have depended on interpreters of sorts and expe- 
rienced considerable difficulty in comprehending correctly 
what they saw and heard. The Chinese pilgrims of a later age I 

who had command of the Sanskrit idiom were much better \ 

placed in this respect; but their interests were not so wide. 

Lastly, with very few exceptions, Herodotus being the most 
notable of them, all the original writings have perished, and 
we now depend on excerpts preserved by later writers and 
compilers, who, in turn, had access only at second hand to the 
matter they quoted. We lack the means of forming an inde- 
pendent integral judgment of most of our ultimate authori- 
ties. Nevertheless it is useful to study these excerpts with care, 
for much can be learnt thus of the geography, physical and 
human, of India as it was understood by contemporary Greek 
writers, of its fauna and flora, of its society, religious condition, 
and economic activity. 

2. Scylax 

The first Greek to write a book on India w 7 as the sea-cap- 
tain Scylax of Caryanda whom Darius sent out c. 509 B.C. on 
a voyage of exploration to find out where the Indus emptied 
itself into the sea. He is said to have started from the city of 4 \ 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 


83 


Kaspatyrus in the Paktyikan district, sailed down the stream 
to the sea, and after a voyage of thirty months, reached the 
place whence the Egyptian king Necho sent the Phoenicians 
to sail round Libya. ‘After this voyage was completed’, says 
Herodotus, ‘Darius conquered the Indians, and made use of the 
sea in those parts’. Scylax’s voyage might have taken him 
through the lower Kabul valley, parts of Kashmir and the 
bulk of the Indus country. We know little of Scylax’s book; 
we do not hear of it as being a guide to Alexander in his voyage. 
It is certain however that Scylax started some of the fables 
about Indian peoples which coloured Greek traditional beliefs 
about India for many centuries ; there is a reference in Philos- 
tratus’ Life of Apollonius of Tyana, to ‘men that are shadow- 
footed or have long heads’ and ‘the other poetical fancies which 
the treatise of Scylax recounts’ about peoples who ‘didn’t live 
anywhere on the earth, and least of all in India.’ Aristotle 
cites Scylax’s statement that in India kings had a marked 
superiority over those they governed. 1 

The antiquarian and geographer, Hecataeus of Miletus 
(B. C. 549-486) 2 , might have used Scylax; he opens one of his 
works, Inquiries , with the admirable statement: ‘What I write 
here is what I consider true; for the tales of the Greeks appear 
to me to be many and ridiculous.’ From his other work, the 
Geography , some Indian names have survived: they are those 
of the river Indus; of two cities, Kaspapyros, a city of Gandhara, 
Multan according to another view, probably the same as Hero- 
dotus’ Kaspatyrus, and Argante, a city in the valley of the 
Indus; and of some peoples, viz., the Opiai, the Kalatiai, the 
Sciapodes (the shadow-footed people of Scylax) and perhaps 
also the Pygmies. Beyond the Indus was a sandy waste, a 
statement in which Hecataeus is followed by Herodotus, their 
knowledge of India being mostly limited to the Persian part 
of it. 


1. The chief reference to Scylax is Herodotus. IV 44. See Philos- 
tratus. The Life of Apollonius of Tyana, III, 47 and Aristotle, Politics , V II, 

3 * 

2. For Hecataeus of Miletus see Cambridge Ancient History. I\ , pp. 
518 — 19: Lassen, Ind. Alt., ii, pp. 635 — 36. Toucher, Ancient Multan , m 
Woolner Commemoration volume (Lahore 1940) pp. 89 — 105 argues that Kai- 
papyros must he identified with Multan. 



84 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


3. Herodotus 

The references to India and Indians in Herodotus (B. C. 
484-425) 1 place them in a clear light, and the monstrous 
races that formed the stock in trade of Greek writers on India 
before and after him do not make theira ppearance in his 
pages. India is to him the furthest region of the inhabited 
world towards the east, and Indians dwell nearest the rising 
of the sun. Of the Indians within the empire of Darius he 
observed that they were more numerous than any other nation 
known to him, and paid a tribute exceeding that of every other 
people, three hundred and sixty talents of gold-dust. But he 
knows that there were many other tribes of Indians, all of them 
dark-skinned, living a long way from Persia towards the south 
over whom King Darius had no authority. There were many 
tribes among Indians and they did not all speak the same lang- 
uage. Some were nomads, others not. Among the nomads 
were the Padaeans, who lived on raw flesh, including that of 
sick or old members of the tribe, who were offered in sacrifice 
to their gods — a practice attested by modern observers to have 
obtained till recently among some savage hill tribes. The same 
custom prevailed among the Kallatiai within the Persian em- 
pire. There was another tribe of marsh-dwellers who ate raw 
fish and wore garments of sedge. Herodotus’ knowledge of the 
people across the Persian border was by no means confined to 
savages. ‘There is another set of Indians whose customs are 
very different. They refuse to put any living animal to death, 
they sow no corn, and have no dwelling houses. Vegetables 
are their only food. There is a plant which grows wild in 
their country, bearing seed, about the size of millet seed, in a 
calyx: their wont is to gather this seed and having boiled it, 
calyx and all, to use it for food. If one of them is attacked 
with sickness, he goes forth into the wilderness, and lies down 
to die ; no one has the least concern either for the sick or for the 
dead.’ This is a very good account of the life of the forest- 
dwelling sages of India who used wild rice ( nlvdra ) for their 
staple food. 

r. Herodotus, III, 38, 94, 98 — 106: VII, 65, 86: McCrindle, Anc. Ind. 
Sec. 1. The citations in the text are from Rawlinson’s version, Everyman’s 
Library Edn. Strabo, XV, 1, 56 (p. 59) for Megasthenes on cannibalism. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 85 


Within the Persian empire, the Indian tribes of Paktiyika 
(Pashtu country), who dwelt northward of all the rest of the 
Indians and resembled the Bactrians in their mode of life, 
were the most warlike, and from among them were selected 
the men who were sent to procure gold from the sandy-desert. 
Herodotus gives a full account of gold-digging ants of the size 
of dogs, which threw up mounds of the gold-dust that was col- 
lected and brought away by the Indians in camel loads during 
the hottest part of the day when the ants hid themselves to es- 
cape the heat; this story in some form became a permanent 
feature of all later Greek accounts of India; Nearchus averred 
that he saw the skins of these ants and that these resembled 
the skins of leopards;^ Megasthenes connects the Derdai (Skt. 
Daradas, mod. Dards) with the gathering of ant-gold, and 
states that they diverted the attention of the ants by depositing 
the flesh of wild beasts in different places before beginning to 
remove the gold. Some ingenious scholars explain away the 
ants of the size of dogs by supposing that the ants are dervied 
from the name of gold pipllika, and that the native miners did 
keep formidable dogs which chased away the people who came 
to take the gold; such explanations raise more questions than 
they answer and are of no value. Herodotus adds that India 
got a small part of its gold supply from mining and both he and 
Megasthenes mention that some of it came from river beds . i. 2 

Herodotus notes that the beasts and birds of India were 
much bigger than those found elsewhere, except the horses, 
which were surpassed by the Median breed. He tells us of a 


i. Strabo, XV, 44, in McCrindle, Anc. Ind ., p 51 where he gives refe- 
rences to several ancient authors mentioning the gold-digging ants: also his 
Afeg. and Arrian , pp. 94 — 7. The A lahdbhdrata, (Cal. ed.), VII, i860 also 
mentions them. 

tadvai pipilikam ndma uddhritam yat-pipilikaih 
jataruparrx dro na-meyam ahdrshuh punjaso nripdh 

The Kumbakonam edition (II, 78, 80) reads wrongly kunjado for punjado. 
The remarkable identity in the expressions employed by Herodotus and in 
this verse should be noted. Modern scholars are generally inclined to trace 
to Indian sources most of the fabulous things narrated of India in the Greek 
books. Tarn, after Laufer, traces the ant-legend to Mongolian sources 
( The Greeks in Bactria and India, pp- 106 — 7). The Son river was called Era- 
noboas, Hiranyavaha, gold-carrier. 

2. Frag. XXIX, pp. 78— 9— Strabo, XV 1 : 57 - PP* 63—4. (The page 
references are, unless otherwise stated, to McCrindle s translations). Also 
Curtius, VIII, 9 — Alexander's Invasion, p. 187. 



86 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Persian governor of Babylon who ‘kept so great a number of 
Indian hounds, that four large villages of the plain were exemp- 
ted from all other charges on condition of finding them in food*. 
The Indus was for him the only river, besides the Nile, that pro- 
duced crocodiles. 1 Most interesting to the Greeks must have 
been his discovery that there were trees in India ‘the fruit 
whereof is a wool exceeding in beauty and goodness that of 
sheep. The natives make their clothes of this tree wool*. 
‘The Indians in the army of Xerxes wore cotton dresses, and 
carried bows of cane, and arrows also of cane with iron at the 
point’. Some Indians with similar equipment rode on horses 
while others used chariots drawn by horses or wild asses. 

4. Ctesias. 

Ctesias the Cnidian, who wrote a book on India 2 was 
just one generation later than Herodotus. Ctesias spent seven- 
teen years in the Persian court ( c . 416-398 B. G.) as physician 
to the Emperor Artaxerxes Mnemon. He must have had 
numerous opportunities of hearing reports of India from Per- 
sian officials who visited the country and of meeting Indian 
merchants and ambassadors who came to the Persian court; 
and he obtained permission besides from the Persian king to 
consult the state archives. But his work has not survived ex- 
cept in an abridgement of Photius, a Patriarch of Constanti- 
nople in the ninth century A.D. (858-886), and a number of 
citations by earlier writers particularly Aelian and Pliny. In 
no respect does Ctesias mark an advance upon Herodotus, and 
almost all his statements can with perfect justice be charac- 
terised as tall lies. Even the few facts to be gathered from him — 
such as that all Indians were not black, that he had seen some 
white ones among them, and that Indians were noted for their 
sense of justice, their devotion to their king and their contempt 
of death — are too vague to be accepted with confidence, parti- 
cularly from such a writer. He cannot be excused on the ground 
that Photius had a predilection for the fabulous and abridged 
his work laying stress unduly on the fabulous races and wonder- 

r. I, 192 (hounds): IV, 44 (crocodiles). 

2- McCrindlc- Ancient India as described by Ctesias the Cnidian , Calcutta, 
1882. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 87 

ful products of India that Ctesias had mentioned, and passing 
over the more valuable portions of his narrative ; for no other 
writer found anything of value in him. The case is not much 
improved by our seeking to explain his dog-headed and dog- 
faced men, pygmies and such others by a reference to like mon- 
strosities known to old Indian books. In fact Ctesias wrote him- 
self down as a fibster when he described the Martikhora (man- 
eater), a creature of the size of a lion, with the face of a man, 
capable of shooting its poisonous stings from its tail to a great 
distance and thus killing every animal except an elephant, and 
added that he saw in Persia one of these monsters sent from 
India as gift to the Persian King ! 

In truth the period between Herodotus and Alexander is 
marked by a decided setback in the Greek knowledge of India. 
The Persians lost their Indian Satrapy after some time and 
Alexander did not come across Persian officials east of the Hindu 
Kush. Even Herodotus was perhaps not much read, and 
there is no evidence that Alexander knew of his account of 
Scylax’s voyage. On the banks of the Indus he thought that 
he had reached he sources of the Nile, and on the banks of the 
Beas he told his soldiers that they were at no great distance 
from the Eastern Sea, i. e., the end of the earth in that direc- 
tion. 1 It has been doubted if Alexander ever really heard 
of the Ganges or suspected the real extent of the contemporary 
empire of Magadha; the intention attributed to him of con- 
quering the Prasii on the Ganges may well be a later legend; 
and possibly he knew of only the Sutlej and just one kingdom 
beyond, that of the Gandaridae, the conquest of which would 
bring him to the shore of the Eastern Ocean. 2 

5. Historians of Alexander 

But the expedition of Alexander was the first occasion 
when the West began to hear a good deal about India that was 
based on the direct personal observation of the reporters. By 
that time the Greeks had begun to take an active interest in 
scientific pursuits, and Alexander was himself a disciple of one 


1. Arrian, Anabasis , VI, i and V, 26: Strabo, XV, 1,25. 

2. Cf. Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History , VI, pp. 410 — 11. 



88 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of the greatest masters of human knowledge. Though in his 
wars and campaigns the first place was given to military con- 
siderations, other interests of a wider character were by no 
means forgotten, and among his lieutenants and companions 
there were many scientists and literary men who later employed 
their pens in describing what they had seen and heard wherever 
they went no less than in celebrating the martial successes 
of Alexander. They were the first to communicate to the out- 
side world more or less accurate knowledge of India, its physi- 
cal features and products, its inhabitants and their social and 
political institutions. Three or four writers stand out among 
the contemporaries of Alexander because of the frequent refe- 
rences made to them by later writers. First is Nearchus, who 
in his account of his voyage in the Persian Gulf gave generally 
dependable information on many topics he happened to touch 
on. A Cretan by birth, he had been brought up at the Macedo- 
nian court and educated along with Alexander. His memoirs 
are no longer extant, but the works of Strabo and Arrian 
contain copious extracts from them. Then comes Onesicritus, 
the chief pilot of Nearchus 1 fleet, who wrote a life of Alexander 
which is now lost. He was a follower of the Cynic philosopher 
Diogenes, and was on this account chosen by Alexander as 
best fitted to initiate contact with the Indian sages of Taksha- 
£ila. His love of the marvellous often led him into exaggera- 
tions and Strabo says tartly that ‘he may as well be called the 
master fabulist as the master pilot of Alexander ’. 1 Modern 
writers also differ in their estimates of his credibility. Aris- 
tobulus was another writer who accompanied Alexander and 
wrote a history of his wars which w r as one of the principal sour- 
ces used by Arrian in his Anabasis and by Plutarch in his life 
of Alexander. His interest seems to have been mainly geo- 
graphical; he is said to have begun writing his work very late 
in life when he was over eighty years of age, and the historical 
parts of his work seem to have suffered from the influence of 
a new rhetorical mode, and the Alexander myth that was 
already beginning to take shape. Among the contemporary 
historians of Alexander there was none to beat Kleitarchus; 


i. XV, 129: Anc. Ind pp. 34—5: Breloer, ii, p. 26. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 89 


he was the son of Deinon, a historian of Rhodes, and he accom- 
panied the expedition of Alexander. His history of the ex- 
pedition was full of invention and romance and was held in 
little esteem by those who came after him. One of Kleitarchus 5 
stories preserved by Aelian (and Strabo) is to the effect that 
Alexander and his army were once, while marching through 
a jungle, thrown in to a panic by mistaking a group of big-sized 
apes for a hostile army. 1 

6. Greek Ambassadors 

Subsequent to these writers came the ambassadors from 
the Hellenistic kingdoms to the Mauryan court, whose obser- 
vations on India were based on a wider and somewhat closer 
knowledge of the country. Among them the most celebrated 
was, of course, Megasthenes. But there were also Deimachus, 
who resided for a long time in Pataliputra, whither he was 
sent on an embassy by Seleucus to Amitraghata (Bindusara), 
the successor of Chandragupta; Patrocles, the admiral of 
Seleucus, who was sent out to explore the less known regions 
of Asia and whom Strabo described as the least mendacious 
of all writers on India whom he had consulted; Timosthenes, 
admiral of the fleet of Ptolemy Philadelphus, and Dionysius 
who, according to Pliny, was sent by the same ruler to the Indian 
King. But none of them seems to have added anything of 
real importance to what Megasthenes had stated about India. 
Megasthenes, in fact, marks the culmination of the knowledge 
which ancient Europe ever had of India. Writers who came 
after Megasthenes improved their knowledge of India’s geo- 
graphy, but their account of Indian civilisation was accurate 
only in the measure in which they followed Megasthenes. 

Megasthenes lived for some time with Sybyrtius, the Sat- 
rap of Arachosia, and from there Seleucus sent him out as am- 
bassador to the court of Chandragupta, and he visited Chandra- 
gupta often during his stay at the capital; this was of course 
after the conclusion of the treaty of alliance between Chandra- 
gupta and Seleucus (305 B*C.). 2 Megasthenes evidently 

1. Anc. Ind. in Class . Lit., pp. 148 — 49. 

2. Arrian ( Indica , V) seems to say that Megasthenes vasited Porus: 
but this has been rightly traced to a scribal error in the text of Arrian who 



90 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


knew Kabul and the Panjab very well and travelled along 
the royal road from the frontier to the capital of the Maury an 
empire. For his knowledge of the rest of India he depended 
on report. He wrote the Indika, a comprehensive work on 
India, apparently divided into four books describing the country, 
its soil, climate, animals and plants, its government and reli- 
gion, the manners of the people and their arts. He sought 
to describe many things from the King’s Court down to the 
remotest tribes. Many writers copied him assiduously in later 
times even as they cast aspersions on his veracity, as did Era- 
tosthenes and Strabo. 

Of the education and training of Megasthenes we know 
little. We may guess that he was an administrator and dip- 
lomat with a sober vision that sought to penetrate behind 
appearances and give a faithful report to his monarch of the 
strength and weakness of the neighbouring empire on the east. 
We do not know if he wrote out his work when he was in India 
or after his return to the West. Ina ny event his statements 
on the Indian State, Law and Administration must be inter- 
preted with care in the light of his natural prepossessions as an 
official of a large Hellenistic State and it is probable that some 
of them included an argument, criticism, or correction due to 
what other Greek writers before him had stated on particular 
topics. Megasthenes has often been denounced as untrust- 
worthy both by ancient and modern writers, but this charge 
applies, properly speaking, only to what he writes from hear- 
say, particularly on the fabulous races of India and on Herakles 
and the Indian Dionysus. Of the former the learned Brahmins 
of the country had a great deal to tell him, but he says that he 
did not set down everything he heard, which may be readily 
accepted in the light of the Puranic accounts of such races. 
Quite probably he fell into some errors, but as we can be cer- 
tain in no instance that we have his very words before us, it is 
always doubtful if the mistake was made by Mhgasthenes or 
the writers who used his work. Let us also remember that these 

might have said only that Chandragupta was greater than Porus, implying 
a comparison, quite natural to him, to the advantage of Megasthenes as against 
the earlier group of writers who accompanied Alexander. See McCrindie, 
Mfgasthenes and Arrian , p. 15. Lassen (11, p. 668) accepts the interpretation of 
Arrian, Anab. V, 612, that Megasthenes visited India more than once. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 91 


writers extracted from Megasthenes just those data on India 
which they considered would be of interest to their readers 
or which lent themselves to attractive literary treatment cal- 
culated to amuse them. Of the manner in which the Indika of 
Megasthenes was used by these authors, Schwanbeck remarks: 
'Since Strabo, Arrianus, and Diodorus have directed their 
attention to relate nearly the same things, it has resulted that 
the greatest part of the Indika has been completely lost, and 
that of many passages, singularly enough, three epitomes are 
extant, to which occasionally a fourth is added by Plinius.’ 1 

7. India : Size 

The statements of all ancient writers on the size of India 
and the length of its boundaries are but random guesses, and 
Strabo who has collected most of them, comments on their 
discrepancies and on the difficulty of being confident or pre- 
cise in treating: of Indian matters. Patrocles said that it was 
15,000 stadia (1,724 miles) from the southernmost point of 
India to the most northerly, and this happy guess — it could 
not have been anything more — comes very near the truth, the 
real distance being 1800 miles. Other guesses are not so happy 
and need not be mentioned, though it may be noted that Megas- 
thenes puts the length of the royal road he travelled by from the 
north-west to Pataliputra at 10,000 stadia, and adds 6,000 
stadia to it to arrive at the total breadth of the country, mak- 
ing a computation from the time taken in voyages from the 
sea up the Ganges to Pataliputra. Eratosthenes, the President 
of the Alexandrian Library from 240 to 196 B.C., was the first 


i. McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian , p. 19. Diodorus, native of Sicily, 
was a contemporary of Julius Caesar: his Bibhotheke comprised 40 books, some 
of them no longer extant: book II., chh. 35 — 42 epitomise Megasthenes: bk. 
XVII gives an account of Alexander’s invasion, and XVIII and XIX con- 
tain short notices of India: — all translated by McCrindle in his works. Arrian 
(A. D. 132) wrote the Anabasis and Indika , using the contemporary account 
of Alexander and the work of Megasthenes. Strabo came from Amasia in 
Asia Minor, c. 64 B.C. — 19 A.D., His Geography is a very comprehensive 
work: Bk. XV, chh, 1 and 2 are devoted to India and Ariana respectively, and 
are translated by McCrindle in his Ancient India as described in Classical Litera- 
ture. Strabo drew his material mostly from the contemporaries of Alexander 
and from Megasthenes. Pliny he Elder, 23 — 79 A.D., wrote a cyclopaedic 
Natural History in thirty-seven books: the sixth book contains his geography 
of India, based mainly on the Indika of Megasthenes, translated by McCrindle, 
ibid. 



92 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


real geographer of the Hellenistic age, who studied and ar- 
ranged systematically all the geographical knowledge avail- 
able in his day; but his conclusions on the position and con- 
figuration of India were far from correct. He thought that 
the country was of the shape of an irregular rhomboid with the 
Indus and the Himalayas for its shorter Western and Northern 
sides, measuring respectively 13,000 and 16,000 stadia; the 
longer sides each exceeded its opposite by 3,000 stadia. His 
orientation was completely wrong and he put the southern ex- 
tremity of the peninsula farther east than the mouth of the 
Ganges. Some idea of the exaggerated notions entertained 
of the size of India may be had from Ctesias’ opinion that 
India was not less than the rest of Asia ; he was excelled by One- 
sicritus who regarded it as the third part of the habitable world, 
while Nearchus gathered that to traverse the plains only occu- 
pied a journey of four months. 1 The existence of Ceylon 
was vaguely known to Onesicritus. 

Megasthenes greatly exaggerated the length of India from 
north to south, and put it at 22,300 stadia at its shortest. 2 But 
he is right in noting that India well nigh embraced the whole 
of the northern Tropic zone of the earth and in the extreme south 
the gnomon of the sundial may frequently be observed to cast 
no shadow or cast it to the southward (in summer) while the 
constellation of the Bear is by night invisible. 3 

8. Climate 

In India’s climate, the rains attracted their attention 
most, as they had not seen anything like them before. Aristo- 
bulus noted that rain fell for the first time after Alexander 
reached Taxila, and continued incessantly all the time he march- 
ed eastward to the Beas and back to the Jhelum; he knew that 
the monsoon (the Etesian winds as he calls them) brought the 
rain. The relatively very scanty rainfall of the lower Indus 


i. Patrocles in Strabo, II, 1.2 (Falconer, i, p. 106); other writers in 
XV, i. 10 — 2 (Anc. Ind. in Class. Lit. pp. 15 — 19). See also Megasthenes and 
Arrian. Frag f IV ff. Strabo, XV, 1, 15 (pp. 20 — 21) for Onesicritus on 
CeWon (Taprobane). 

2. Frag . VIII (p. 52). 

3. Frag. I (Dlod. II, 35), p. 30. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 93 


valley, which gets little benefit from either monsoon, did not 
escape him, and he notes that in the spring and summer of 325 
B.C., Alexander spent nearly ten months on the voyage down 
the river ‘without ever seeing rain even when the Etesian winds 
were at their height’. Eratosthenes speaks of the rains falling 
regularly every year both in summer and in winter. 1 He 
thought that the evaporation from the vast rivers was another 
cause of rain, besides the monsoons. 

9. Rivers 

The immensity of the Indian rivers, of the Indus and Gan- 
ges systems, is noted and commented on by Megasthenes. The 
Ganges ‘which at its source is 30 stadia broad, flows from north 
to south, and empties its waters into the ocean forming the 

eastern boundary of the Gangaridai Another river, 

about the same size as the Ganges, called the Indus, has its 
sources, like its rival, in the north, and falling into the ocean 
forms on its way the boundary of India’. Besides these two great 
rivers and their tributaries, there were c a great many others 
of every description 5 , 2 and many of them were navigable. 
Arrian recognised, following Nearchus that the larger portion 
of India is a plain formed of alluvial deposits of the large rivers 
particularly the Indus and the Ganges.’ 3 The erratic changes 
in the courses of the rivers of the Indus system were noticed by 
Aristobulus; once when he went on some business into the 
country he saw a tract of land deserted on account of the Indus 
having shifted its course into a new channel; there were the 
ruins of a thousand towns and villages once full of life. 4 
During floods the rivers rose to considerable heights and in- 
undated vast areas, the cities located on eminences being turned 
into islands for a time. When the water subsided and the 


1. Strabo, XV, i, 17 and 20 (pp- 21 — 3, 25). 

2. Fra%. I (pp. 33 — 4): Arrian, Indika , ch. 4 (pp- 186 — 94 )* Megas- 
thenes records the fable of river Silas in which nothing would float and which 
petrified everything plunged in it. Fr. XXI-XXIV, pp. 65 — 6: 196 — 7. 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 16 (p. 21): Arrian’s Anabasis Bk. V', ch. vi, pp. 

88 — go of Ancient India, Its Intasion by Alexander . 

4* Strabo, XV, 1, 19 (p. 25). 



94 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


land but half dried, it was sown and planted with little labour 
and perfectly satisfactory results. 1 

10. Fertility of Soil 

The soil was fertile and the greater part of it was under 
irrigation and bore two crops in the year both of fruit and grain. 
Rice, millet and sesamum were sown in summer; wheat, bar- 
ley and pulse, in winter. Aristobulus noted that rice stood 
in water-logged fields and was sown in beds. Megasthenes 
traces the superior stature and the proud bearing of the peo- 
ple to the abundant means of subsistence at their command; 
he says that famine and scarcity were unknown in India. 
Sugar-cane is described as a reed yielding honey without bees, 
and the cotton plant continues to attract attention, Nearchus 
recording that fine webs were made from tree wool which was 
also used in a raw state by the Macedonians for stuffing matt- 
resses and the padding of saddles. 2 Strabo preserves a des- 
cription of the banyan tree by Onesicritus which is worth re- 
producing : ‘there are some large trees from which branches 
grow out to the length even of twelve cubits. These branches 
then grow downwards as if they had been bent until they touch 
the ground. They next penetrate into the soil and take root 
like shoots that have been planted. Then they spring upwards 
and form a trunk, whence again, in the manner described, 
branches bend themselves downward and plant the ground 
with one layer after another, and so on in this order, so that 
from a single tree there is formed a long shady canopy like a 
tent supported by numerous pillars.’ As regards the size of 
the trees, he states that ‘their trunks could scarcely be clasped 
by five men’. Aristobulus stated that the shade of a single 
tree could shelter fifty horsemen from the noon tide heat, while 
Onesicritus put the number at four hundred; Nearchus said 
that even ten thousand men could rest under the shade of a 
single tree. 3 Many medicinal plants and roots, both salutary 

1. Ibid., 18 (pp. 23 — 24). 

2. Meg. Fraos. I, XI (pp. 31, 54 ~o)- Strabo XV, 1,18 and 20. 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 21 (pp. 26 — 7). Arrian, Indika , xi Ip. 210). Asoka 
planted banyan trees on the roads : and there is an old Tamil verse which 
contrasts the tiny seed of the tree with its vast size capable of sheltering a 
whole army. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 95 


and noxious, were grown in India, and plants which yielded 
a great variety of dyes; Aristobulus noted that under the law 
any person who discovered a deadly substance without announc- 
ing its antidote at the same time rendered himself liable to the 
penalty of death, but one who discovered both got a reward 
from the king. India, like Arabia and Ethiopia, produced 
cinnamon, spikenard and other aromatics. 1 

1 1 . Minerals 

The mineral wealth of India is noted by Megasthenes. 
There was much gold and silver, and copper and iron in no 
small quantity, and tin and other metals employed in making 
articles of use and ornament, as well as the implements and 
accoutrements of war. 2 His observations on ant-gold and 
river-gold have been noticed already. Ceylon (Taprobane), 
he said, was more productive of gold and large pearls than India. 
He gave a good account of pearl-fishing, and stated that each 
shoal of oysters had a leader, to capture whom was to get the 
whole group. ‘The fishermen allow the fleshy parts of such 
as they catch to rot away, and keep the bone, which forms the 
ornament; for the pearl in India is worth thrice its weight in 
refined gold/ 


12. Animals 

Among Indian animals the Elephant easily got the first 
place in the attention of almost every Greek observer. 3 The 
Indian elephants were seen to be larger and stronger than the 
African elephants, and Megasthenes thought that this was 
due to the Indian soil supplying food in unsparing profusion. 
The elephants of Ceylon were larger still. The longevity of 
an elephant’s life was well known, though Onesicritus put it 
too high when he stated that they lived three hundred years, 
sometimes five hundred, and that they were very vigorous when 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 22 (p. 28). 

2. Frag. I (Diod. II, 36) p. 31: pearls. Frags. XVIII, L. B., (pp. 62, 

1 14) and Arrian Indika, viii (p. 202). 

3 - Frag. I (Diod. II, 38) p. 35: Ibid. (Diod. II, 37 ) PP- 33 “ 4 = Strabo 
XV 1, 42 and 43 (pp. 49 — 50) — for one phrase here Sevan’s translation is 
‘to sew beautifully’ for McCrindle’s ‘to swim most admirably ’-Arrian, Indika^ 
XIII, XIV, pp. (213 — 4). 



96 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


about two hundred. Arrian, obviously following Megasthenes,. 
says more correctly that the longest lived animals attained an 
age of two hundred years, but many died prematurely of dis- 
ease. The manner of hunting the elephant, described briefly 
by Nearchus and in greater detail by Megasthenes, was much 
the same then as the Keddah operations of today. The ele- 
phants were easily tamed and were naturally of a mild and 
gentle disposition, so as to approximate to rational beings. 
‘Some of them have taken up their drivers who have fallen 
in battle, and carried them off in safety from the field. Others 
have fought in defence of their masters who had sought refuge 
by creeping between their forelegs and have thus saved their 
lives. If in a fit of anger they kill either the man who feeds 
them or the man who trains them, they are so overpowered 
with regret that they refuse food and sometimes die of hunger’. 
‘They even learn to throw stones at a mark, to use weapons 
of war, and to swim most admirably.’ Nearchus spoke of 
chariots drawn by elephants as a most valued possession, and 
made the curious statement that a woman who won the pre- 
sent of an elephant from her lover was highly honoured and 
no one thought of blaming her for sacrificing her virtue for such 
a prize . 1 And Strabo remarks that this contradicts Megas- 
thenes’ statement that private persons were not allowed to keep 
a horse or an elephant, as they were the property of kings only. 
The elephant corps was a great asset in war and the possession 
of a vast force of the largest sized elephants by the Gangaridai 2 
made them the most dreaded of all the Indian states. 

Next to the elephants, we find monkeys and snakes figur- 
ing prominently in the Greek accounts. In the forests on the - 
banks of the upper Jhelum long- tailed apes of an uncommon 
size were found in vast numbers, and Kleitarchus’ famous 
story of Alexander’s strange encounter with a troop of them 
has been noticed above. They were quick to imitate every- 
thing they saw and were therefore easily caught by hunters 
washing their eyes with water i n their presence and then leav- 

i. Strabo, XV, i, 43 (p. 50) ; Arrian, Indika, XVII, p. 222. 

2 * The Gangaridai and the Prasii (Prachyas) are often mentioned 
together by the Greek writers and must be taken to apply to the people of the 
valley of Lower Ganges. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 


97 


ing pots of bird-lime behind which sealed the eyes of the apes 
wiien they came and smeared their eyes with it; an alternative 
method was the use of baggy trousers smeared inside with bird- 
lime. Different varieties of monkeys were known to Megas- 
thenes and described in detail by him as may be seen from 
extracts preserved by Aelian. One of these varieties so resemb- 
led men in appearance that they could easily be mistaken for 
ascetics, and in an Indian city called Latage they were pro- 
vided every day with a regular meal under the King’s orders 
after which they quietly withdrew to the forests without caus- 
ing any damage or injury. Of another type in the eastern 
Himalayas we read: ‘If these creatures are left unmolested, they 
keep within the coppices, living on wild fruit; but should they 
hear the hunter’s halloo and the baying of the hounds they 
dart up the precipices with incredible speed, for they are habi- 
tuated to climbing the mountains. They defend themselves 
by rolling down stones on their assailants, which often kill 
those they hit. The most difficult to catch are those which 
roll the stones. Some are said to have been brought, though 
with difficulty and after long intervals, to the Prasii, but these 
were either suffering from diseases or were females heavy with 
young . 1 Arrian remarked that the knowledge of the apes 
of the Indian forests was so common in his time that he did 
not think it necessary to say much regarding their size or the 
beauty which distinguishes them or the mode in which they 
are hunted . 2 

The smaller poisonous varieties of the snakes, spotted and 
nimble in their movements, were noticed by Nearchus who ex- 
pressed his surprise at the multitude and malignancy of their 
tribe . 3 When the rivers rose in flood and filled the plains 
with water, they invaded the dwelling houses in villages, and 
on this account the people had to raise their beds to a great 
height from the ground, or even to abandon their homes 
through the presence of these pests in very large numbers. Tn 

1. Strabo, XV, i, 29 (p. 36): Meg. Frags . XIII, XIII B (21), (pp* 
57 B. 60 — 61). 

2. Indika, XV (p. 218). 

3. Strabo, XV, 1, 45(pp. 51—2): Arrian, Indika, XV (pp- 218—19). 
The device of raided beds as protection against reptiles was noted by Marco 
f 1 lo in South India in the 13th century A. D. 



98 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAs 


fact, were it not that a great proportion of the tribe suffered 
destruction by the waters, the country would be reduced to a 
desert. The minute size of some and the immense size of others 
are sources of danger; the former, because it is difficult to guard 
against their attacks, the latter by reason of their strength, for 
snakes are to be seen of sixteen cubits in length . There were- 
snake-charmers moving about the country and they were able 
to cure snake-bites, and Alexander collected round him for 
the benefit of his army a group of the most skilful among the 
snake-charmers. The longest snake seen by Aristobulus was 
nine cubits and a span in length, but Onesicritus 1 stated that 
Abisares, King of the mountain country, kept two serpents 
one of which was 80 cubits in length and the other 140. Me- 
gasthenes knew of pythons that could swallow stags and bulls 
whole. He also speaks of flying serpents, two cubits in length, 
which flew by night and dropped a poisonous secretion which 
blistered the skins of persons on whom it fell. There were also 
winged scorpions of an extraordinary size. 2 

Hunting dogs of astonishing stiength and coinage were 
noticed by the companions of Alexander in the country of 
Sophy tes, and Alexander received one hundred and fifty of them 
as a present from him. A curious incident in Soph\tes J court 
is related at some length by almost all the writers and here is 
Strabo's version of it : ‘To prove their mettle, tw o of these dogs 
were set on to attack a lion, and when these were overpowered, 
two others were set on. When the contest w r as about equal, 
Sophvtes ordered a man to seize one of the dogs by the leg and 
to drag him way, or if he still held on, to cut off the limb* 
Alexander at first refused to let the dog be so mangled, 
as he wished to save its life, but when Sophytes said, “I will give 
you four instead of it”, he consented, and saw r the dog allow its leg 
to be cut off by slow incision rather than let go its hold 3 ’. It 
was believed that tiger blood ran in the veins of these dogs ! 


X. Strabo, XV, i, 28(p. 34). It is this statement of Onesicritus for 
which Strabo characterises him as a ‘master fabulist’ as well as the master 
pilot of Alexander. 

2. Frags. XIX and XVI (pp. 56 — 61). 

3. Strabo, XV, r, 3 * and 37, (pp. 3O— 39, 46). Note I on p. 39 
gives references to other accounts. Meg. Frag. XII (p. 56). 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 99 

The tiger itself the Greeks naturally had little chance of 
coming across. Nearchus saw the skin of a tiger, but not a live 
animal. He heard, however, that it equalled in size the largest 
horse, but for swiftness and strength no other animal could be 
compared to it ; that the tiger when it encountered the elephant, 
leapt upon the head of the elephant and strangled it with ease ; 
and that the animals usually seen and designated tigers were but 
jackals with spotted skins and larger than other jackals — which, 
of course, is a quaint description of leopards. According to 
Megasthenes the largest tigers were found in the country of the 
Prasii, almost twice the size of lions. He once saw a tame tiger 
led by four men, seizing a mule, overpowering it and dragging 
it to him, all by its hind leg ; such was the strength of the 
animal 1 . 

Megasthenes noted that some animals known only in a tame 
state in Greece were found also in the wild state in India, such as 
sheep, dogs, goats and oxen. The one-horned horse or kartazon 
of which a somewhat minute account is preserved by Aelian is 
generally taken to be the rhinoceros 2 . Nearchus came across 
whales of enormous size in his voyage before he entered the 
Persian Gulf, and Aelian probably follows Megasthenes in his 
interesting description of these monsters ‘five times larger than 
the largest elephant’. The rib of a whale was as much as twenty 
cubits and its lip fifteen cubits 3 . 

Among the birds, parrots and peacocks attracted particular 
notice. Arrian criticises Nearchus for writing at length about 
parrots as if they were a curiosity and saying that they w ere 
indigenous to India ; but Aelian’s account, doubtless based on 
Nearchus and other writers, is not devoid of interest : ‘There are, 

I am informed, three species of them, and all these, if taught 
to speak, as children are taught, become as talkative as children, 
and speak with a human voice ; but in the words they utter a 
bird-like scream, and neither send out any distinct or musical 
notes, nor being wild and untaught are able to talk’. The same 

1. Arrian. Indika, XV (p. 217): Strabo, XV, I, 37, (P* 45)“ Me S* 
Frag. XII, (p, 56). 

2. Meg. Frag. XV, XVB (pp. 58— 6o ) : Strabo, XV, 1, 56 (P* 59 
and n. 3) 

3. Strabo. XV, I, II— 12 (p. 91) : Mc «- Fmg - LIX ^ PP ‘ l64 ~ 65 ^ 



ICO 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAS 


writer observes that the peacocks of India were the largest any- 
where met, and Alexander was so charmed with their beauty 
that he threatened the severest penalties against any one who 
should kill a peacock 1 . 

Having gained some idea of what the Greeks knew of India’s 
natural phenomena, we may now turn to their accounts of its 
humanity, social institutions and polity, and here Megasthenes 
is our leading authority, the attention of earlier writers having 
been confined to the North-west and to local customs and insti- 
tutions in that part of the country. India, being of enormous 
size when taken as a whole, was, according to Megasthenes* 
information, peopled by races both diverse and numerous, not 
one of which was originally of foreign descent, all being evidently 
indigenous. Moreover, India neither received a colony from 
abroad, nor sent out a colony to any other nation 2 . These are 
statements of some historical value ; the memory of the incom- 
ing of Aryans had completely faded out, and quite probably, 
the movement of colonisation to the Eastern lands, Indo-china 
and Malaysia, had not yet begun. But the contact with the 
Hellenistic kingdom was already established, and the time was 
not distant when Asoka’s zeal for Dhamma would carry" the name 
of India far and wide to the West certainly, and possibly to the 
North and East as well. 


13. Legends. 

Though Megasthenes seems to have introduced his account 
of the legends centring round Dionysus and Herakles with the 
observation that he heard them from ‘the men of greatest learn- 
ing among the Indians’, it is obvious that all the versions of these 
stories now accessible to us have been thoroughly edited from the 
Greek point of view. We may be sure that no Indian scholars 
ever spoke of Dionysus and Herakles under those names, and 
that, if anything, Megasthenes took some things that he heard 
to be the same as some other things known to him better, and made 
his own identifications before setting down his thoughts. Let 
us remember also that the vainglorious credulity of Alexander 

r - *' rn, " n ' A ' 7 ' XV f p . Me^. Frag. LIX (p. 159): Aelian, 

V - 1 l -'■* - Ltd. 1:1 cLi 1. Lit . p 133, and n. i . 

-■ flag. I l Diod. II, 38,, xlw iMrabo, XV, i, 6 ), Meg. pp. 33, 107—8. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 101 


had given a good start to these legends with the earlier writers, 
with whose works Megasthcnes was very well acquainted. 
Dionysus figures in these legends as the conqueror and civiliser 
of India and its first ruler, the founder of cities, the teacher of 
industrial arts, and the establisher of religion and polity. The 
Oxydrakoi claimed to be descended from Dionysus, the vine 
grew in their country and they displayed great pomp in their 
processions, and their kings set out on their military expeditions 
in the Bacchic manner ; from these facts, modern scholars have 
inferred that Dionysus of these narratives was a C.T'ek repre- 
sentation of the Indian god Siva. It is difficult either to 
confirm or contradict this opinion, but it is clearly wrong to think 
that Heraklcs represents Krishna. There can be no doubt 
that some elements of Krishnaism are mixed up here, for Arrian 
remarks : ‘This Heraklcs is held in especial honour by the 
Sourascnoi (Surasenas) who possess two large cities, Methoia 
(Mathura) and Cleisobora (Krishnapura ?), and through whose 
country flows a navigable river called Iobanes ( Yamuna). * But 
the mention by Megasthcnes of his daughter Pandaia and of the 
Pandya kingdom in the south over which she was set to rule, 
and some other traits, particularly the Sibai (Sivas) claiming 
descent from Herakles, bring him once more into the cycle of 
Saiva legends. Arrian gives the curious information, which 
doubtless he owes to Megasthenes, that from Dionysus to Sandra- 
kotto> the Indians counted 153 kings and a period of 6042 years 
broken by three periods of republican rule, and that Herakles 
came fifteen generations after Dionysus — figures which do rot 
tally with any known Puranic reckonings which they resemble 
so much. Herakles is also said to have founded ‘no small number 
of cities, the most renowned and greatest of which he called 
Palibothra’ 1 . 


14. People 

The Indians, says Arrian, are slender and tall in person, 
and of much lighter build than other men. 2 Though some of 


1. Meg. Frag, i (DiocL II. 38 — 9L p p. 36 — 40: Fr, XLVI (pp- i °7 
— Strabo, XV, 1, 6-8 (pp. 11— 14): Fr. LVIII (pp. 158-9) • Arrian 

Indika, VII ix, (pp. 198 — 204}. , 

2. Indika , xvii {p 221) : also Inv. of India by Alexander p. 85 on the sta- 
t?:re °f men in the Indus Valley. 



102 


AGE of the xandas and mauryas 


them are dark in complexion, they neither have woolv hair, 
nor complexions so intensely dark as the Ethiopians, and the 
reason for this is found in the humid atmosphere of India. 1 
Indians seldom suffered from disease and enjoyed long lives 
(Onesicritus gives 130 years, and even more) as they lived 
frugally and abstained from wine though they drank rice- beer 
commonly enough. 2 In the dominions of King Sophytes every 
new born baby was inspected when it was two months old by 
State officials and if any defect or deformation in its limbs was 
discovered it was ordered to be killed. ‘In contracting 
marriages they do not seek an alliance with high birth, but 
make their choice by the looks, for beauty in children is a quality 
highly appreciated.’ Curtius and Diodorus both give subs- 
stantially the same account of this matter, obviously derived 
from a common source; we see from Strabo, 3 who says the same 
things of Kathaians, that Onesicritus is the authority for these 
statements. But we cannot be sure whether he wrote down 
exactly what lie saw in India, or idealised it in the light of very 
similar Spartan institutions known to him. He also stated that 
the handsomest man was chosen as king among these peoples, 
and that they sought to embellish the beauty of their persons by 
dyeing their beards and their garments with the colours of 
surprising beauty which the country produced. Megasthenes 
attributed the great artistic skill of the Indians to the pure air 
they inhaled and the very finest water they drank. 4 


1. Strabo, XV, i, 24 (pp. 29 — 30): Arrian, Indika , vi (pp. 197 — 8). 

2. Strabo, XV, 1, 43 (p. 52) — Meg. Fra*. XXVIII (p. 69): also 
Strabo, XV, 1, 34 (p. 41), Arrian, Indika, XV. (p. 219). 

3. Curtius IX, i (p. 219): Diod. XVII, 91 (pp. 279 — 80): Strabo, 
XV, 1,30 (p- 38'. Here is Curtius* description of Sophytes and his sons as 
they came out of their capital city to meet Alexander; ‘He vvas distinguished 
above all the other Indians by his tall and handsome figure. His roval robe, 
which flowed down to his very feet, was all inwrought with gold and purple. 
His sandals were of gold and studded with precious stones, and even his 
arms and wrists were curiously adorned with pearls. At his ears he wore 
pendents of ptecious stones which from their lustre and magnitude were of 
an inestimable value. His sceptre too was made of gold and set with beryls’ 
(IX. r, p. 220'. Arrian, Indika . XVI (p. 220) cites Nearchus on Indians 
dyeing their beards. Some other writer cited by Strabo, XV, 1, 71 (pp- 
76 — 7- asserts that Indians always wore white, contrary to what is said by 
othe 1 s: he adds that they wore long hair and beards, and plaited the hair and 
bound it with a fillet. 

4. Diod. II, 36 (p. 31)- 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 103 


15. Taxi l a 

Taxila (Takshasila) was the first large city seen by Alexander 
and his companions alter they had crossed the Indus into India 
proper, and in this friendly city they spent some days somewhat 
free from the warlike atmosphere of a military camp. It is worth 
-our while, therefore, to gain some idea of the impression produced 
by tins very pbpulous and wealthy city and its institutions on 
the minds of the Greeks before we proceed to consider the more 
systematic account of Megasthenes, or rather what has survived 
of it. We may also review the details relating to other states 
and peoples in the Xorth-west of India. 

Taxila was a large city governed by good laws. The surr- 
ounding country was thickly peopled and extremely fertile, and 
the wealth of the city and its ruler might be judged fi om the 
presents offered to Alexander and his friends by Taxiles. Some 
strange and unusual customs of Taxila are noticed by Aristo 
bulus. Those who, from poverty, woe unable to marry off 
their daughters, exposed them in the flower of their youth for 
sale in the market place, advertising thereby the sound of war- 
drums and conches ; a prospective husband was allowed to 
inspect the back of the girl first, then her front, and if there was 
mutual agreement, the alliance followed. Another custom 
"was to throw out the dead to be devoured by vultures, doubtless 
a trace of Iranian influence. Polygamy was not unknown 
here as elsewhere, and Satl was practised among Taxilans, and 
the widow who refused to burn was held in contempt. 1 Sat! 
wa^ observed among the Kathaians also, and Strabo is frankly 
sceptical of Diodorus’ reason for the practice, namely that it 
was meant to check women seeking to dispose of their husbands 
by poison when they happened to fall in love with younger men. 2 
From Diodorus, however, we get one of the earliest and most 
vivid descriptions of the actual scenes that marked such occa- 
sions. An Indian commander in the Army of Eumenes was 
hilled in battle In Iran in 316 B.C. ; he had two wives and both 


i- Strabo, XV, i, 28 (pp. 33—4) : ib.> 62 (p.69). 

2. Strabo, XV, 1, 30 (p. 38): Diodorus XIX, 33—4 (PP* 202 r~*}l 
. cGnndle’s translation of the extract from Diodorus has been slightly altered 
*J? *he light of Bevan’s version at CHI, I p- 415* See also Diod. Xv II» 
^ 9 1 ^P* 2 79 of Invasion and n. I — i) 



104 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAS 


o El-red to burn themselves on his pyre ; the matter was taken 
to die Greek generals who decided in favour of the younger wife 
burning, as the elder one was with child. ‘Whereupon the one 
who lost her cause went away weeping and wailing, rent the 
\-( il from her head, and tore her hair as if some terrible news 
had been told her. The other, overjoyed at her victory, set 
forth for the fuu< ral pile, crowned with fillets by the women 
who belonged to her, and decked out splendidly as for a wedding. 
She was escorted by her kindred setting forth in song the praises 
of her virtues. When she came near to the pyre, she took off 
her adornments and distributed them to her seivants and friends 
leaving them as memorials of her, as it were, to those who had 
loved her. Her adornments consisted of a multitude of finger- 
rings, set with precious stones of divers colours ; upon her head 
there w'as no small number of little golden star?, between which 
were placed sparkling stones of all sorts ; about her neck she 
wwe several necklaces each a little larger than the one above it. 
At length she took farewell of her domestics, and was assisted by 
her brother to mount the pyre, and, to the great admiration 
of the crowd which had gathered together to see the spectacle, 
she made her exit from life in heroic style. For the whole army 
under arms marched thrice round the pile before fire was set to 
it, and the victim, having meanwhile laid herself by her husband’s 
side, scorned to demean herself by uttering shrieks even when 
the flames were raging round her. The spectators were moved, 
some to pity and some to exuberant praise, w r hile there were not 
wanting Greeks who condemned the custom as savage and 
inhumane.’ 


16 . Sages. 

The Greeks first met Indian sages in the neighbourhood of 
Taxila, and there are many versions of their meetings with 
tangible variations that puzzled even Strabo and still continue 
to vex scholars who study accuracy in such Tar off things. 
Nearchus, Onesicritus and Aristobulus all gave their own 
accounts, and Megasthencs worked them up with the aid per- 
haps of yet other accounts of which we know nothing ; all this is 
clear from Strabo. Arrian and Plutarch give an account of 
Alexanders interview with the sages which took place more 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 


105 


likely in Taxila rather than in the country of Sambos and after 
his revolt . 1 Xearchus’ account of the sages is brief, but illumi- 
nating as explaining the basis of some of Megasthenes’ statements 
on Indian social organisation . ‘Some of the Brahmanes take 
part in political life, and attend the kings as counsellors. The 
others are engaged in the study of nature. Kalanos belongs to 
the latter class. Women study philosophy along with them, and 
all lead an austere life.’ Kalanos (Kalyana ?) of Taxila was the 
one who allowed himself, as Plutarch narrates, to be persuaded 
by Taxiles to visit AUxander, accompanied him to Persia, and 
there, disregarding the entreaties of Alexander, burnt himself 
alive when he fell ill for the first time in his seventy-third year. 
There was unanimity among the philosophers regarding the 
propriety of self-immolation, and Megasthenes noticed this. 
Aristobulus appears to have noticed the difference between 
sanyasins and idnafircstLas as he says that of the two BraLmrna 
sages the saw, the elder had his head shaved, but 
the other wore his hair. Both of them were followed by their 
disciples. He may be right in saying that they spent 
their spare time in the market place, and got their 

food free, but that this was a privilege they enjoyed in 
return for their being public counsellors can hardly be accep- 
ted as a correct statement. They came to Alexander’s table, 
took their meal standing, and exhibited feats of endurance like 
lying in the sun or standing on one leg for a whole day. One- 
sicritus states that Alexander sent him to the sages in the first 
instance as he heard they went about naked and did not accept 
invitations from other persons. He found at a distance of less 


i. Nearchus in Strabo, XV’, i, 66 (p. 72): Onesicritus ib. 63 — 5 'pp* 
% — 72), Aristobulus, ib. 61 (pp. 68 — 9): Megasthenes, tb. 58 — 60 (pp. 64 ' 
67) — Frag. XLI (pp. 97 — 103). Plutarch, chh. 64 — 5 of his Life of Alexan- 
der ^ or which see McCrindle, Ivaston , pp. 313 — 15- Also a short account 
ot Curtius, VIII, ch. ix (p. 190). Diodorus, XVII, ch. 107 (p. 3 01 ) on ce h" 
immolation of Kalanos; also Strabo, XV, 1, 68 (pp. 73 “ T; Lastly, Mc- 
C; indie, Invasion , pp. 386 — 92 on Kalanos. For a recent criticism, somewhat 
to 1 subjective, of these accounts, see Tarn, Tht Gntks in Bactria and Irdia, 
pp- 428 — 31, who discounts Onesicritus completely and says ; ‘Onesik: ’tos 
indeed put out a story that Alexander had not talked to the men himself out 
U d sent him to do it : but he could do no bette*' than make one of his Indians 
si ve the ordinary Greek account of the Golden Age and the other talk 2 !‘W 
t'nical common places, and his version never exercised any influence . Plu- 
tarch (ch. 65, opening sentences ) believed that Alexander met the sages 
himself and also sent Onesicritus to them. 



106 age of the xandas and maurvas 

than three miles from Taxiln, fifteen men standing in diiTtrent 
postures, and among them Kalanos and Mandams '/>r Dandnnus 
as in other texts). Kalanos gave a general account of the golden 
age in the past, but would not proceed further unless the Gieek 
visitor stripped and lay down naked on the same stones with 
himself. The older and wiser Mandanis rebuked Kalanos 
for his insolence, and was more accommodating to the guest’s 
curiosity and they compared notes on the ideas of Greek and 
Indian philosophers. Mandanis approved much that he heard 
from Oncsicritus of Greek philosophy as taught by Pythagoras, 
Sociates and Diogenes, but criticised the Greeks for preferring 
custom to nature and refusing to give up clothing. Conversa- 
tion was not easy as it had to be conducted through three inter- 
preters who understood nothing of what they were asked to 
translate. ‘One might as well expect water to flow pure through 
mud’ said Mandanis. Alexander is said to have met no fewer 
than ten of these philosophers and propounded hard questions 
to them ; they answered them to his satisfaction and he re- 
warded them duly. 

17. Philosophers 

Megasthencs has much to say on Indian philosophers ; he 
must have gained his knowledge from previous writers as well as 
from personal observation. His distinction between those who 
inhabited the mountains and worshipped Dionysus, and those 
who lived in the plains and worshipped Herakles is net easily 
understood, and Strabo himself remarked : ‘These accounts are 
fabulous, and are contradicted by many writers.’ His account 
of the Brahmanas and Sramanasis much more valuable, though 
there is room for doubt about what exactly he meant by these 
terms. The Brahmanas, he says, were held in higher esteem 
and had a more consistent dogmatic system. The pre-natal 
ceremonials (sanukaras), the stages of life ( dsramas ) and the rules 
and practices governing them, the relative freedom from res- 
traint enjoyed by the grihastha (house-holder) were all known 
to Megasthencs, though on some matters he seems to portray 
the- -i y rather than actual fact, as when he says that the Brahmanas 
marry as many wives as possible to secure good progeny ; or 
when he gives the period of study as thirty-seven years. Their 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 107 


philosophy and cosmogony which had some things in common 
with Greek teaching on the subjects are also briefly expounded 
by him. He says that women were kept out of philosophical 
studies for fear of the bad women divulging the secret lore to 
unworthy people, and the good ones deserting their husbands 
for a life of asceticism ; but here he is contradicted by 
Nearchus, though on this matter quite possibly both theory and 
•practice differed in different localities. This account of the 
Brahmanas then is reasonably accurate and interesting as a 
record of the impression produced by them in the mind of an 
observant foreigner. But the description of the Sramanas is 
not a little puzzling, because while the name generally indicates 
Buddhist ascetics, there is little in the description itself which 
will not apply to Brahmanical ascetics. Here is the account as 
reproduced by Strabo : ‘Of the Sarmanes the most highly 
honoured are the Hylobioi. They live in forests, subsist on 
Jeavcs and wild fruits, wear garments made from the bark of 
trees, and abstain from wine and commerce with women. The 
tings consult them by messengers regarding the causes of events, 
and use their mediation in worshipping and supplicating the 
gods. Next in honour to the Hylobioi are the physicians, for 
they apply philosophy to the study of the nature of man. They 
are frugal in their habits, but do not live in the fields. Their 
food consists of rice and barley-meal which every one gives who 
is asked, as well as every one who receives them as a guest. By 
their knowledge of medicine they know how to make marriages 
fertile and how to procure male or female children as may be 
desired. They effect cures rather by regulating diet than by the 
use of medicines. The remedies in most repute are ointments 
and plasters. All others they suppose to partake largely of a 
noxious nature. Both this class and the other class of persons 
practise fortitude as well by undergoing active toil as by enduring 
suffering, so that they will remain motionless for a whole day in 
one fixed posture. Besides these there are divines and sorcerers 
and those who are conversant with the rites and customs relat- 
ing to the dead, who go about villages and towns begging. 
Those who are more cultured than these, even they allow them- 
selves to make use of popular ideas about hell which seem to 
make for godliness and purity of life. Women study philosophy 



108 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with some of the Sarmanes, on the condition of observing sex* 
ual continence like the men.’ The name ‘forest-dwellers* 
(Hylobioi) does create a doubt if Megasthenes had the vdna- 
prasthas in mind ; but the Buddhist monks also shunned cities 
and villages and dwelt in forests ; and the term Sarmanes 
(Sramanas) as well as the social services described, such as heal- 
ing the sick and preaching to the people seem more appropriate 
to the Buddhist monks than to Brahman ascetics ; again 
women were admitted more readily into the order of bhikkunis 
than among Brahmanical ascetics. If this reasoning is correct, 
we have here one of the earliest accounts of the Buddhist order 
of monks, and it is to be noted that when Megasthenes wrote, 
they did not yet command as much esteem in Society as the 
Brahmanas. Asoka’s labours for the cause of Buddhism lay 
still in the future ; but the bhikkus were already making a name 
for themselves by their zeal in the practice of Dhamma. 

13. North-Western India . 

To return to the notices of the North-west by Alexander’s 
contemporaries. Nearchus noted that the laws of Indians 
differed from those of other nations and were not committed to 
writing, a statement obviously inspired by the name smriti 
(memory) for the law codes, and repeated by Megasthenes also. 
Among certain tribes, Nearchus observed, a girl was given away 
as the prize to the victor in a boxing match. Among others 
land was cultivated in common by a number of families who 
shared the produce in harvest time according to needs for the 
ensuing year, and then destroyed the remainder so as to encour- 
age industrious habits and discourage idleness 1 . The dress worn 
bv the Indians was made of cotton of a brighter white colour 
t:ian any cotton found elsewhere, or appeared so in contrast 
to their daik complexion. ‘They wear an under-garment of 
cotton which reaches below their knee half-way down to the 
ankles, and also two upper garments of winch they throw one 
over their shoulders, and twist the other in folds round their 
head. The Indians wear also ear-rings of ivory, but only the 

i. Strabo. X\ . I, <p. 7 j . Ib. "i rp. j", — f> ' for Megasthenes on 
afc^en- c ot writ e T . tav.s. Both NVarrhus rr.il therms knew that writing 

was well known in India and used foi other purposes. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 109 


ricu ones.... Such Indians as are thought anything of use 
parasols as a screen from the heat. They wear shoes made of 
white leather, and these are elaborately trimmed, while the 
soles are variegated, and high healed to make the wearer seem 
so much the taller 1 / 

19. Arms 

Arrian give a fairly detailed account of the arms and outfit 
of the Indian soldiers, based on the authority of Nearchus 2 ; 
“The foot soldiers carry a bow made of equal length with the 
man who bears it. This they rest upon the ground, and pressing 
against it with their left foot, thus discharge the arrow, having 
drawn the string far backwards far the shaft they use is little 
short of being three yards long, and there is nothing which can 
resist an Indian archer’s shot,* — neither shield nor breast-plate, 
nor any stronger defence if such there be. In their left hand they 
carry bucklers made of undressed ox-hide, which are not so 
broad as those who carry them, but are about as long. Some 
are equipped with javelins instead of bows, but all wear a 
sword, which is broad in the blade, but not longer than 
three cubits ; and this, when they engage in close fight (which 
they do with reluctance), they wield with both hands, 
to fetch down a lustier blow. The horsemen are equipped 
with two lances like the lances called saunia , and with a shorter 
buckler than that carried by the foot-soldiers. But they do not 
put saddles on their horses, nor do they curb them with bits 
like the bits in use among the Greeks or the Kelts, but they fit 
on round the extremity of the horse’s mouth a circular piece of 
stitched raw hide studded with pricks of iron or brass pointing in - 


. i. Arrian, Indika, XVI (pp. 219 — 20 ). McCrindle’s translation 
modified in the light of Sevan’s version in CHI, I, p- 4 12 * Curtnis, B c, , 
ch. 9 has the following : ‘The character of the people is here, as elsewhere, 
formed by the position of their country and its climate. lhey coyer 
their persons down to the feet with fine muslin, are shod v*ixn 
sandals, and coil round their heads cloths of linen (cotton); they nan 0 
precious stones as pendants from their ears, and persons of high socia n 
or of great wealth, deck their wrist and upper arm with bracelets ot gom. 
They frequently comb, but seldom cut, the hair of their head. The beard 
of the chin they never cut at all, but they shave off the hair from the rest of 
die face, so that it looks polished.’ Also Strabo, XV, I? 54 IP* 

Fr. XXVII ( p . 7 o). 

2 . Arrian, Indika, XVI (pp. 220 — 1 ): cf. Strabo, XV, 1 , 66 r PP- 
7 2 ~~~73/j much brietci. 



110 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


wards, but not very sharp; if a man is rich he uses pricks made 
of ivory. Within the horse’s mouth is put an iron prong like a 
skewer to which the reins are attached. When the rider, then,, 
pulls the reins, the prong controls the horse, and the pricks 
which are attached to this prong goad the mouth, so that it 
cannot but obey the reins. 5 

The chariot and the elephant played an important part in 
Indian warfare. The chariot was drawn by four horses and 
carried six men — one archer and shield bearer on each side 
besides two charioteers who were also men-at-aims ; when the 
fighting was at close quarters, they dropped the reins and took 
part in the combat 1 . Aelian sa\s, however, that the chariot 
carried only two men beside the charioteer ; this may have 
reference to chariots of smaller size. The same writer says 
that each elephant carried three archers besides the driver 2 . 
According to Curtius, an image of Hercules was borne in front 
of the line of the Paurava’s infantry in the battle of Jhelum, 
and this acted as the strongest of all incentives to make the* 
soldiers fight well 3 . 


20. Skill in arts . 

Nearchus testifies to the ingenuity of Indians in works of art 
by citing their facility in the imitation of the sponges, curry- 
combs, oil-flasks and such other articles which they saw the 
Greeks using. Cloth was used for writing on. Copper 
was used fused but not wrought, with the result that vessels- 
broke like earthenware if they fell to the ground. Prostration 
before kings and noblemen was unknown ; only hands were 
raised in salutation 4 . According to one of Strabo's sources, it 
was a great occasion when the king washed his hair, and the 
courtiers vied with each other in sending costly presents ; this 
seems to be a reference to the abihsheka of the king soon after his 
accession. In the processions at festivals many elephants 


1. Curtius, viii, 14, ( Invasion , p. 207). 

2. Meg. Frag. XXXV, p. 90. 

3. Curtius. Ibid (p. 208). 

4. Strabo, XV, 1, 67 (p. 73}. Curtius, viii, ch. 9, says that the ten- 
der side of the barks of trees received written characters like paper — Invasion, p 

p. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 111 


adorned with gold and bilver were in the train, as well as four- 
horsed chariots and ox-waggons. There followed hosts of attend- 
ants in holiday attire carrying basins, goblets and other vessels 
of silver and gold some of them set with precious gems. Ani- 
mals and birds also formed a feature. Kleitrachus mentioned 
four wheeled carriages carrying whole trees from which were 
suspended cages with tame birds of bright plumage and fine 
song. 1 


Peculiar usages 

Onesicritus noted a number of usages peculiar to the king- 
dom of Musikanos in Sindh. They had a common meal which 
they ate in public as did the Lacedemonians, their food consist- 
ing of the produce of the chase. They used neither gold nor 
silver though they had mines of these metals. They had no- 
slaves, and employed instead young men in the flower of their 
age, as the Cretans employed Aphamiotai and the Lacedemonians 
the Helots. They studied no science but medicine with any 
care, for they regarded the excessive pursuit of any art, as war 
for instance, to be a wicked thing. They had no actions at law 
but for murder and outrage : in contracts and other matters of 
mutual trust, if one of the parties broke faith the other must 
endure it and blame himself for trusting the wrong man and not 
engross the attention of the citizens with his law-suits 2 . 

2 1 . Slaves 

Some of these statements particularly those relating to 
slavery and law-suits, were repeated by Megasthenes with a 
much wider application. His statement on slavery has been 
extracted by Diodorus, Arrian, and Strabo 3 ; we may reproduce 
Arrian’s as being the clearest and most complete of them ; 
‘All the Indians are free, and not one of them is a slave. The 
Lakedaemonians and the Indians are so far in agreement. The 
Lakedaemonians, however, hold the Helots as slaves, and these 


1 • Strabo Ibid. 69 fpp. 75 — 6) King’s washing his hair is interpreted 
abhtsheka by Jayaswal, JBORS , II, p. 99. 

2. Strabo Ibid , 34 (p. 41). 

~ 3 * Diod. II, 39 (p. 40) ; Arrian, Indika, X — Fra%. xxvi (pp* 68 9 and 

a o6~8): Strabo, XV, 1, 54 (p. 58). 



112 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


do servile labour ; but the Indians do not even use aliens as 
slaves, and much less a countryman of their own.’ To under- 
stand this statement in its proper sense, we should remember 
that Megasthenes had Onesicritus before him ; and we find 
him deliberately extending to all India a statement that his 
predecessor made particularly of one country visited by him, 
and equally deliberately correcting or contradicting him in 
regard to Helotry. Megasthenes says in effect, that there are 
no slaves in India as Onesicritus knew, but his comparison 
of the Indian servants to Helots is wrong, for the Helots were 
put to servile labour and were in fact slaves. Obviously 
Megasthenes is here thinking of slavery in its full legal and poli- 
tical implications according to which the slave was the chattel 
of his master with no rights of any kind whatsover. And by a 
close study of the rules of the Arthaiaslra on dasas and karmakaras y 
serfs and hired labourers, Breloer has shown that dasas were not 
slaves in this sense ; for they could not be employed in unclean 
work — servile labour as Megasthenes would call it, and they 
could hold and transmit property and regain their freedom by 
right under certain conditions. And this appears to be the 
correct meaning of the text before us. Megasthenes was neither 
misled by the mildness of Indian slavery into denying its exis- 
tence, nor was he idealising Indian conditions for the edifica- 
tion of the Greeks, but simply stating and interpreting a fact 
as he saw and understood it, incidentally commenting on the 
view of another writer known to him 1 . 

22. Deposits 

Regarding law-suits, Strabo is our only source of ascertain- 
ing what Megasthenes said, and he is known often to abridge 
his original very considerably. Strabo writes : ‘The simplicity 
of their laws and their contracts is proved by the fact that they 
seldom go to hw. .They have no suits about pledges or 
deposits, nor do they require either seals or witnesses, but make 

i. Breloer, Kautalya Studien , II, Pt. i, pp. n — 69. Contra. Stein, 

Afegcu lhen.es und Kautilya, pp. 109 ff. where the argument is built on the assump- 
tion doulos — slave. J. J. Meyer has found fault with Breloer 

for assumig too much knowledge of Greek law on the part of Megasthenes, 
but his criticism carries no conviction to me. ZTI, 7,pp. 194-204 and Bre- 
loer’s reiomder, pp. 205 — 32. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 113 


their deposits and confide in each other 1 / This statement, 
which again follows the account ofNearchus, has been ex- 
plained by Breloer on the assumption that the Greek writers 
were thinking of the elaborate Greek procedure regarding 
deposits which invariably needed a written document, six 
witnesses and a seal, and of the form of private suit (dike) in 
connection with such pledges and deposits. Witnesses and 
seals are, of course, known to Indian law, and the Arthasastra 
is no exception here. But when there is a proper meaning 
that we can find for the statements we get at second hand, it 
would be well to accept it and acquit the Greek writers 
of misunderstanding Indian conditions or of idealising 
them 2 . 


- 23. Seven classes of the people 

Perhaps the best known section of Megasthenes is his 
account of the seven ‘tribes’ or classes of India. They are : 
(1) The philosophers, (2) cultivators, (3) herdsmen and hunters, 
(4) artisans and traders, (5) fighters, (6) overseers (Ephors or 
Episcopoi) and (7) councillors and assessors 3 . Megasthenes, 
like Nearchus, mentions two types of Brahmins — those engaged 
in the study of nature and practice of religion, and those who 
took part in political life and advised the king as counsellors. 
Both these classes were numerically small, but highly respected 
for their learning and character. The class of philosophers 
included two types ; first the officiating priests ( purohitas ) who 
conducted religious ceremonials, public and private, in return 
for dakshind , were exempt from labour and taxation, and pre- 
dicted the fortunes of every year at its commencement ; then 
there were the ascetics (sanydsins) who have been mentioned 
already. The seventh class provided the mantrins, the judges, 
treasurers and generals for the army. The second class of culti- 


1. Strabo, XV, i, 53 (p- 56 )=Meg. Frag . xxvii (p. 70 ) Also Frag. 

xxvii B and C (p. 73). e ^ 

2 . Breloer ,o P cU, pt. ii , PR 70^*58- **+ Ste ^ * ^ 

pp. 204 — 5 . ... vr— XII 


204 — 5. . ... VT VTT 

3 . Diodorus, II, 40-41 (Meg. PP- and 53)- 
(pp. 203—13',. Strabo, XV, i, 39—41 ^ 6 T 49 . f ora ravages of war. 

AJso Diod. II, 36 ( p . 33) for immunity of cultivator d ™ bCs over ^ qu es- 
^lonahan, Early History of Bengal} p. i53> refutes Stem 


tion 



114 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


vators formed the bulk of the population ; they were exempt 
from fighting and other services, devoted the whole of their 
time to tillage, and were of a mild and gentle disposition. They 
lived in the country and avoided towns as much as possible* 
In times of war, they were allowed to go about their occupa- 
tion undisturbed by the surrounding conflict. In the words 
of Arrian : Tn times of civil war the soldiers are not allowed to 
molest the husbandmen or ravage their lands : hence, while the 
former are fighting and killing each other as they can, the latter 
may be seen close at hand tranquilly pursuing their w T oik, — 
perhaps ploughing, or gathering in their crops, pruning the 
trees, or reaping the harvest.’ This does not seem to be an 
idealised picture, but a matter of general practice and common 
knowledge in ancient India ; witness the telling simile in an old 
Buddhist commentary which says that philosophers while des- 
troying the opinions of their adversaries must carefully respect 
the principles of logic which are useful to all, just as kings, while 
destroying the soldiers of their enemies, respect the field labomer 
who is the common help of both armies 1 . The cultivators paid a 
determinate share of the produce to the state by way of rent 
for the land they cultivated but did not own. On this important 
subject*, we may set down the actual words of the Greek authors* 
Aman says simply : ‘they cultivate the soil and pay tribute 
to the kings and the independent cities’. Diodorus is more 
elaborate, but by no means more helpful ; he says : ‘They pay a 
land-tribute to the king, because all India is the property of the 
Crown, and no private person is permitted to own land. Besides 
the land-tribute, they pay into the royal treasury a fourth part 
of the produce of the soil’. Lastly, Strabo has this : ‘The 
whole of the land belongs to the Crown, and the husbandmen 
till it on condidon of receiving as 'wages one-fourth of the pro- 
duce. We notice marked differences in these extracts from 
Megasthenes by the three writers. Arrian is silent on state 
ownership and says that the payment for land was of the same 
order in monarchies and in free cides (republics), which should 

!*• The citation is from A b h idharmako iatyaXhya — see Brc’ocr. i. p. 118, 
n. Also lHQ_ f ii, (1926]:, p. 656. 

2. U. N. Ghosal, Ownership of Land im Amtient India, IHQ , ii (1926), 
pp. 198 — 203. Also post chapter on Mauryan Polity. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 115 


be deemed enough to silence all attempts to restrict the applica- 
tion of our texts to the royal domain ; Diodorus mentions the 
payment of a quarter share of the produce to the state in addition ' 
to the tribute, while Strabo says that three-fourths were givers 
up to the state, only a quarter going to the cultivator as wages. 
It may well be doubted whether these differences in the rate 
of land tax or rent may be properly explained as due to differen- 
ces in the conditions under which cultivation was carried on 
under a sharing system, the landlord contributing only the land 
in some cases, but cattle, plough, manure and so on in different 
degrees in other instances. The Arthasasira , however, knows 
these differences, and Breloer has argued that the Mauryan 
polity <wa s based on a close supervision and regulation of all 
agriculture and industry in the land by government agency 1 . 
In Taxila alone soldiers outnumbered husbandmen, as the 
king was at war with two of his neighbours, as he told 
Alexander 2 . 

The third class, shepherds and hunters, lived a nomadic 
life in forests, cleared the land of wild beasts, birds that devour 
seeds sown, and other pests, received an allowance of corn from 
the king for the service, and paid him tribute in cattle. The 
fourth class of artisans and traders paid taxes from their earn- 
ings, except armourers and shipwrights who received subsidies. 
The fifth class, warriors, less numerous only than the cultivators 
lived a life of ease and enjoyment in peace ; they received a 
handsome pay out of which they maintained all the servants they 
required for cleaning their arms, keeping their horses, driving 
their elephants and chariots and attending on them at home j 
and in camp. The sixth class evidently includes both officials ~ 
openly employed for the supervision of the w r ork of the different 
departments, the Mahamairas and Adhyakshas, and the numerous 
spies (assisted by the courtesans) who were engaged in the con- 
stant communication of secret information about all men and 
things to the king and, in republics, to the magistrates. 


n Breloer, KS, i, pp. 77 — 93 ; contra. Stein, op. cit., pp. 126 — 9. 

2. ‘When Alexander asked him whether he had more husbandmen of 
*oldiers, he replied that as he was at war with two kings he required more 
soldiers than field labourers/ Curtius, viii, ch. 12 (Invasion, p. 202.). 



AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAUYRAS 


J 16 


24. Marriage and occupation rules . 

Diodorus concludes his summary of this class-organisation 
with the following observations : ‘Such, then, are about the 
parts into which the body politic of India is divided. No one 
is allowed to marry out of his own class, or to exercise any 
calling or art except his own : for instance, a soldier cannot 
become a husbandman or an artisan a philosopher,’ Arrian 
has also similar remarks at the end with this addition : ‘It is 
permitted that the sophist only be from any class ; for the life 
of the sophist is not an easy one, but the hardest of all. 9 By 
sophist of course an ascetic is meant here. Strabo also gives 
these restrictions regarding marriage and occupation, but adds 
that the philosophers are exempt from them on account of their 
superior merit. The stress laid on endogamy and the adherence 
to one’s own occupation (svadharma), the only exception being 
in favour of the Brahmin, clearly indicate that Megasthenes 
did mean to describe the caste-system as we should now call it ; 
but these restrictions obviously had no meaning with reference 
to some of his classes, particularly the sixth and seventh 1 . Either 
he did not hear of the theory of the four varnas , or was carried 
away by a desire, natural in a Hellenistic Greek, to establish 
a similarity between Egypt and India in social organisation 2 . 
Allowing for all its inaccuracies, there is still much in Megas- 
thenes’ picture that is true to reality and is borne out 
by Indian literary works including the Arthasastra . 

25. Food and drink. 

The Indians, says Megasthenes, lived frugally, and, being 
simple in their manners, led happy lives. Their staple food 
was rice, and there was no common meal hour, each one taking 

i. Breloer has argued that Megasthenes must have applied the term 
mesos to the classes, and used g j nos only in the statement on endogamy, that 
Diodorus and Strabo kept up this distinction, while Arrian has caused confu- 
sion by applying the term ‘genos’ to the Seven classes. In other words, the 
rule regarding endogamy is a piece of family law that stands apart from the 
division of the population into seven classes. £DAiG, 1934, p. 137. But I 
hesitate to accept this ingenious argument. Breloer has also sought to show 
on the strength of Pliny, VI, 19 (2.2) sec 66 and Solinus 52, 9 that Megasthenes 
made up his seven classes from the five of Taxila polity mentioned by an earlier 
writer, most probably Onesicritus, and that Herodotus’ classes of Egypt had 
little to do with it. Ibid pp. 147—64. 

2. ‘The Egyptians are divided into seven distinct classes — these are the 
priests, the warriors, the cowherds, the swineherds, the tradesmen, the inter- 
preters, and the boatmen’. Herodotus, II, 164. 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 1 1 7 


his food by himself when he felt inclined ; ‘the contrary custom 
would be better for the ends of social and civil life’ 1 . At supper 
a table was placed before each person and a golden bowl on it ; 
into this they first put boiled rice and then they added many 
daindes prepared in the Indian way 2 . They drank wine only at 
sacrifices, at which they did not stab the victim, but strangled 
it in order that only what is entire may be offered to the deity. 

26. Crime and Punishment . 

Theft was of rare occurrence, and in Chandragupta’s camp 
of 400,000 men, the thefts reported on any day did not exceed 
200 drachmae (about Rs. 100) 3 . Love of finery and ornament” 
was indulged in by those who could afford it. They had their 
bodies massaged by means of smooth rollers of ebony ; they wore 
robes worked in gold, ornaments set with precious stones, and 
flowered garments of the finest muslin. They married a number 
of wives, some for children and others for pleasure 4 . The code 
of punishments was severe, and threatened mutilation for bear- 
ing false witness, and death for causing the loss of the hand or 
eye of the artisan. In other cases of bodily injury, the offender 
not only paid the penalty according to lex talionis but had his ^ 
hand cut off as well. Indians were peculiarly distinguished 
among the nations as lovers of dance and song ; they reared no 
costly monuments for the commemoration of the dead, but 
celebrated their virtues in song 5 . 

27. Pdtaliputra 

India was a land of many tow ns, and Megasthenes was aware 
of the difference in administrative organisation between town 

1. Frag. XXVII (pp. 69— 70^= Strabo, XV, 1, 53—4 (PP- 55 ~ 8 )* 

2. Frag. XXVIII (p. 74). ' . 

3 « One sentence of strabo is usually translated : f Their houses and 
property are for the most part unguarded*. But Breloer questions the 
correctness of the text and holds that the last word should properly read 
‘guarded’, implying a contrast between the stronger closed part of a house and 
its more open portions — a plan of house building imposed by the climate ana 
prevailing even now. KS, ii, p. 9. 

4* Purchase of wives from their parents in exchange for a yoke of oxen 
15 mentioned in this context as a universal rule ; but this is surely due to some 
plunders landing on the part of Megasthenes or Strabo. The prescription 
is known to Indian law-books and applies only to the drsha form of marriage. 

5 - Arrian, Anabasis , vi, 3, (Invasion, p- 136) , Indika, X (p. 20g“Meg» 
Fra i- XXVI (pp. 67—3). 



118 


. AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and country. Cities situated on the banks of rivers or on the 
sea coast were built of wood as they were liable to frequent damage 
from rain and flood, while those standing on commanding situa- 
tions or lofty eminences were built of brick and mud. Patali- 
putra at the confluence of the Ganges and the Son was the largest 
Indian city 1 . The palace of Chandragupta, ‘the greatest of all 
the kings of the country’, far surpassed those of Susa an 
Ekbatana in its splendour and magnificence. In its parks were 
kept tame peacocks and pheasants. There were shady groves and 
meadows planted with trees the branches of which were cun- 
ningly interwoven by the art of the horticulturist. And the 
trees were kept ever green and never seemed to grow old or 
shed their leaves. Some were native to the soil, others brought 
from other lands with great care for their beauty, but the olive 
was not among them. Birds were there, not confined, but 
coming of their own accord and making their nests and forming 
lairs on the branches of the trees. Parrots were native to the 
land and were maintained in large numbers, as they were valued 
for their capacity to imitate human speech ; they often hovered 
in groups round about the king. In the palace grounds there 
were artificial ponds of great beauty filled with fish of enormous 
size but quite tame. No one had permission to catch them ; 
but the king’s sons, when they were children, learned to fish and 
to swim at the same time in these tranquil ponds, learning also 
how to sail their boats 2 . 


i. Meg. Frag, XXV (pp. 66— 7)=Strabo, XV, i, 35—6 (pp. 42—4) : 
Fra? y , XXVI (pp. 68 — 9)= Arrian Indika, X (pp. 204—6). Also Pliny at 
Meg. p. 139. Details reproduced in Chapter on Chandragupta. 

_ 2 * A'dian, XIII, Gh. 18 (Anc. Ind. in Class. Lit., pp. 141 — 2). Curtius, 
viii, 9 on the King and the palace may be cited here for comparison : ‘The luxury 
of their kings, or as they call it, their magnificence, is carried to a vicious excess 
without a parallel in the world. When the king condescends to show himself 
in public his attendants carry in their hands silver censers, and perfume with 
incense all the road by which it is his pleasure to be conveyed. He lolls in a 
golden palanquin, garnished with pearls, which dangle all round it, and he is 
robed in fine muslin embroidered with purple and gold. Behind his palanquin 
follow men-at-arms and his body-guards, of whom some carry boughs 
of trees, on which birds are perched trained to interrupt business with their 
cries. The palace is adorned with gilded pillars clasped all round by a vine 
embossed in gold, while silver images of those birds which most charm the eye 
diversify the workmanship. The palace is open to all comers even when the 
Ling is having his hair combed and dressed. It is then that he gives audience 
to ambassadors, and administers justice to bis subjects. His slippers being 
after this taken off, his feet are rubbed with scented ointments. His principal 
exercise is hunting ; amid the vows and songs of his courtesans he shoots the 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 1 19 
28. Women in the Palace 

The king s personal wants were attended to by women. 
The bodyguards and soldiery were posted outside the palace 
gates. The statements that a woman who killed the king when 
drunk became the wife of his successor, and that the king might 
not sleep during day, and was obliged to change his couch often 
by night with a view to defeat plots against his life, must be treated 
as curious gossip rather than be accepted for facts as some writers 
do. On the other hand, the role of women in the personal ser- 
vice of the king is well attested in Indian literature, and 
Kautilya lays down many precautions to be observed as a routine 
for ensuring the personal comfort and safety of the king ( dtmara - 
kshitakam ) . The king spent much time outside his palace hearing 
and judging cases, and he did this even while he was being 
massaged. He went out for offering sacrifice, and for the chase. 
The hunting procession was a somewhat Bacchanalian display. 
‘Crowds of women surround him, and outside of this circle spear- j 
men are ranged. The road is marked off with ropes, and it is 
death, for man and woman alike, to pass within the ropes. Men 
with drums and gongs lead the procession. The king hunts 
in the enclosures and shoots arrows from a platform. At his 
side stand two or three armed women. If he hunts in the open 
grounds he shoots from the back of an elephant. Of the women, 
some are in chariots, some on horses, and some even on elephants, 
and they are equipped with weapons of every kind as if they 
were going on a campaign 1 *. Curtius gives a more rhetorical jj 
account of the king and his doings. 


ganie enclosed within the royal park. The arrows, which are two cubits long* 
are discharged with more effort than effect, for though the force of these missiles 
depends on their lightness they are loaded with an obnoxious weight. He 
n es on horse-back when making short journeys, but when bound on a dis- 
tant expedition he rides in a chariot (howdah) mounted on elephants and, 
uge as these animals are, their bodies are covered completely over with trap- 
pings of gold. That no form of shameless profligacy may be wanting, he 
is accompanied by a long train of courtesans carried in golden palanquins and 
tnis troop holds a separate place in the procession from the queen’s retinue, 
and is as sumptuously appointed. His food is prepared by women, who also 
serve him with wine, which is much used by all Indians. When the king 
‘ s , i . nto a drunken sleep his courtesans carry him away to his bedchamber, 
uwokmg the gods of the night in their native hymns” (Invasion, pp. 188 — 

Me S- XXVI (pp. 71— 2)~Strabo, XV, I, 53 (p. 58). 



120 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


29. Administration 

The administrative organisation of the Mauryan state is 
described by Megasthenes under three heads : (1) rural adminis- 
tration, (2) city administration and (3) military administration 1 . 
The distinction between town and country for administrative 
purposes was well established in Indian polity, as is clear from 
the constant references to p aura andjanapada in literature ; and as 
the Alauryan empire was the nearest approach to a war-state 
ever attained in India, army administration attracted the special 
attention of an observer of the type of Megasthenes. The 
picture he presents is that of a highly organised and efficient 
bureaucracy engaged in regulating activities in almost every 
important sphere of national life. 

The officials of the rural branch so to say, to whom Megas- 
thenes applied the general designation agronomoi, supervised 
irrigation and land-measurement, hunting and enforcement of 
forest laws and all the occupations connected with agriculture 
mining, carpentry and metal industries. They also collected 
taxes and maintained the roads, setting up mile-stones indicat- 
ing distances at every ten stades (a little over a mile). This 
seems to be a summary account of the duties of a large number 
of officials rather than of the activities of a single board 2 . 

Those in charge of the city (the astynomoi ) were divided into 
six bodies of five each. Their functions were respectively 
(1) supervision of industrial establishments ; (2) care of foreigners 
including provision of lodging and assistants who would watch 
their doings, attention to sick persons and burying the dead 3 ; 
(3) census of population and property ; (4) control of trade 

i. Meg*. Frag. XXXIV (pp. 86 — 9)=Strabo XV, i, 50 — 2 (pp. 53 — 5)* 
McCrindle's translation saying that the first class of officers ‘have charge of the 
market’ is now sc’en to be a mistake due to the word agroronomoi having somehow 
crept into Strabo s text in the place of agronomoi which is obviously required 
by the context. Cf. Stein, Op. cit pp/233 — 4. Monahan Early History of 
Bengal , pp. 160 — 61, traces analogies in detail between Megasthenes and 
Kautilya in the administrative organisation of town and country. 

2. Contra Stein, Op. cit. % p- 235. 

3. Cf. Meg. Frag. I — Diod. II, 42 (pp. 44 — 5). ‘Among the Indians 
officers are appointed even for foreigners, whose duty is to see that no foreigner 
is wronged. Should any of them lose his health, they send physicians to attend 
him, and take care of him otherwise. and if he dies they bury him, and deliver 
over such property as he leaves to his relatives. The judges also decide cases 
in which foreigners are concerned, with the greatest care, and comedown 
sharply on those who take unfair advantage of them.’ 



INDIA IN EARLY GREEK AND LATIN LITERATURE 121 


and commerce, regulation of weights and measures, and marking 
with the official stamp articles passed for sale 1 , no one being 
allowed to deal in more than one commodity except on payment 
of a double-tax ; (5) similar duties regarding manufactured 
goods, the traders being required strictly not to mix new goods 
with old ; (6) collection of the tax of ten per cent on sales, the 
penalty for evasion being death. The six bodies acted together 
in general matters like the maintenance of public buildings, 
regulaion of prices, and care of markets, harbours and temples. 

This account of city-government does not correspond prima 
facie to anything known from Indian sources. It has been 
pointed out 2 rightly that while in the pages of the Arthasastra 
we come across individual officials in charge of more or less the 
same duties as are discharged by some of the boards of Megas- 
thenes’ account, there is no trace whatever of a body of thirty 
dividing into six pentads ; and as the same arrangement recurs 
in his description of military administration, it has been suggested 
that Megasthenes gave a schematic and idealised account far 
removed from realities. On the other hand, urban adminis- 
tration ha3 always been different from rural, and there is evi- 
dence that at the time of Alexander’s invasion some of the larger 
cities had an administrative system very like what Megasthenes 
has detailed. Thirty deputies from Nysa accompanied Akouphis 
on his visit to Alexander; and, ‘from the Oxydrakaicame the lead- 
ing men of their cities, and their provincial governors, besides 
1*50 of their most eminent men, entrusted with full powers to 
conclude a treaty 3 ’. It is possible that in these republican cities, 
the entire aristocracy had a voice in government and the execu- 
tive work was carried on by groups of five ; for the pafichayat 
is after all a very widespread Indo- Aryan institution 4 . The 
rise of the Mauryan empire did bring about a considerable 
change, and it is possible that Megasthenes was either not fully 
abreast of the new situation, or probably his account is coloured 
by his knowledge of the historians of Alexander. 


n I follow here Smith's correction of McCrindle — See Atoka ( 3 r< i edn.^ 
P- 88, n. i. 

2. Stein, Op. cit. y pp. 248 — 66). 

3 - Arrian, Anabasis , V, 1 ( Invasion , p. 79) : ib. vi, 14 (p. 154)* 

4 * Breloer, ^DUG, 1935, pp. 61 — 7. 



U2 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Lastly the war office comprised a board of thirty, functioning 
in six divisions of five members each. The first division was 
the admiralty ; the second, transport and commissariat pro- 
viding, among other things, servants to beat the drum, and groom 
the horses, and mechanists to tend the machines; the remaining 
four were respectively in charge of infantry, cavalry, war-chariots 
and the elephants. There were royal stables for the horses and 
'elephants and an arsenal for the arms, ‘because the soldier has 
to return his arms to the magazine, and his horse and his elephant 
to the stables’. Horses were broken in by professional trainers 
forcing them to gallop round and round in a ring, especially when 
they saw them refractory ; the Arthasastra devotes whole sections 
to a description of the movements to which the war horses and 
elephants should be trained, besides describing their proper care 
in considerable detail 1 . 

I. Meg. Frag. XXXV (p. 8$). if 30 — 31. 





Key to Plate I 


First Row : 

1. Gold daric 

2. Silver shekel 

3. Gold double daric ( p. 124 ) 

4. Coin of Philip Arideaus from Taxila ( p. 125 ) 

Second Row : 

5. Silver decadrachm ( pp. 125-6 ) 

6. Coin of Alexander from Taxila ( p. 125 ) 

7. Attic tetradrachm, silver, imitation ( p. 128) 


Third Row : 

8. Seleucus I, silver Attic tctradracnm Zeus/ Athene 

( P- 129 ) 

9. Sophytes, silver ( p. 126-7 ) 

10. Diodotus II, silver, Attic tetradrachm (P.130) 

Fourth Row : 

11. EuthydemusI, silver Attic tetradrachm (p.130) 

12. Seleucus I, silver. Horse /Elephant ( p .129) 




1 



APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III 

EARLY FOREIGN COINS IN INDIA 

( Nanda-Maurya Period) 

The coins current in India before her contact with the 
Greeks were of the variety usually described as punch-marked 
an I cast 1 . Their manufacturing technique widely differed from 
that of the Greek coins, and it has been almost unanimously 
accepted that it was invented by the early Indian moneyers, 
without the aid of any outside influence 2 3 . Though numismatists 
differ about the earliest date of the circulation of these indi- 
genous coins, there is no doubt now that many of them passed 
current during the Nanda-Maurya period, being introduced 
in India at a much earlier time. Other types of coins which 
also passed as currency in the extreme north of India during 
this period were those issued by the Achaemenid Persian rulers 
of this region. The Persian emperors from Darius I onwards 
usually struck two types of coins, viz., the darics and the sigloi, 
the former being of gold and the latter of silver. The name 
C daric’ is evidently derived from that of Darius Hystaspes whose 
Indian conquests included the whole of the Indus valley while 

i. The name ‘punch-marked’ is given to a large mass of early Indian 
corns, mostly in silver and comparatively infrequently in copper, on account 
of the various symbols being punched on metal blanks ofdifferent shapes, sizes 

and weights. It was at first suggested by numismatists that these coins were 
private issues, various moneyers or shroffs being held responsible for their 
manufacture : according to this view the symbols on their surface were noth- 
ing more than the hall-marks of the different individuals through whose hands 
the coins passed in the course of trade and commerce. But this view has 
given place to the more probable one of their having been issued by a centra 
authority. Uninscribed cast copper pieces bearing such symbols as elephant, 
tree in railing, mountain &c., are some of the commonest coins of ancient 
India, and belong probably to the same period in which the punch-marked 
coins are to be dated. For a full treatment of these varieties of the earliest 
indigenous coins of India, the reader is referred to J. Allan’s Catalogue of the 
Coins of Ancient India , Introduction, parts ii-iv. 

3 . M. Decourdemanche, however, was of opinion that most, if not all, 
of the punch-marked coins belong to the Achaemenid monetary system, these 
being nothing but a variety of the Indian issues of the Achaemenid Persian 
emperors: Journal Asiatique 7 1912, p p. 117 — 132. D.R. Bhandarkar opposes 
this view; cf. Carmichael Lectures , 1921, pp. 118 — 22. J. Allan thinks that 
the thick silver bent bars with devices on their concave side, found in some 
parts of north-western India, ‘are struck on a Persian standard and repre- 
sent double sigloi or staters, half and quarter sigloi, CAI. p. xvi, 1 — 3. 



124 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


‘siglos’ is based on ‘shekel’, a kind of weight standard adopted 
by the Persians from the ancient Babylonians. On the obverse 
of the former, the Persian emperor armed With a bow and a 
spear is shown in a running posture, while the reverse contains 
an irregul ar oblong incuse. The Persian silver coins bear almost 
identical devices, but several of them have peculiar counter- 
marks both on the obverse and the reverse, which according 
to some scholars emphasise their definite Indian association 1 . 
The darics are about 130 grains (8.42 grammes) in weight, 
while the maximum weight of the sigloi, twenty of which were 
equal in value to a daric, was 86.45 grains (5.6 grammes). 
It was previously held that both these varieties of silver and gold 
Persian coins were actually minted in India, and passed current 
there side by side. But a more acceptable suggestion has been 
made not very long ago that the relative cheapness of gold in 
this country would make it uneconomical for the Persians to 
mint any gold coins here for circulation ; m fact, it would tend 
to draw outside the country any darics which might have been 
brought there in course of trade and commerce 2 * * . This view has 
been supported by the non-discovery of the darics here in any 
quantity, and the comparative frequency of sigloi in the Indian 
soil. 

No coins of any Greek prince, however, could have been in 
circulation in India before Alexander invaded the country. It 
is presumed that even during the period of his short stay there 
in the course of his conquests in the north-western regions, he 
could hardly have found any time to issue coins in his newly 
acquired territories. A copper coin of squarish shape bearing the 
name of Alexander, which was supposed at first to be his Indian 
issue, has been long since declared to have no connection with 

1. Rapscn held this view; he recognised some symbols thus counter- 
marked as similar to those found on Indian punch-marked coins, and other 
marks he explained as resembling several Brahml and Kharoshthi letters: 
JRAS* 1895, pp. 065. ff- E. Babelon attributed these countermarks to other 
countries of Asia, such as, Lycia, Pamphylia, Cilicia and Cyprus; Les Perses 
Xchemenides p. xi. G Macdonald says ‘that the results of the most recent in 
vestigation (Hill, JHS. 1919, pp- 125 ff.) rather tend to bear out his opinion’ 
though he does not ignore the noteworthy similarity between them and the 
Indian punchmarks; CHI. I, 344. 

2. CHI. I, 342 — 43. The ratio between gold and silver in India as 

we know from Herodotus, ‘was not higher than 1 :8 5 as compared with the 

form of 1 . 13. j n , ..-•Hied by he Imperial mint’. 



FOREIGN GOINS 


125 


India 1 . Bat two silver coins (tetradrachms) bearing the name 
of Alexander and one silver coin, that of Philip Aridaeus, were 
discovered by Marshall in the course of his excavations at the 
Bhir Mound site Taxila 2 . These coins ‘bear on the obverse 
head of Alexander wearing the lion skin, and on the reverse 
Zeus seated on a throne with the eagle on his right hand and the 
sceptre in left’. Though they have different legends and mono- 
grams, they are closely similar to one another. On one of the 
coins of Alexander, the legend BA2 1/\Er\2 A/\E = AN/^POY 
can be distinctly read. Their freshly-minced condition and the 
fact that they were recovered from a stratum, assigned by Marshall 
to the 3rd or 44i Century B.C., may lead one to suppose that 
they were actually minted in India. But this first recorded 
find of such coins in India is still unique and the coins could have 
been brought here from outside. 

The troubles which Alexander’s officers left in charge of his 
Indian conquests had to encounter in mainiaining their transi- 
tory hold on these regions did not allow them to issue coins 
in any number in the name of their master 3 . But a few interest- 
ing coins of Greek technique belonging to the latter half of the 
4th century B.C. have been discovered, which, though all of them 
were not found in India, seem to have Indian association. 
Among them mention may be made first of the few unique 
silver decadrachms issued by Alexander himself from his Baby- 
lonian mint, which were distinctly of a commemorative 
character. The obverse shows an elephant with two riders 
followed by a warrior on a prancing horse, while the reverse 


1. P. Gardner thought that there were a few such pieces of Alexander’s 
Indian money: BMC . xviii. But realy the piece, now in the collection of 
the Berlin Museum, is unique. The shape which is the only reason for associa- 
ting it with India might have been an accidental freak, ‘the result of awkward 
handling by some workman at a western mint*. Macdonald refers to a group 
of tetradrehms with Zeus’ head on the obverse and the eagle on a thunder- 
bolt accompanied by the legend AaE~ AN/^POY on the reverse, as having 
some connection with the east, if not actually with India : CHI. I 388 — 89. 
The presence of a satrapal tiara on the right field of the reverse sides of these 
coins proves that they were satrapal issues. 

2. ASR. 1924—25, pp 47 — 8, pi. ix. These coins were found in a 
small earthen jar which abo contained as many as 1 167 silver punch-marked 
and bent-bar-type of Indian coins, and one Persian sielos. 

3. Macdonald’s description of a few such imitations of the Athenian 
‘ow'ls’ which might have been minted in the extreme north-west of India, 
may be noted in this connection : CHI. I, 3OU. They are the same as 
referred to in the previous foot note. 



126 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


contains the standing figure of Alexander shown as the god 
Zeus. The obverse device has been explained by numismatists 
as the artist’s version of Alexander’s battle with Porus, the Mace- 
donian emperor on horseback attacking with his lance Porus 
riding on the elephant, while a second person, the driver of the 
elephant, turns to throw a javelin at the pursuer. The reverse 
depicts Alexander dressed in a Macedonian cloak with a com- 
posite helmet on his head, his right hand holding a thunderbolt 
and his left a spear ; Nike is shown in the top left field, about 
to place a wreath on his head. The monogram on the lower 
left field of the reverse is /B which may either stand for 
BA2IAEjl2 AAEE ANAPOY, or may more probably be 
a contraction for Babylon, one of the mint cities of Alexander. 
The other class of silver coins which are usually supposed to have 
been minted in India, were the issues of one Sophytes, as we 
know from their legend on the reverse. This Sophytes has so long 
been identified with Sopeithes of Arrian (vi, 2, 2) and Strabo 
(xv. 699), who ruled over terroitories in the Salt Range region, 
Punjab, at the time of Alexander’s invasion. Sopeithes 
appears to have been the Greek form of the Indian name Sau- 
bhuti who according to most scholars was an Indian 1 . But R.B. 
Whitehead questioned the identity of Sophytes and Sopeithes 
not very long ago. He further suggested that Sophytes was an 
eastern satrap in the last quarter of the fourth Century B.C. 
ruling somewhere in the Oxus region, where his coins were 

originally minted (, Numismatic Chronicle , 1943). It is true 

that there is no record of an actual discovery of any of these 
coins in Indian soil, but there is also no clear proof of 
Sophytes’ connection with the Oxus region. Arrian and Strabo 
are explicit about the existence of one Sopeithes (most probably 
the Greek transliteration of some such Indian name as Saubhuti) 
and it is tempting to connect it with the name Sophytes, the 
issuer of the coins in question (JNSI VII, pp. 23 — 6). The 
obverse of these coins shows the head of the king to right within 
dotted border, wearing close-fitting helmet and cheek-plate, 
the former adorned with a wreath of olive leaves * on the reverse 


i. D. R. Bhandarkar attempts to prove that Sophytes was really a 
Hinduhed Greek; for his arguments, cf. CL. 19*1, pp. 30 — 1. 



FOREIGN COINS 


12 ? 


is shown a cock to right with a caduceus on the left field 
and the Greek legend 2n<£>YT(I)Y on the right, all inside a 
border of dots. The coins are struck from regularly adjusted 
dies ( ^ ^ ) and usually bear a monogram consisting of the 
Greek letter M or MN ; their approximate weight is 58 grains* 
These coins are of great interest as they are without doubt based 
on the imitations of the Athenian ‘owls 5 which seem to have been 
somewhat familiar in or just outside the north-western border 
of India at that time. The discovery of a unique tri-hemiobol, 
now in the Berlin Museum, bearing the helmeted head of Athena 
in place of that of Sophytes, apart from most other numismatic 
features, definitely proves the connection between the two sets 
of coins. The weight of Sophytes’ coins, which according to- 
earlier numismatists was derived from the Indian dharana or 
purana (silver punch-marked coins weighing 32 ratis, roughly 
58 grains) has now been shown by Macdonald and others to be 
the same as that of the imitations ; it has been described as a 
lighter Attic standard sometimes adopted by moneyers in their 
issue of such coins in the east 1 . As Sophytes does not use any 
royal title on his coins, it has been presumed that his coins were 
issued not long after Alexander’s invasion, when, though for all 
intents and purposes enjoying sovereign rights, he might have 
acknowledged temporarily the authority of the Greek invader 3 . 
An earlier view regarding the prototype of Sophytes’ coins, not 
even completely abandoned now, is that they were imitated from 
a certain type of Seleucus’ coins ; in fact such was the close 
similarity between the obverse of this issue of Seleucus I and 
that of the coins of Sophytes, that some numismatists were 
tempted to connect the two sets of coins in this manner. It is 
more correct to accept the view suggested by Rapson long 
ago that both were derived from the imitations of the Athenian 


I* But this so-called lighter Attic weight might have been influenced 
by the Indian dharana or purana standard after all. It is the smaller denomi- 
nations of the imitations of the Athenian ‘owls’ procured in the regions near 
the extreme north-west border of India, which are usually based on the 58 
grains standard which is also the weight of a large mass of silver punch- 
marked coins. 

2. D. R. Bhandarkar is of opinion that these coins of Sophytes could 
have been issued neither during the period of Alexander’s stay in India, nor 
at a time subsequent to his departure from there ; according to him, they 
were issued before Alexander invaded India, CL . 1921, p. 30. 



128 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


^owls’ 1 . But if Whitehead’s suggestion that Sophytes was an 
eastern Satrap ruling somewhere in the Oxus region in c. 320 
B.C. is correct, then these coins had no Indian connection. 

It will be of interest now to study in brief the special features 
of these imitations of owls, some of which according to most 
numismatists were actually minted in the extreme north-west 
of India or just outside. The original ‘owls* of Athens were 
beautifullyexecuted silver coins of various denominations usually 
tetradrachms, which bore on the obverse the head of Pallas 
Athene, the tutelary deity of the city, and on the reverse the 
figure of an owl, the bird sacred to the goddess, with the legend 
A#E usually in the right field. These coins were so much in 
demand among the people of the Aegean world and among 
those of the middle and near east, that Athens had to supply 
the specie from her own mint. When Athens lost her political 
importance as a result of her debacle in the Peloponnesian War 
and the subsequent Macedonian hegemony, her mint was closed, 
and imitations of the above type of the Athenian coins were made 
in large numbers in the countries which once used to import 
the Athenian originals. These imitations can be divided into 
two well-defined classes, the first closely approximating to its 
prototype* The second class softer in style usually bear the 
monogram M behind the head of Athene on the obverse and a 
bunch of grapes over the back of the bird on the revei'se. 
The most characteristic feature which, however, distingui- 
shes the second class from the first is that - the obverse and 
reverse devices of the former are finely adjusted ( \f f ), where- 
as in the case of the latter no such adjustment seems to have 
been made ; this nice fixity of position of one die in relation to 
that of the other may point ‘to the employment of a hinge or of 
some equally effective contrivance’ (Macdonald). Moreover, the 
first class usually consists of tetradrachms, while the second also 
contains drachms and didrachms. These smaller denominations, 
again, are not based like the higher ones on the Attic 
standard of weight, a drachm according to which weighed 67.2 

i. P. Gardner p. xx) and several other older numismatists 

held the vie'.v,’ it has also been supported by G. Seltman in his Greek Coins , 
pp. 228 — 29, pi. LII- 3, and pi. LV.6. But Rapson correctly suggested long 
a m that ‘both of these classes may have been derived from the same originals 
— the imitations of the Athenian coins made in India; I C. p. 4. 



FOREIGN GOINS 


129 


grains (4.37 grammes), but on one in which the same would 
weigh no more than 58 grains (3.75 grammes). These numis- 
matic peculiarities of the second class of the imitations place 
them alongside ‘ another set of drachms and diobols which are 
struck from regularly adjusted dies (^ ^ ), but in which the place 
of the Athenian owl is taken by an eagle, looking backwards* 
(Macdonald). On this latter class of coins, the bunch of grapes 
behind the owl’s back is in one case accompanied by a caduceus. 
These latter sets of the imitation- of the Athenian ‘owls’ were 
undoubtedly the prototype ofSophytes* coin discussed above, 
and this is one of the principal reasons which have led numis- 
matists to infer that ‘at least the smaller Athenian imitations 
were not unfamiliar in the north of India’ 1 . 

Several Greek coins 2 issued in Syria and in the adjacent 
countries to its east, some bearing the name of Seleucus I and 
others those of Seleucus I and his son Antiochus I jointly require 
a brief notice here on account of their Indian association of a 
somewhat remote character. The first group of these have on 
the obverse the head of a horned horse to right inside a dotted 
border, while their reverse shows an Indian elephant. 
Another class of coins in the same series bear a laureate 
head of Zeus on the obverse and Pallas Athene driving in a 
chariot drawn by four elephants on the reverse. The 
Greek legend BA^IAErS 2EAEYKOY on the reverse 
side of both the classes proves that they were issued after 306 
B.G, when Seleucus I assumed the royal title for the first time. 

A few of the latter class of coins, coarser in style and execution, 
are usually collected from the extreme north and north-west of 
India, showing thereby that though they were not actually minted 
in India, they might have been in circulation in this region. 
The other group of Greek coins, more or less similar in type 
to the second class of such coins just noticed, — on the reverse 
is shown a fighting Athena riding in a car drawn by either 
two or four elephants, bear the Greek legend BA2IAEA2 
2EAEYKOY KAI ANTIOXOY. The elephant device in all 
the above types of coins seems to have some remote connection 

1. CHI. I, 387-^88. 

2. These are usually tetradrachms J coins of lesser denominations, 
however, are not unknown. 



130 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with one of the terms of the treaty concluded by Seleucus I with 
Chandragupta Maurya ; according to it the former bartered 
away the provinces of Paropanisus, Aria, Arachosia and Ged- 
rosia along with his claims to the Punjab and other Greek con- 
quests in northern India for five hundred war elephants. This 
particular war arm proved so decisive a factor at the battle of 
Ipsus where Antigonus the formidable rival of Seleucus was 
overthrown, that it became one of the favourite dynastic devices 
of the Seleucidae. The head of a homed horse, another favour- 
ite device of the same, was perhaps commemorative of Buce- 
phalus, the famous charger of Alexander the Great, in whose 
honour the Macdonian emperor founded a city named 
Bucephala on the bank of the Jhelum in the Punjab. 

Most of the Greek coins discussed above arc extra- Indian 
in character, from the point of view of their provenance ; but 
almost all of them have some association, near or remote, with 
the country. The hoards of Greek coins, however, that were 
actually minted here and which passed as currency in the 
extreme northand north-west were the ones issued by the Greek 
rulers of Bactria and India. These Bactrian Greeks atfirst ewed 
allegiance to Seleucus I and his successors, and it was under 
Antiochus Theos (Antiochus II), the grandson of Seleucus I, 
that one Diodotus, the Greek satrap of Bactria, threw off the 
Syrian yoke sometime in the middle of the third century B.C. 
Justin says that this Diodotus died shortly after the assumption 
of independence and was succeeded by his son of the same name. 
The second Diodotus issued coins bearing his name and 
the device of Antiochus II. But these coins as well as 
those of Euthydemus I who dispossessed him of the throne of 
Bactria, were all issued outside India. The coins of the 
immediate successors of Euthydemus I, viz., Demetrius 
and others were mostly non-Indian issues ; a few of them were, 
however, actually minted in this country, when Demetrius 
carried the Bactrian Greek arms into India and conquered some 
parts of it. Eucratides who w as a supplanter of Demetrius in 
Bactria and the head of a rival branch of the Greek princelings 
contending with Demetrius’ successors for possessions in the 
extreme north and north-west of India, issued a large number 
of coins many of which were of Indian origin. The coins of the 



FOREIGN GOINS 


13 ? 

host of the Indo-Greek rulers, mostly belonging either to the 
house of Euthydemus I or to that of Eucratides, were all minted 
here, because these Greek princes who had long been driven 
out of Bactria by the Sakas had made their home in India. The 
story, however, of these Bactrian and Indo-Greek princes and 
their coins, though begining in the latter part of the Maurya 
age, really falls within the Suriga and Kanva periods. 



CHAPTER IV 

CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


In a previous chapter we traced the expansion and consolida- 
tion of the Magadhan empire under the Nandas. The New 
Monarchy was exposed to a two-fold danger. On the one hand 
there were symptoms of popular disaffection with the regime 
which did not augur well for the future. Besides this there 
appeared on the north-western horizon the spectre of foreign 
dominion. Alexander, it is true, had to retire from the Beas 
but his “successors” inherited his ambition and some of his plans. 
The lament was no doubt heard that the pursuit of Alexander’s 
policy and retention of his conquests required “royal troops 
under the command of some distinguished general” 1 . Neither 
of these conditions could be fulfilled for some time after Alexan- 
der’s death. The Macedonian Regents 2 from 323 to 317 B.C. 
had to be content with a sort of condominium on the Indian 
borderland. It did not, however, take long to consolidate 
the Tavana forces in Western Asia under a new leader so 
that Indians had once more to prepare themselves for their 
fiery onset. 

Many of the prominent figures that strutted on the Indian 
stage in the twenties of the fourth century B.C. — Agrammes, 
Ambhi, Porus, to name only a few — did not show any proper 
realisation of the problems that faced their country, or the des- 
tiny that awaited her. To preserve and augment the nascent 
empire of Magadha, to deal effectively with the foreign menace, 
to “unify the innumerable fragments of distracted India” and 
bring the ideal of the Chakravartain into the realm of practical 
politics, to inspire Indians with a zeal for mighty endeavour in 


i. McCrindle, Ancient India as described in Classical Literature , pp. 20 1 — 2. 

2. It is an interesting question whether Macedon, the home of Alexander 
and many of his “successors”, was known to Indians. The Adina-pumduaddna 
(No. 52) of the Avadana-kalpalata of Kshemendra refers to a city styled Madhuka 
m the published Sanskrit text. The name is however given as Mashudana 
in the Bengali version by Mr. S. C. Das. The second name, if authen- 
tic, may be reminiscem of Macedon. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BlNDUSARA 


133 


various fields of activity and bring her politically and socially 
into close touch with the outer world— all this required a man 
of heoric proportions. Such a man did not take long in 
coming. If Plutarch and Justin are to be believed there appeared 
before Alexander in the Punjab (326 — 25 B.G.) a ‘stripling’ 1 of 
humble birth about whom tradition records signs and portents 
significant of an august destiny 2 . He conceived the grand 
design of reversing the condition of things that must have 
filled the mass of his countrymen with despair. For nearly a 
quarter of a century he did bestride the Indian world like a 
colossus. For generations the country had to follow in the lines 
laid down for her by Chandragupta. 

The success of the new Indian leader has been immortalised 
by a grateful posterity. Fragments of the cycle of legends of 
which he is the hero survive even in the works of Latin histo- 
rians. In our own country we have lauds, tales, plays, even 
philosophical dissertations in Sanskrit, Pali, and Prakrit in which 
writers eulogise the hero in whose arms the earth harassed by 
barbarians found a refuge, who nearly succeeded in brirging 
about the unification of “Jambudvipa”. Unfortunately very 
little is recorded about the life and career of this remarkable 
man, which bears the stamp of unassailable authenticity. One 
searches in vain for his very name in the inscriptions of his 
grandson. The Mahdbhdshya of Patanjali has interesting refe- 
rences to Chandraguptasabha 3 and to Amitraghata 4 , possibly the 
son of Chandragupta, but records nothing about the deeds of 
the earliest of the Mauryas. Much that is known about him 
belongs to the domain of folklore. A Chandraguptakathd — the 
nucleus of Chanakya-Chandragupta-katha of mediaeval times — 
must have come into existence before the beginning of the 
Christian era, as is apparent from the marvellous episodes 
that have found their way into the narrative of Justin who 
abridged the Latin history of Pompeius Trogus, a contem- 

1 

i . Plutarch* s Lives (Loeb), Vol. VII, Life of Alexander, Chap. 62 ; p. 403 ; 
McCrindle, Invasion of AUxander i p. 31 1 for Plutarch ; p. 327 for Justin. 

a. Cf. bala eva hi lokena sambhavitamahodayah ; in Mudrardkshasa (ed. by 
Haridas Siddhantabagis-Bhattacharya), p. 452 \ Parisishta Par van (e.d. by 
Jacobi, 2nd Ed. ), VIII. 243 l also Justin McCrindle Invasion, p. 327* 

3- I. 1.9. 

4 * HI. 2. 2. 



134 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


porary of Augustus, Fragments of the story have also been 
preserved by the Buddhists in the Milinda-Panho and the 
7 hcragatha Commentary 1 and by the Jains in certain mediaeval 
epigraphs of Mysore besides other documents. Curiously 
enough Chandragupta is ignored in the Asokavadana though we 
have notice of his son Bindusara. The Tamilian reference to 
“Vamba Moriyar’ 5 may also have been connected with the 
Chandragupta saga. Fuller details are given in Hemachandra s 
Parisishtaparvan , the Alakavamsa J^lka , Burmese legends 2 and the 
Kashmirian versions of the Brihat-Kathd . There is a dramatic 
rendering of one form of the legend by Visakhadatta. The 
central theme of the story is hinted at in the Chandakaustka 3 . 
Certain additional details are found in the commentary on the 
Vishnu Parana and that of Dhundiraja on the Mudrdr dkshasa of 
Visakhadatta. 

To narrate the true story of Chandragupta one cannot rely 
entirely on the Katha but has to piece together scraps of informa- 
tion obtainable from inscriptions, classical sources, genealo- 
logical lists preserved in Indian and Cylonese chronicles and 
certain incidental notices. 

The epigraphic records of AJoka and Dasaratha, while of 
value as a source ofinformation regarding spiritual ideals, state 
of religion, internal organisation and social life in the early 
Maurya epoch, do not mention specific events that may be 
referred with precision to the reign of either Chandragupta or 
his son Bindusara. Far different in character is the Junagadh 
Rock inscription of Rudradaman which not only specifically 
names the first Maurya but affords an interesting glimpse of the 
extent of his conquests and methods of administration. For 
fuller notices of Chandragupta *s career we have, however, to 
turn to Greek and Latin writers of the Hellenistic period and the 
early centuries of Imperial Rome. Among classical sources 
an important place should be given to notices of friendly inter- 
course between the first twoMauryas and their Syrian contem- 
poraries for which we are indebted to Athenaeus who quotes 
from Phylarchus and Hegesander 4 . There was an exchange of 

1. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, I, 846. 

2. Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama II, 12 ff. 

3. Quoted in the Kdiyamimdritsd (3rd ed.), p. XIII. 

4. McCrindle, Invasion , pp. 405, 409 n. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


135 


embassies as well as correspondence between the Indian and 
certain Hellenistic courts. The names of three of the Hellenic 
envoys have survived, namely, Megasthenes, Daimachus and 
Dionysius, As is well known the Indika of Magasthenes consti- 
tutes in some respects the most valuable source of information 
regarding Chandragupta and his times. But the fragments 
that survive in the books of Diodorus, Strabo, Arrian, Pliny and 
others throw more light on internal government and manners 
and customs of the people than on the political transactions of 
the age. For the events that followed the death of Alexander 
and led up to the rise and expansion of the Maurya empire 
reliance has to be placed mainly on the XVIII and XIX 
Banks of the Universal History ( Bibliotheke ) of Diodorus Siculus, 
the Life of Alexander by Plutarch, Justin’s Epitome of the Historia 
Philippicae of Pompeius Trogus (Book XV), the Syriake of Appian 
{Book XI. 9.55) and certain passages from the Geography of 
Strabo and the Natural History of Pliny. The Puranic and 
Ceylonese chronicles have nothing to say regarding Chandra- 
gupta’s relation with the Hellenic powers. But they notice the 
dynastic change in Magadha and give information regarding 
the king’s lineage not known from classical sources. The Chroni- 
clers whose extant works cannot be dated earlier than the Gupta 
Age could not escape from the influence of the Chanakya-Chandra - 
gupia-Katha which must have reached a highly developed form 
in their days. In their accounts the figure of Kautilya, unknown 
to earlier texts, makes its appearance as that of the leading actor 
in the drama of events that leads to the supersession of the Nandas 
by Chandragupta. This is in striking contrast with the facts 
recorded by Justin, following Trogus, according to which 
Chandragupta plays the leading role in the dynasiic revolution 
among Indians and Kautilya is not even alluded to. 

Among the sources of the Maurya period mention is often 
mad; of the Kautiliya-Arthafdstra . The copious information 
obtainable from this work relates more to ideals and methods 
of administration, social life etc., than to external political facts ; 
it is also a matter of controversy how far the famous treatise can 
be regarded as a genuine product of the Maurya Age. 

Before we proceed to sketch the life and career of Chandra- 
gupta on the basis of the sources indicated above, it may not 



136 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


be out of place to say a few words about the vexed question of 
chronology. 

Attempts have been made to determine the chronology of 
the Mauryas in general, and Chandragupta in particular, with 
the help of Jain and Buddhist tradition. Hemachandra informs 
us in the Parisishtaparvan 1 that the accession of Chandragupta 
took place 155 years after the liberation of Mahavlra. This 
statement is confirmed by Bhadresvara in his Kahavali . 2 Mem* 
turiga, however, in his Vicharasrenl 3 refers to other sources which 
place the event 60 years later in 215 A.V. Apart from the lack 
of unanimity among these Jain writers, the date of Mahavlra ’s 
liberation is itself a matter of controversy, and it is not safe to 
to build a chronological edifice on such foundations. The 
memorial verses quoted by Merutnga give other details which 
put the interval between the accession of Chandragupta and the 
end of Saka rule and the foundation of Vikrama era at 255 
years 4 This would place the accession of the first Maurya in 
313 B. C. — a result that closely approximates the epoch of the 
Seleucidan era, and has, therefore, found favour with some 
scholars. It should, however, be noted that the Jain writers are 
apparently referring to Chandragupta’s rule in Avanti, and not 
Magadha or the Punjab, and that part of the chrolonological 
tradition embodied in the memorial verses is contradicted by 
Bhadresvara and Hemachandra. Moreover, the date 313 B.C. 
for Chandragupta does not accord with Buddhist tradition 
which puts his accession 162 years after the Parinirvdna of the 
Sakya Sage, that is, 382 B.C., if we accept the Ceylonese epoch 
(544 B.C.) of the Great Decease, and 324 B.C., if we prefer the 
Cantonese tradition (486 B.C.) for the passing away of the 
Enlightened One. The earlier date is no doubt opposed to 
classical evidence, but the date 324 B.C. is not irreconcilable 
with the testimony of Greek and Latin writers. The figures 
given by Buddhist chroniclers are, however, as much open to 
comment as the data of Bhadresvara, Hemachandra and Meru- 
tunga. We have, therefore, to turn to the clues furnished by 

1. Ed. Jacobi p. xx Text, VIII. 339. 

2. Ibid. p. xx. 

3. Ibid. p. xx. 

4. Ind. Ant. J 9*4 PP* u8 f. Jacobi, Kalpasutra of Bhadrabaku> Leipzig^ 

P* 7 : 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


137 


classical accounts supplemented by the testimony of Asokan 
inscriptions. 

The classical writers refer to several famous episodes in the 
career of Chandragupta with hints as to their chronological 
sequence. He met Alexander while yet a ‘stripling’ and not 
yet ‘called to royalty 5 (326 — 25 B.C.) 1 and mounted the throne 
of India ‘not long afterwards’ 2 by instigating the Indians to over- 
throw the existing government, or according to another inter-* 
pretation, soliciting the Indians to support his new sovereignty 3 ; 
thereafter* he prepared to attack Alexander’s prefects ; the latter 
were put to death and the yoke of servitude was shaken off from 
the neck of India ‘after Alexander’s death’ (i.e., after 323 B.C.) 
Chandragupta was reigning over India when Seleucus was 
laying the foundation of his future greatness. 6 (The famous 
Macedonian general acquired the satrapy of Babylon for the 
first time in 321 B.C., regained control of the city and founded an 
era in 312 B.C., and assumed the title of king in 306-5 B.C.)* 
After subduing the Bactrians he passed over into India, concluded 
a treaty with Chandragupta and then returned home to prose~ 
cute the war with Antigonus (before 301 B.C). 7 Appian, who 
also refers to the war which Seleucus waged with Chandragupta,. 
besides other events, mentions the understanding with the Indian 

i* Plutarch, Op. cit Ch. LXII. (Loeb Classical Library), translated 
by Perrin ; Justin, InV. Alex. p. 327. 

2* Plutarch; op . cit. LXII. p 401. 

3. Just in, lnv. Alex., p, 328; Watson’s translation of Justin, p. 142. 

4, Justin uses the words “having thus won the throne” once again after 
mentioning the fight with the prefects. This has led scholars including Tam 
(Greeks in Bactria and India, p. 47 n2) to surmise that the acquisition of 
his kingdom by Chandragupta followed the war with Alexander’s satraps, 
the last of whom, Pithon did not leave India till 316 B. C. But the 
words “having thus won the throne” are not to be construed merely with 
the preceding sentence describing incidents in connection with the war 
with the prefects. They refer also to the events that preceded the clash 
of arms with the Macedonian commanders, and in fact, sum up the whole 
episode relating to the rise of Chandragupta. For a similar summing up 
of the exploits of Seleucus, see Appian, Syrian Affairs, XI 9.55 referred to. 
above. In the detailed account given by Justin we are expressly told that 
Chandragupta was stimulated to aspire to royalty by an incident that 
happend immediately after his flight from Alexander’s camp in 326/25 B.C. 
The use of the term deinde (thereafter) after “new sovereignty” suggest* 
that the Macedonia War came sometime after the change of government among 
Indians. In the Mudrardkshasa too the total destruction of MUchchha chieftain* 
and troops follows the dynastic revolution in Magadha ( Indian Culture , II.* 

P* 56 t f.) 

5. Justin. Inv,AUx., 327. 

6. ibid., 328. 

7. ibid.. 328. 



138 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


king about the marriage relationship and adds that “some of 
the exploits were performed before the death of Antigonus and 
som* afterwards” 1 i.e., after 301 B.C. That these operations 
cannot have reference merely to dealings with Chandragupta 
but include also events outside this country, that find mention 
earlier in Appian’s narrative, e.g. the war with Syrian clans, is 
clear from other sources, such as the narrative of Justin who 
dates the treaty between the Syrian and Indian monarchs before 
th^ clash of arms of Seleucus with Antigonus. In fact Appian 
here sums up the career of Seleucus as a Nicator. 

How long Chandragupta lived after the war with Seleucus 
cannot be precisely determined from Greek sources. His grand- 
son Asoka is known to have been a contemporary of Magas of 
Cyrene who died not later than 259 — 58 B. C. according to the 
evidence of Porphyry, which seems to be confirmed by the testi- 
mony of Callimachus, a contemporary poet, of Polybius (X. 22) 
and of coins. 2 The acceptance of this date implies that the 
XIII Rock Edict of Asoka cannot be dated later than 259 
—53 B.C . as it speaks of Magas as alive. As rescripts of 
morality began to be written when Asoka was anointed twelve 
years, his coronation could not have taken place after 270 — 69 
B.C. The death of Chandragupta and the reign of his son 
-Bindusara must, according to the evidence we have cited, fall 
between the Seleucidan war and 270 — 69 B.C. Tradition 
assigns a period -of 24 years to the reign of the first Maurya, 
25, 27 or 28 years to Bindusara, and 4 to the interval between 
the accession and the coronation of Aioka. If we accept 
the mean figure 27 for Bindusara, a period of 55 years must have 
intervened between the accession of Chandragupta and the 
coronation of his grandson. The former event took place 
according to this calculation not later than 270-69+55=325 
-24 B.C. An early date for the rise of Chandragupta is suggested 
by the fact that at the time of the partition of Triparadeisos 
{321 B.C.) Antipater had to give the kingdoms that lay along 
the Indus and the Hydaspes (Jhelum) to Indian Rajas “for it 
was impossible to remove these kings without royal troops under 

1. Roman History , , Vol II., Book XI. 9.55, p. 204, (Loeb Classical Lib. 
translation by White. 

2. Tarn, Antigonos Gonatas , pp. 449 ff. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


139 


the command of some distinguished general. 1 ” The inadequacy 
of “royal troops” and the absence of “distinguished general” 
are inexplicable unless the more important among the prefects 
f of Alexander had already been put to death or expelled. That 
achievement is ascribed by the Latin historians solely to 
Chandragupta who, and not Ambhi or the Paurava, “was the 
leader who achieved their (i.e., Indians’) freedom” 2 . It is true 
•that the great liberator is not mentioned in connection with the 
partitions of Babylon and Triparadeisos. But we have similar 
reticence in regard to Eudemos who had been directed along 
with Taxiles to assume the administration of the province 
governed by Philippus as early as 324 B.C. 3 He survived Porus, 
and clung to some part of India till about 3 1 7 B.C. 

Greek and Latin writers frequently corrupt the name of 
Chandragupta. It was Sir William Jones who solved the puzzle 
and found in the appellations used by the classical historians 
and geographers variant forms of the name of the first Maurya 
as known from Indian sources. Writers of our own country, too, 
sometimes use epithets which require a few words of comment. 
As is well known the name of Chandragupta does not 
find a place in the epigraphs of his descendants. It, however, 
is distinctly referred to in the Junagadh Rock Inscription of 
Rudradaman I. It is also known to Patanjali and a host of 
Indian bards and chroniclers, playwrights, poets and even 
philosophers. Among classical writers the nearest approxi- 
mation to the correct name ( Sandrokoptos ) is made by Phylarchus, 
who is quoted by Athenaeus 4 . Strabo, Arrian and Justin have 
Sandrocottus. Appian and Plutarch corrupt it into Androco- 
ttus. In the Mudrarakshasa we have the cognomens Chanda- 
Siri (Chandrasri), Piadamsana (PriyadarSana) and Vrishala 6 . 
Chandrasri is of course the shortened form of the name Chandra- 
gupta with the addition of the honorific Sri 8 . The attribution 

X. Dio. XVIII. 39; McCrindU Ancient India in Classical Lit. p. 211—12. 

2. Inu. Alex. p. 327. 

3. Inu. Alex., p. 177 Smith, Aioka, (3rd ed.) p. 12. 

4. Strabo says that Sandrokottus adopted the surname Palibothros 
(P at all puts aka ?), Alegasthenes and Arrian , p. 66. 

5. Haridas Siddhantaba gis edition, pp. 42, 374. 

6. The usual practice is to put the honorific before the name. For a 
contrary usage, of. Asokasri in Parikshtaparvan, Kharavtlairi, Veda orSkandairf, 
Skandairl, Saktisri, Balaian in inscriptions, and Yajnasrl in the Puranas etc. 



140 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


to Chandragupta of the appellation Piadamsana, if based on 
correct tradition, is of great interest as it is generally known as 
an epithet of his famous grandson, Asoka, and his common 
designation in inscriptions. As a title of royalty it finds mention 
in the Vishnudharmottara as quoted in the Rajadharmakaustubha 
of Anantadeva 1 . But its use does not appear to have been so 
common in early times as that of Devanampiya. Vrishala is 
taken by some to hint at Chandragupta’s extraction from the 
Sudra line of the Nandas. But the cognomen is used in the 
epic and law books also o f Kshatriy as and others who deviated 
from orthodoxy. An ingenious suggestion has been made in 
recent times that the expression really stands for basileus 2 , the 
Greek word for king. There is, however, no suggestion in 
Indian literature that Vrishala is a royal epithet. The word 
has a social and no political significance, and is often applied 
to non-royal personages, particularly wandering teachers and 
ascetics like the Buddha 3 . 

Regarding the ancestry of Chandragupta Indian writers have 
not preserved any unanimous tradition. There is no doubt 
agreement in regard to the name of the the family to which he 
belonged, which is invariably given as Maurya. But the origin 
and derivation of the word present a problem which requires 
elucidation. The Brahmanical commentators like Dhundiraja 
and the annotator of the Vishnu Pur ana derived the expression 
from Mura, supposed to be the wife of a Nanda king, and grand- 
mother or mother of the first Maurya. There is, however, no 
warrant for this view in early texts. The Puranas make no 
mention of Mura and do not refer to any dynastic connection 
between the Nandas, who were of Sudra extraction, and the 
Mauryas. No doubt they say that after the extermination 
of all Kshatriyas by Mahapadma Nanda, kings will be of Sudra 
origin. This cannot however be taken to imply that all the 
post-Mahapadman kings were Sudras as some of them, e.g., 
the Kanvas, are distinctly styled dvija. In some Puranic texts 


1. Kamal Krishna smritirtha’s ed. p. 43 

2. I.H.Q., XIII (1937), p.651. 

3. Kautillya Arthasdstra (Text), p. 199 R. K. Mookerjee, Hindu 
Civilisation , p. 264. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


141 


the reading is &udra-prayastv adharmikdh 1 . Sudra-like and irre- 
ligious are not an inapposite description of several members 
of the Maurya family who showed predilection for Jainism and 
Buddhism. One text, the Markandeya Purana , goes so far as to 
brand the Mauryas as asuras 2 . Suradvish , it may be remembered, 
is used by the Bhagavata Purana in reference to people beguiled 
by the Buddha 3 . The earliest authorities to claim a Nanda 
origin for the first Maurya are the Mudrardkshasa and the media- 
eval versions of the Brihat-katha . It is, however, to be noted 
that the Greek accounts do not suggest any blood relationship 
between Chandragupta and Agrammes, the Nanda contemporary 
of Alexander. The former is mentioned by Justin as 
“born in humble life 4 .” The reference, to our mind, 
points to the fact that Chandragupta was not born in the purple 
and was not a scion of the royal line which he overthrew. It 
is significant that Plutarch includes “Androkottos” among the 
persons who, according to several historians, disclosed to 
Alexander the meanness of the origin of the contemporary ruler 
of the Prasii, apparently the last Nanda king. It does not seem 
probable that people who sneered at the “barber” line of 
Magadha could themselves claim no higher status in society, 
Buddhist writers do not regard Maurya as a metronymic. 
They invariably represent it as the name ofa clan 5 the members 
of which ranked as Kshatriyas since the days of the Buddha. 
Even Kshemendra who speaks of Chandragupta as purvanan- 
dasuta in his version of the Brihat-katha , distinctly mentions 
Asoka as born in the Solar Race in the Avandanakalpalata* . The 
latter view accords with the testimony of several mediaeval 
inscriptions 7 . The antiquity of Moriya or Maurya as a clan 
name is clear from the Mahaparinibbana Sutta which represents 
the people in question as Kshatriyas and rulers of the little 

x , Pargiter, Dynasties of the Kali Age , p. 25, 

2. 88. 5. 

3. I. 3. 24. 

4. Irw. Alex. p. 327. 

5. For traditional Buddhist accounts of the origin of the name, see 
Malalasekera, D.P.P.Pf., II. 673. 

6. Story No. 59, v. 2, ‘Saurya* Kula may be regarded by some as 
a mistake for Maurya Kula, (ii. p. 209) . but the supposition loses its force 
when later on in the same story we find Saurya and Maurya together in the 
passage — Sphita Saurya- Alaurya-Mahdiajhsavanapa fichdnana £rim 0 d- Ai ' k ade vah . 

7. Ep. Ind. Ii, p 222 



142 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


republic of Pipphalivana, probably lying between Rummindei 
in the Nepalese Tarai and Kasia in the Gorakhpur District 1 . 
Some recent writers seek to connect the first Maury a with 
Gandhara and its neighbourhood on the basis of evidence which 
does not bear scrutiny 2 3 . The suggested identi fication of Chandra- 
gupta with Sisikottos is not borne out by Greek evidence. The 
treatment of the two eminent men by Alexander is different, 
and there is nothing to show that Sisikottos was a mere stripling 
when he met the Macedonian king for the first time. Equally 
implausible is the attempt to connect £akuni,whom the Kashmir 
Chronicle represents as the great-grand-father of Asoka, with 
Sakuni of Gandhara, famed in the Mahdbhdrata a . Sakuni is by 
no means an exclusive desigation of Gandharian princes as it 
occurs in the Puranic list of Videhan kings 4 . In Mudrdrakshasa y 
Act V, the Gandharas are actually found arrayed against 
Chandragupta. 

History does not record when the founder of the 
Maurya dynasty was born. As he was a mere stripling when 
he saw Alexander in 326—25 B.C. his birth could not have 
taken place before the middle of the fourth century B.C. 
Certain writers, as has already been noted above, record tradi- 
tions that he was of royal extraction. The Brihatkathd and the 
Mudrdrdkshasa connect him with the Imperial Nanda dynasty 
of Magadha, and Buddhist commentators with the ruling family 

i. P. H. A . /., 4th ed., pp. 160, 217. 

The names Morieis, Meroes and Moeres are known to classical writers 
( C,H.I . I. p. 470 ; McCrindle Inv. Altx. pp. 108, 256). But their connection, 
if any, with Sandrocottus is not clear. If Morieis is a tribal name it may well 
stand for Moriya or Maurya. 

Mauryaputra of Afudr dr dkshasa (II, 6, p. gg) may simply mean, be- 
longing to the Maurya clan\ Cf. Sakyaputra, Nataputta. It is by no means 
an exclusive designation of Chandragupta. The Kalpasutra of Bhadralahu 
ed. by Jacobi (p. 28) refers to a Mauryaputra Kasyapa as one of the eleven 
ga^adharas. Cf. also Alhxdhdnachindmaiii I. 32. 

2. Gandhara Origin of the Maurya Dynasty and Indentifi cation o 
Chandragupta with Sasigupta, by H. C. Seth. In Indian Culture , X. pp- 32n, 

34, it is said that “Chandragupta was a man of the Utiarapatha ” and that 
“Hwen Thsang narrates a legend (Beal, Buddhist Records, I., p. 126 Sic .,) which 
connects the Sakya-Mauryas with the country of Udyana”. The passage on 
which the last statement is based is not quoted. The pilgrim’s story (Beal, 

I. 128) simply mentions Udyana as a place of refuge of a §&kya fugitive. The 
evidence hardly suffices to represent either the Sakyas or Chandragupta as 
•‘men of the Uitarapatha.” Is it suggested that Afqyura-raja (king of pea- 
cocks) on p. 126 is to be taken to refer to Chandragupta ? 

3. Seth, op. at p. 15. 

4. Vdyu Pur an 2, 89, 29. 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


143 


of Moriyanagara, perhaps identical with Pipphalivana of early 
Pali texts, members of which had to take shelter in Pupphapura 
(Pataliputra) when the last monarch of the line had been put 
to death by a certain powerful Raja. The queen consort of 
Moriyanagara, we are told, gave birth to Chandragupta, and 
the child is said to have been reared by a herdsman and a hunter 1 . 
A variant form of the story is given by the Burmese 2 3 * * . The 
foundation of the Maurya city (Moriyanagara) is there attri- 
buted to princes of Vai^ali that had escaped frcm the massacre 
of Adzatathat (AjataSatru) . According to Jain tradition recorded 
in the Pari&shtaparvan 8 , however, Chandragupta was born of the 
daughter of a peacock-tamer (Mayuraposhaka) who lived in 
an obscure village. The sources of Trogus and Justin knew 
Chandragupta as a novus homo , a man “born in humble life’*. 
This does not accord with the tradition regarding his imperial 
pedigree, though it may well be reconciled with the story that 
his family, though sprung from a ruling Kshatriya clan, had 
fallen on evil days. Justin’s reference to the hero’s encounter 
with “a lion of enormous size” and “a wild elephant” of 
monstrous shape further shows that the Chandraguptakathd 
known to the Latin historians of the early century of the 
Christian era, might not have been altogether ignorant of 
Chandragupta’s traditional association with hunters and tamers 
of the wild denizens cf the forest. Little that is historical can, 
it has to be conceded, be extracted from these legends. 

It should, however, be noted that all our authorities agree 
that the Mauryas hailed from Eastern India, the land of the 
Prasii. Young Chandragupta’s detestation of the Prasian 
contemporary of Alexander, to which Plutarch bears witness, 
is in conformity with the tradition that the poor plight in which 
the Maurya family found itself in the twenties of the fourth 
century B.C. was due, in large measure, to the agressive 
policy of neighbouring rulers, particularly the imperialists of 
Magadha. 

i. Mahawanso (Tumour) I. p. xl. 

a. Bigandet, Life or Legend of Gaudama , II. p. 126. 

3. ( Text ) VIII. 231 ; cf the Buddhist tradition connecting the 

name Moriya with mora (peacock), MaJalasakara, Dictionary of Pali Proper 

Names II. 673. 



144 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chandragupta’s first emergence from obscurity into the full 
view of history occurs in 326 — 25 B.G. when he met Alexander, 
The fact is recorded by two of the classical writers, viz., Justin, 
who draw upon the history of Trogus, and Plutarch. The 
young Maury a might have acquainted the Macedonian invader 
with conditions in Eastern India. “Alexander”, he is reported to 
have said in later times, “narrowly missed making himself 
master of the country, since its king was hated and despised 
by his subjects for the weakness of his disposition and the mean- 
ness of his origin. 1 ” Details of the original speech and the manner 
in which it was delivered are not recorded. But we are told by 
Justin that its tone gave offence to the Macedonian king who 
gave orders to kill the Indian lad. The latter sought safety by 
a speedy flight 2 . Curiously enough some modern editors emend 
the text of Justin and propose to read Nandrum in place of 
Alexandrum. The name Nan da, however, is not known from any 
other classical source, and Plutarch, who also refers to the meeting 
between Alexander and “Androcottos”, makes separate mention 
of the king or kings of the Prasii. Classical writers record other 
instances of Alexander’s impatience with boldness of language. 
The cases of Cleitus and Callisthenes may be recalled in this 
connection 3 . 

The narrative of Justin leaves the impression that after his 
departure from Alexander’s camp Chandragupta retired to a 
forest tract, drew together a body of armed men and ‘solicited 
the Indians to overthrow the existing government.’ and support 
a new sovereignty 4 . Modern translators of Justin’s text charac- 
terise the warriors who gathered round the Maurya as a band 
of robbers. But the original expression used by the Latin 
historian has the sense of mercenary soldier, hunter, as well as 
robber. The former senses are in consonance with Indian 
tradition. According to the story told in the Parisishtaparvan 
troops were levied for Chandragupta with wealth procured by 

1. Plutarch, (Loeb.) p. 403 ; McCrindle, Inv. Alex., p. 31 1 5 cf. also 
Curtius and Diodorus in Inv. Alex. pp. 222, 282. 

2. Inv. Alex., p. 327. 

3. Cf. Grote, History of Greece , (E.L.S.), XII., pp. 1403; 147!?. 

4. Justin, Inv. Alex., p. 328 : Watson’s translation, p. 142. “The new 
sovereignty” of Justin reminds us of the words Maury e nave rajani of the Mudrd * 
rakshasa. Act. IV., p. 278. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


145 


metallurgy or mineralogy ( Dhatuvada ) for the purpose of uproot- 
ing Nanda 1 . The purpose of the levy stated in the Jainta text is 
important. In the light of this evidence ‘the overthrow of the 
existing government 5 alluded to by Justin, can well be taken 
to refer to the subversion of the rule of the Nandas. As a matter 
of fact Justin in the earlier part of his narrative apparently draws 
a distinction between this event and the war with the prefects 
of Alexander, preparations for which were made thereafter 
(< deinde ). According to a subsequent passage, however, the 
winning of the throne and reigning over India seem to follow 
and result from the fight with the Macedonian commanders. 
The problem is not free from difficulties and our views have been 
stated in connection with the chronology of Chandragupta. 

If the “overthrow of the existing government 55 does not 
refer to the fall of the Nandas, but only to the destruction of 
the Macedonian domination in the Indus valley, we shall have 
to assume that the classical writers, who recounted the story of 
the rise of Chandragupta, knew nothing regarding the fate of 
Agrammes, about whom they speak so much, and were ignor- 
antof the dynastic revolution that gave Chandragupta the throne 
of Pataliputra and the crown of Prasii. It is not very probable 
that the Chandragupta Kathd on which they must have drawn 
for some of their thrilling episodes, had no reference to the tragic 
end of Alexander’s Magadhan contemporary who was “detested 
and held cheap by his subjects . 55 

Be that as it may, for details of the momentous events that 
led to the supersession of the Nandas by the Mauryas we must 
turn to Indian chroniclers and story-tellers. No contemporary 
account has survived. The traditional story is told differently 
by different writers. In some cases only fragments have sur- 
vived. One of the earliest of these, which lies embedded in the 
Milinda Pdhho , 2 * * preserves its heroic character as a tale of war 
between the contending forces of the Nandas and the Mauryas. 
The lustre of Chandragupta is, as in the narrative of Justin, 
yet undimmed by that of an all powerful chancellor. His 

1. Jacobi’s edition, 2nd. ed., p. Ixxiv : Text. VIII. 253-54. 

2. S.B.E. XXXVI., p. 147. It is interesting to note that the 

nese commentator turns Nanda into “Nandagutta of Bra hm ana caste (/«« 

3;- 



146 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


opponent Bhaddasala is a brave soldier, a general of the Nandas, 
not an astute minister. The accounts of the Puranic 
genealogists, the chroniclers of Ceylon and the JVitisar a of 
Kamandaka are still marked by comparative simplicity. They 
relate how the Nandas were uprooted and the “earth passed to 
the Mauryas 1 ”. But the credit for the achievement, for “anoint- 
ing the glorious youth Chandragupta as king” over the earth 
(or Jambudvipa) is given to a minister, the Brdhmana Kautilya, 
Chanakya or Vishnugupta. The treatise on statecraft ascribed 
to the latter goes so far as to omit in this connection all explicit 
reference to Chandragupta 2 . 

We have further embellishment in the Mudrarakshasa which 
competent critics are inclined to assign to the ninth century 
A.D 3 4 . Kautilya is now definitely the leading actor in the drama. 
The Nanda king who falls a victim to his wrath is named Sarva- 
rthasiddhi, and the family is referred to as of noble birth ( abhi - 
*jana A ). Mlechchha chieftains, Parvata, Parvataka, Parvatesvara 
or Sailesvara, his brother Vairodhaka, son Malayaketu and 
Meghaksha or Meghanada, king of the Persians, take part in 
the dynastic quarrel along with hordes of Sakas, Yavanas, 
Kiratas, Kambojas, Balhikas, Khasas, Hunas and others. The 
barbarians appear at first as allies of Chandragupta. But when 
promises made to them are evaded, and Parvata and his brother 
fall victims to Chanakya’s cunning, Malayaketu turns against 
the Maurya and joins the Nanda minister Rakshasa. The 
storm that threatened to burst upon Chandragupta was averted 
by jealousies and quarrels among his enemies. The Mlechchha 
forces dispersed and the discomfiture of Malayaketu as 
well as Rakshasa was complete. In the play the battle of 
intrigue proves more efficacious than the arbitrament of the 
sword. None of the Mlechchha chieftains have names which 
can be regarded as standing for genuine Greek or Persian 


i. The leiereno* to the Aiattas equated with the “band o i robbers” 
of Justin, that snrne ret ni \vniers find in the Puranic texts is due to a misread 
ing (P^rgitcr. DKA, w. ui h 35.). 

2. ArthasChira, Br.. XV., concluding verse. 

3. Keith, Sanskrit O/arau , p. 204. 

4. MudrauAs ha sc p. >0. 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


147 


originals and the appearance of the Hunas in connection with 
the Magadhan conflict of the fourth century B.C. exposes the 
true character of several incidents narrated in the play. The 
identification of Parvataka with Porus, proposed by some 
writers , 1 has little to support it. Parvataka and his family are 
clearly branded as Mlechchha in the play, and their forces as 
Mlechchha - bala ; on the other hand the Purus or Pauravas could 
claim an illustrious Vedic and epic ancestry. The territory 
over which Parvataka ruled is described by Jain writers as 
Himavatkuta , 2 while Porus ruled at first the country between 
the Jhelum and the Chenab to which were added territories 
stretching as far as the Hyphasis or Beas and the Indus. In the 
Mudrarakshasa one Sindhusena or Sushena appears as the prince 
of the Indus region. Lastly, Parvataka is slain by a poison 
maiden ( Vishakanya ) as a result of Kautilya’s intrigue, while 
Porus is killed by Eudamus, according to one reading of the text 
of Diodorus, and by Alexander himself according to Pseudo- 
Callisthenes . 3 

The Kashmirian redactors of the Brihatkathd show their 
independence of the tradition followed by the play by introduc- 
ing a Yogananda, a Nanda produced by magic, that is, by the 
entry of an adept in that art into the body of the genuine (puna) 
Nanda. They also attribute to Sakatala, the minister cf the 
real Nanda, the destruction of the son of the supposititious king, 
and the bestowal of the royal dignity upon Chandragupta, 
child of the genuine monarch. Chanakya, according to this 
version, is simply a protege and an instrument of Sakatala . 4 * The 
real Nanda king is now definitely described as a Sudra. 

Fresh accretions to the tale are met with in the Parisishta~ 
parvan , the Mahavaiiisa Jlkd , and the legend of the Burmese 

1. C.H.I., I., 471 : ‘‘Identification of Parvataka and Porus ” H. C- Seth. 

2. Parisishtaparvan (Op. cit. , VIII. 297 — 98 (p. 222). Jacobi has the 

following note on Parvataka : f In the list of the kings of Nepal, according to 
the Bauddha Parvatlya Varhsavali {Ind. Ant., Vol. XIII. p- 4 12 ) die nth 
king of the 3rd dynasty, that of the Kiratas, is Barba, apparently our Parvataj 
for, in the reign of the 7th king, Jitedaoti, is placed Buddha’s visit to Nepal 9 
and in that of the 14th, Sthunka, Aioka visited the country.'* p* 

Ixxv, m.) 

3 » Smith, Aloha , (3rd ed.), p. 12 n ; McCrindle, Ancient Ind 1 in 
Classical Literature, p. 178. 

4. ^ Text, Nirnaya S a gar a Press, KatJidp'dhalambakch Tarangas IV and V I 

Pen/er’s edition of Tawney’s translation, Vol. I., p. 40 — 57. 



148 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


Buddha . 1 We have different versions of the story of the initial 
failure of Chanakya and Chandragupta in their attack on the 
Nanda dominions, and their ultimate success due to experience 
gathered on the spot. According to the Buddhist version the 
last of the Nandas is put to death. But in the narrative of 
Hemachandra he is permitted to leave his kindgom . 2 There 
is lack of agreement in regard to another important matter. 
Th- Mahavamsa Jika definitely assigns Chanakya to the city of 
Taxiia . 3 On the other hand, Hemachandra seems to suggest in 
the Abhidhanachintdmam 4 “that Kautilya, son of Chanaka was a 
Dramila” i.e. an inhabitant of South India. But as the lexical 
verse indentifies him with Vatsyayana, Mallanaga, Pakshilas- 
vamin as well as Vishnugupta, little importance attaches to its 
testimony. Curiously enough the Parisishtaparvan 5 mentions 
Gollz-vishaya as the home-land of the famous minister. The 
identity of the place is not known. 

The overthrow of the Nandas rid the Magadhan empire of a 
dynasty that, in spite of its great services, had failed either to 
secure the good will of the subjects, or to show any intelligent 
grasp of the policy to be pursued towards the invaders in the 
North-West. The new regime had to justify itself by efficient 
administration, by promotion of the welfare of the people, and 
securing their protection against the Tavana menace. Regarding 
some of the methods adopted by Chandragupta opinions may 
differ. According to Justin “he oppressed with servitude the 
very people whom he had emancipated from foreign thraldom ” 6 
We do not know how far the remark applies to the Magadhan 
provinces. The judgment is of too sweeping a character to be 
supported by all other available evidence. We shall not enter 
here into the details of the Mauryan polity which will be dealt 
with in a later chapter. The emancipation of the Indians 
from foreign thraldom, to which the Latin historian refers, was 


1. Pariiiihtaparvan Canto VIII , Mahdwanso (Tumour) pp. xlff. Bigandet, 
op, cit . II ., 126 ff. 

2. Parisishtaparvan, VIII 315 f., p. Ixxvi. 

3. Mahdwanso (Tumour) p. xxxixf 
4* HI- 517* 

5. VIII. 194. 

6 . McCrindle, Invasion , p. 327 



CHANDRA GUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


149 


in itself no mean achievement. Wc now turn to this famous 
episode in the career of Chandragupta. 

The liberation of the land of the five rivers and the border 
country from the Macedonians was a long process. It required 
two wars to expel the prefects of Alexander and hurl back the 
battalions of one of the most ambitious and capable of his succes- 
sors. The great Macedonian king and conqueror wanted to 
incorporate the territories he had conquered in India perma- 
nently into his empire. He made elaborate arrangements 
or their defence and administration. Garrisons were posted 
in several places, colonies planted, cities fortified at important 
stategic points and dock-yards constructed. Satraps recruited 
from Indians as well as Macedonians and allied peoples irom 
the West were appointed to assume the administration cf some 
of the conquered provinces. Certain areas were, however, 
left under the control of Indian Rajas . 1 2 

Alexander died in 32 3 B.C. His successors, who met to parti- 
tion the Macedonian empire at Babylon on the day after his 
death, and again at Triparadisus in Syria towards the end 
of 321 B. C., had no desire to withdraw altogether from the 
Indian provinces. They could not however be blind to certain 
new developments. The Macedonians were torn by internal 
dissensions and their ranks were getting thinner in India. 
Antipater, regent 'of Macedonia from 321 to 318 B.C., managed 
to retain control over the satrapy of India w r hich‘ ‘bordered on the 
Paropanisadae” which he gave to Pi then in 321 B.C. <l Of the 
adjacent kingdoms he gave that which lay along the Indus to 
Porus, and that along the Hydaspes (Jhclum) to Taxiles 
(Ambhi), for it was impossible to remove these kings without 
royal troops under the command of some distinguished general. 5,3 
Smith seems to think that the names of the Rajas have been 
interchanged. 3 This is not improbable. But it is well to 
remember that the city of Taxila did not lie far from the 
Hydaspes, and Porus might have been given charge of a part 
of the Indus valley over which Eudamus, the Thracian, 
exercised sway as one of the joint successors of Philippus. 

1. See ch. Ill above. 

2. McCrindle, India as described in Classical Literature , pp. 20 1 — 2. 

3. Asoka , (3rd ed.b p- I2n. 



150 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Eudamus was probably disfavoured as a partisan of Eumenes, 
a rival of Antipater. 1 It is significant that according to a reading 
of a passage of Diodorus, Eudamus is said to have seized a number 
of elephants after the death of Alexander, having treacherously 
slain Porus. 2 The hostility to Porus is explicable if the Indian 
Raja had been granted favours by the Regent in Macedon at 
the expense of the Thracian commander. Eudamus had how- 
ever soon to leave India to help Eumenes in his fight against 
Antipater. The event is usually dated in or about 317 B.C. 
and must in any case have preceded the execution of Eumenes 
in 316 B. G. Pithon, who favoured the side of Antigonus, 3 
another great general who claimed a share of Alexander’s inhe- 
ritance, left India about the same time in 316 B.C. 4 and was 
slain in the battle of Gaza four years later. 5 

The leading part in the destruction or expulsion of Alexan- 
der’s commanders in India is, as already stated, assigned by 
Justin to Chandragupta. The earlier attempt of Samaxus, 
the Assakenians, the Brahma nas of the Lower Indus valley, 
and Musicanus (Alousikanos) had ended in failure. The 
process of liberation is likely to have begun before the Partition 
of Triparadisus when the lament is already heard about the 
growing power of the Indian Rajas and the absence or at least 
inadequacy of royal “troops under the command of some dis- 
tinguished general.” “Itseems howeverthat thecountry” “eman- 
cipated from foreign thraldom” did not stretch at first beyond 
the Hydaspes (Jhelum) in the north-west. The Alacedonian 
Regent claimed to dispose of territories extending eastwards 
as far as that river in 321 B.C. But soon the Magadhan fron- 
tier reached the Indus. According to a fragment quoted by 
Pliny, possibly from Megasthenes, “the Indus skirts the 
frontiers of the Prasii” 6 that is, the Alagadhan empire, doubtless 
during some part of the reign of Chandragupta as his predece- 
ssors did not control any part of the Punjab, and his successors 
seem to have exercised sway over the province as far as the 

1. McCrindle, Invasion p. 389. 

2. Smith, Asoka, (3rd ed.), p. i2n. 

3- McCrindle Invasion , p. 40 o. 

4. Tam Greeks in Bactria and India , p. 47 n 2. 

5. McCrindle Invasion, p. 400. 

o, McCrindle, Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian p. 143. 



chandragupta and bindusara 


151 


north-western mountains. The Indians whose territory 
“bordered on the Paropanisadae” (in the Kabul valley) are 
known to have been under Pithon till c. 316 B.G. The district * 
to which Eudamus clung, after the partition of Triparadisus^ 
which ignored him, may also have lain, like that of his predec- 
essor Philipp us, partly at any rate, beyond the Indus. These 
commanders had been partisans of Antigonus and Eumenes 
respectively. The execution of Eumenes in 316 — -15 B.C. 1 and 
the exhaustion of Antigonus in the war of 315 to 312 — 1 1 B.G. 8 
left the way clear for Seleucus who returned to Babylon in 312 
— 1 1 B.G., and soon made himself master of “the whole region 
from Phrygia to the Indus”. 3 Appian, to whom we are indebted 
for the information conveyed by the last few words, seems clearly 
to suggest that the Indus formed the boundary between the 
dominions of Seleucus and Ghandragupta before the two kings 
came to blows. The former is said to have “ crossed the Indus 
and waged war with Androcottus, king of the Indians, who 
dwelt on the banks of that stream .” 

It is a matter for surprise that the classical writers who have 
so much to say regarding the Indian campaigns of Alexander 
should preserve reticence in regard to the details of the famous 
struggle to which Appian refers. Even the date of the war 
and its total duration are not known for certain. Appian 
informs us that the fight went on “until they (i.e., the Syrian 
and Indian Kings) came to an understanding with each 
other and contracted a marriage relationship ( kedos ).” He 
adds that some of the exploits of Seleucus were performed 
“before the death of Antigonus (at Ipsus, 301 B.G.) and some 
afterwards.” 4 The “understanding” or treaty with Ghandra- 
gupta and “settlement of affairs in the East” are definitely dated 
by Justin before Seleucus’ return home to prosecute the war 
with Antigonus. 5 Pliny refers to the opening up of India with 
its numberless nations and cities by the arms of Alexander, 


!• Inv. Alex. p. 385, Companion to Greek Studies p. no. 

2. Companion, p. no. 

3* Appian, Roman History , Vol. II. (Loeb Library) — Syr. XI. 9.55. 
4. Appian, Ibid. 

5* Ino. Alex., 328, 



152 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Seleucus and Antiochus, but gives no details that might have 
thrown light on the war with Chandragupta . 1 

While the war itself received scant attention at the hands 
of the historians, the “understanding” seems to have attracted 
greater notice. Plutarch tells us that Chandragupta “made a 
present to Seleucus of five hundred elephants .” 2 Fuller infor- 
mation is given by Strabo who says : 

“Along the Indus are the Paropamisadae, above whom lies 
the Paropamisus mountain ; then, towards the south, the 
Arachoti ; then next, towards the south, the Gedroseni, with 
the other tribes that occupy the seaboard ; and the Indus lies, 
latitudinally, alongside all these places ; and of these places, 
in part , some that lie along the Indus are held by Indians, although 
they formerly belonged to the Persians. Alexander took these 
away from the Arians and established settlements 3 of his own, 
but Seleucus Nicator gave them to Sandrocottus, upon terms 
of intermarriage [epigamia) and of receiving in exchange five 
hundred elephants .” 4 

In another passage we are informed that “the Indus River 
was the boundary between India and Ariana, which latter was 
situated next to India on the west and was in the possession of the 
Persians at that time (i.e., at thetimeof Alexander’s invasion) ; 
for later the Indians also held much of Ariana, having received 
it from the Macedonians .” 5 

Diplomatic relations were also established between the 
contracting powers, for Strabo refers to the sending of Megas- 
thenes to the court of Chandragupta at Pataliputra. 

The details of the “understanding” to which Strabo bears 
witness leave no room for doubt that Seleucus could not make 
much headway. Even royal Macedonian troops under a dis- 

t. McCrindle, Ancient India as described in Classical Literature , p. 107. 

The journeys made from the Beas for Seleucus Nicator, to which Pliny bears 
witness, may, as pointed out by Macdonald, refer not to reconnaissances made 
during a campaign, but to information gathered subsequently by Greek envoys 
accredited to the Court of Pataliputra (Megasihenes and Arrian , 1926, 129 ff.* 
Comb. Hist. Ind. I. 430.). 

2. Plutarch, op, cit. Ch. LXII. 

3. Governments or provinces according to Tarn ( Greeks in Bactiia and 
India , p. 100. 

4. Geography (Loeb. Library) translated by H. L. Jones, (XV. 2 . 9,h 
P- 143 - 

5. ibid, p. 15 (xv. i. 10). 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BlNDUSARA 


153 


tinguished commander failed to dislodge the king of the Prasii 
from the Punjab. On the contrary, the invader had to give 
up some of the Macedonian possessions on the Indus “receiving 
in exchange the comparatively small recompense of five hundred 
elephants.” In regard to the extent of the territory surrendered 
by Seleucus and the nature of the marriage compact of 
which, according to Strabo, the cession was in part the conse- 
quence, there has been considerable difference of opinion. 
Smith believed, on the strength of a passage of Pliny, that the 
countries ceded included the four satrapies of Gedrosia, Ara- 
chosia, Aria, and the Paropamisadae. 1 Pliny however simply 
says that “numerous authors include in India the four satra- 
pies” in question. 2 He may have been referring to conditions 
not in the days of Seleucus and Chandragupta, but in some 
later epoch, e.g., that of the monarchs of the Scytho- Parthian 
dynasties who reigned previous to A.D. 77. 3 The words used by 
Strabo “and of these places, in part, some that lie along the 
Indus are held by Indians” do not convey the idea of a complete 
abandonment of the Satrapies in question including even Aria. 
Tarn is inclined to think that only those parts of the three 
satrapies of Paropamisadae, Arachosia and Gedrosia which 
lay along the Indus were ceded by Seleucus. In Gedrosia the 
district ceded was, in his opinion, that between the Median 
Hydaspes (identified with the Purali) and the Indus. Of the 
satrapy called Paropamisadae Chandragupta got, according 
to this view, only Gandhara between the Kunar river and the 
Indus. The boundary in Arachosia is not precisely defined 
but it is suggested that what Chandragupta got lay east of a 
line starting from the Kunar river to somewhere near Quetta 
and then going to the sea by Kalat and the Purali river. 4 The 
contention of Tarn cannot however be accepted in its entirety. 

i* E.H.I.s 4th cd. p. 159. 

2. Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 156 \ E.H.l 4^ c d. p* 159* 

3. Pliny’s information was not solely drawn from the contemporaries 
of Alexander and Seleucus. He refers to the opening up of India by e arms 
of Antiochus as well as Alexander and Seleucus. He utilised the ev i ence no 
only of u old writers ” but of ambassadors who came to the early Koman 
emperors (Me Crindle Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, 
pp. 103, 107). He speaks of a discovery oi a shorter route to the 
Indian ports by a merchant (p. in) in comparatively recent times. 

4. Tam, Greeks in Bactria and India , p- 100. 



154 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


In regard to one point he is definitely wrong. The V and 
XIII Rock Edicts of Asoka count among the north-western 
tribes who were included within the raja-vis}iaya> and were 
subject to the jurisdiction of imperial officials, not only the 
Gandharas but the Yonas. Association with the Kambojas 
and the Gandharas suggests that these Yonas are the people 
of that name mentioned in the Mahavamsa whose city Alasanda 
had been identified by Cunningham and Geiger with Alexandria 
in the country of the Paropamisadae near Kabul 1 . When 
Strabo says that ‘‘the Indiansheld muchod Ariana, having received 
it from the Macedonians”, it is difficult to believe that 
he means only the comparatively narrow strip of territory that 
lay to the west of the Indus and east of a line drawn from the 
Kunar to the Purali. 

In regard to the marriage compact Macdonald draws a 
distinction between the terms kedos and epigamia used by Appian 
and Strabo respectively. The former, we are told, would 
signify an actual marriage, while the latter probably implied 
only “a convention establishing a jus connubii between the two 
royal families ”. 2 It is observed in this connection that there was 
no room in the family circle of Seleucus for any actual marriage 
relationship. Both the expressions used by our authorities may, 
however, signify a “connection by marriage,” though the word 
used by Strabo has also the sense of “right of intermarriage 
between states .” 3 The cession of territories “upon terms of 
intermarriage (epigamia)” implies that the marriage did take 
place, the lands in question being possibly treated as the dower 
of the Seleucid princess like the Kasi village in the Buddhist 
story of Kosala devl and Bombay in case of Catherine of 
Braganza 4 . 

By his victory over the Nandas and the Macedonians 
C ividragupta became master of the extensive region stretching 
from Magadha and Bengal to the easternmost satrapies of 
Ariana. The king of Pataliputra and the Prasii dominated 

i.. Cunningham, Ancient Indian Geography , p. 18 , Geiger Mahavamsa , 

P* * 94 - 

2. Comb. Hist . of India, Vol. I., p. 431. 

3* Liddell and Scott., Greek-English Lexicon , pp. 626, 946. 

4. See on this point the observations of Tam, Greeks in Bactria and India 
p. 17411. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


155 


not only “the whole tract along the Ganges”/ but thecountries 
on the Indus that had once acknowledged the sway of the 
Pet siaus and Alexander. Unfortunately the classical writers 
do not say much about any further extension of the Magadhan 
dominions in the interior of India. We have only the vague 
statement of Plutarch that ££ with an army of six hundred 
thousand men (Chandragupta) overran and subdued all India.” s 
The conquest and subjugation of one important province, that 
of Surashtra or rCxthiawar in the extreme west, is however 
clearly attested by the Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudra- 
daman which refers to Chandragupta’s Rashtriya or High Com- 
missioner Pushyagupta, theVaisya, who constructed the famous 
Sdinrsana Lake. The incorporation of this country within the 
Mxgadhan empire implies control over Avanti or Malwa. The 
‘Mariyas’ or Mauryas are actually included by Jain writers 
among the successors of Palaka of Avanti 3 . Ujjain, the capital 
of the province, long remained the seat of a Maurya viceroyalty. 
In the days of Asoka, grandson of Chandragupta, the 
Maurya frontier reached North Mysore. As the only specific 
conquest claimed by that emperor is that of Kalinga, the exten- 
sion of the empire beyond the Tuiigabhadra must be due 
to one of his predecessors. Certain mediaeval inscriptions 
speak of parts of Mysore being protected by Chandragupta . 4 
The evidence is late and too much cannot be built on it. It 
should however be noted that a number of Tamil authors, 
usually assigned to the early centuries of the of the Christian 
era, mike allusion to the “Moriyar” having crossed a mountain 
witn snow-capped peaks towering to the skies, and these allu- 
sions will be discussed elsewhere in the section on South India. 

In. the third century B.C. the Chitaldrug district marked 
the furthest limit of the Maurya empire in the South. But 
posterity ignored these limitations and loved to regard the hero 


_*• . Megasthcnes and Arrian p. 141, That the king of the 'PalibothrP 
vPataliputra) referred to in the Fragment is Chandragupta is clear from the 
description of the standing army which follows the account of the people 
and the capital city. 

*• Plutarch, op. cif., Ch. LXII. 

3 - Jacobi, Kalpasutra of BhadrabahUy 1879, p. 7 > Pttridishfapanjan, 
Jacobi, and. ed., p. xx. 

4. Rice, Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions f p. 10. 


156 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


who had overthrown the Nandas and given protection to the 
earth harrassed by the Mlechchhas as “king over all Jambudvipa”, 
sole monarch of the country that extends “from the lord of the 
mountains (& ailendra, i.e., the Himalayas), cooled by showers 
of the spray of the divine stream (Ganges) playing about among 
its rocks, to the shores of the Southern ocean ( dakshindrnava ) 
marked by the b alliance of gems flashing with variouscolours.” 1 
These words find an echo in the statement of Plutarch quoted 
above, thus pointing to the prevalence, as early as the beginning 
of the Christian era, of the tradition of Chandragupta’s 
universal rule — the realisation of the ideal of a united India 
under an Ekarat or Chakravartin to which the Brahmanas and the 
Nikdyas give eloquent expression. 

The political and military record of Chandragupta, brilliant 
as it is, does not sum up all his achievements. The great soldier 
who had liberated one part of his country from an unpopular 
dynasty, and another from foreign yoke, the architect of an em- 
pire embracing the greater part if not the whole of India, was 
as '‘strenuous in the arts of peace as in the arts of war. 55 The 
conqueror of Bhadrasala and Seleucus, master of a host of . 
600,000 foot-soldiers, 30,000 cavalry, 8,000 or 9,000 elephants 2 , 
wore the velvet glove as soon as conditions permitted. Great 
though he was as a war-leader, he had no inordinate passion 
for the sanguinary revelries of the battle-field. He set out to 
accomplish the unity of India, but beyond its borders he never 
cast his covetous eyes. The statement of Arrian, who apparent- 
ly quotes from Megasthenes, that “a sense of justice, they say, 
prevented an Indian king from attempting conquest beyond 
the limits of India 3 ” perhaps reflects one of the fundamental 
principles of Mauryan foreign policy as laid down by the foun- 
der of the line and upheld by his successors. 

Tlie conquests of Chandragupta brought India into 
closer touch with the outer world, particularly with the coun- 
tries of the Hellenic West. We have noted above that the clash 
of arms with the Tavana king of Western Asia was followed by 

1. Afudrarakshasa, Act. III., verse 19, 

2. McCrindle Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian, 
pp. 141, 161. 

3. Ibid. p. 209. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


157 


the establishment of an intimate relationship of a personal 
character between the ruling houses of Pataliputra and Babylon- 
Seleuria. A lady of the Seleucid family probably graced the 
royal palace of the king of Prasii, and a Greek envoy adorned 
his court. The consideration thus shown did not remain 
unreciprocated. We are informed by Athenaeus on the autho- 
rity of Phylarclius that the Indian king sent sundry presents 
to Sdeucus which included certain powerful aphrodisiacs 1 . 
Chandragupta’s respect for Hellenic genius is also illustrated 
by the story that he did honour to the altars of Alexander 2 
Diodorus speaks of a Greek author named Iamboulus who was 
made a slave by the Ethiopians and was later ship-wrecked 
on the shores of India and carried to the 4 Ting of Palibothra 
who had a great love for the Graecians 3 .” It is, however, 
difficult to determine whether we have here an allusion to Chan- 
dra jupta’s phil-Hellenism, or, a reference to the liking that his 
son and successor had for Greek sophists. It is interesting to 
note in this connection the presence of a considerable number 
of foreigners in the metropolitan city of Pataliputra. A spe- 
cial board of municipal officers engaged itself in looking after their 
safety and comfort. Special arrangements were also made to 
meet their judicial needs 4 . Arrian informs us that “the 
Indians do not use aliens as slaves.” 

In civil government Chandragupta showed an aptitude 
which placed him far above the ordinary warrior-king. The 
selection of councillors from men respected on account of their 
high character and wisdom, an equitable system of judicial 
administration, efficient management of municipal affairs, 
development of roads and irrigation works, concessions to hus- 
bandmen and artisans, encouragement of passenger traffic and 
commerce, and perhaps also the suppression of piracy, by a 
board of admiralty, limitation of slavery, and many other 
measures to promote the prosperity and civilization of the 
people, do not support the stricture of Justin that he “changed 

1. McCrindle, Invasion p. 405. 

2. Smith, EMJ . p. 1 2511. 

3. Ancient India in Classical Literature, p. 204-5. 

4. Uegaithents and Arrian, pp. 42, 68. 


158 


AGE OF THE N AND AS AND MAURYAS 


the name of freedom to that of bondage” and oppressed his 
countrymen. The judgment of the Latin historian may have 
been based on the strict discipline that he enforced, and the 
severity of the penal code which permitted mutilation. We 
shall not deal in detail with these and other matters relating 
to Maurya polity as they will receive attention in a 
later chapter. We shall content ourselves with a brief notice 
of the king and his court. 

The monarch usually resided in the famous metropolis 
of Pataliputra, known to the Greek and Latin wi iters as Pali- 
bothra, Palibotra and Palimbothra. 1 2 But on occasions he 
must have moved about from place to place like Harsha. Ap- 
pian 5 s reference to Androcottus as the king of the Indians, who 
dwelt on or about the Indus, 2 suggests that the emperor might 
have used some city on or near that river as an alternative capi- 
tal or at least as a ‘camp of victory 5 (jayaskandhavara ) . The 
classical writers have left interesting accounts of the Maurya 
metropolis in the land of the Prasii. Pataliputra, we are told 
was a large and wealthy city, situated at the confluence of the 
Erannoboas (Hiranyavaha or Son) and the Ganges, stretching 
in the form of a parallelogram. Its “inhabited quarters” 
covered an area 80 stades (9 miles 352 yards) in length and 15 
stades (1 mile 1270yards) in breadth. It was enclosed by a wooden 
wall 3 * pierced with loopholes for the discharge of arrows and 
crowned with 570 towers, apparently for keeping watch. The 
approaches to the city consisted of 64 gates. Running alorg the 
wall, but outside it, was a gigantic trench fed by water intro- 
duced from the neighbouring rivers, 6 plethra (200 yards) wide 
and 30 cubits deep, constructed for the purpose of defence as 
well as reception of sewage. Sumptuous palaces adorned the 
city, which housed a numerous population, including a large 


1. The foundation of the city, as is well, fcnown, is ascribed by Indian 
writers to Udflyi, son of Ajatsatru. Curiously enough a tradition quoted by 
Diodorus, presumably on the authority of Megastheres (McCrindh, Ancient 
India a* described hy Merest fores and Arrian, p. 37). gives the credit to Heracles* 

2. Appian, op. cit. XI. 9. 55. 

The capita] of V 1 : .taj it"ii (the Trdus Valiev and the Borderland) in the 
Maurya period P I.m wn to have hem at Taxila. It is not improbable that 
App’an aLudcs to tl e iv^dcncc of Chandra gup to. in this city* 

3. Ci. Fa tan kill I\. 3. 2. li Pj.tc.litu f i c. hah prcUdiah Paial'puirakdh 

pi churl ill'* 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 159 . 

number of foreigners. The care of the metropolis was entrus- 
ted to a corporation of 30 members (astynomoi) A 

If Aelian is to be believed the royal palace “where the 
greatest of all the kings 55 of India resided was a marvel of work- 
manship with which “neither Memnonian Susa with all its 
costly splendour, nor Ekbatana with all its magnificence, can 
vie. 55 Parks, resonant with the melodious notes of peacocks 
and pheasants, shady groves and ever green trees “set in clumps 
and branches woven together 55 , some of which were brought 
from distant lands, lovely tanks abounding in tame fishes, and 
with little princes fishing, playing and swimming in them — 
were all calculated to lend charm to the scenery. l. 2 The 
majesty and beauty of the palace befitted the residence of a 
mighty monarch, and its dweller is revealed to us as a man of 
fine aesthetic sense with “a genuine joy of life and love of nature 55 
not usually associated with a stern soldier. Excavations have 
brought to light the ruins of Maurya buildings at the village 
of Kumrahar, not far from the modern city of Patna. The 
wooden structures, especially fragments of timber palisade* 
probably date back to the reign of Chandragupta. 3 

Among the inmates of the palace the consorts of the great 
king claim special attention. One of them, if we accept the 
traditional interpretation of the treaty between Chandiagupta 
and Seleucus, must have been a Seleucid princess. 4 Jain 
tradition refers to the name of another lady called Durdhara, 
represented as the mother of Binduasara. 5 Burmese legends 
do not mention the name, but assign to the mother of Chan- 
dragupta’s successor a Maurya lineage and the chief place 
among the queens. 6 The queens of the first Maurya are rather 


l. McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian , pp. 37, 65^ 67f. 87, 2ogf. 

a. Cf. Rock Edict II of Asoka for importation of herbs, roots and 
fruits. 

Monahan, Early History of Bengal , p. 177 ; C.H.L , I., p. 41 if l McGrindle, 
Ancient India in Classical Literature , p. 141 f. 

Curtius in his History of Alexander { Inv. Alex., pp. i88f) describes an Indian 
palace which is taken by some to be that of Chandragupta. But as has been 
pointed out by Monahan (op. ext. p. 178), it is not clear whether we have here 
ft description of the court of the Imperial Mauryas or of some minor potentate. 

3. Monahan, op. cit. pp. 173! ; Smith E.H.L (4th edn.) p. isHn. 

4. Cf. the views of Tarn, one of the most recent writers on the subject, 
Greeks in Bactria and India , p.i74n. 

5. Parisishtaparvan , pp. lxxix, 234 (VIII. 439*. 

6. Bigandet, op. cit., p. 128. 



160 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


shadowy figures, and we do not know whether like the wives of 
Chandragupta’s Hellenistic contemporaries they played any 
conspicuous part in public life, court ceremonial, and policy. 
The sons of the king find mention in a passage of Aelian 
noted above as engaged in fishing, playing and swimming in 
ponds within the palace grounds. We do not know if these 
youngsters included the famous Bindusara whose name and that 
of Simhasena among those of the sons of Chandragupta have 
been transmitted by tradition . 1 

Besides these members of the royal family, there was a host 
of women “bought from their parents” who took care of the 
king’s person inside the palace, and even accompanied him on 
hunting expeditions . 2 

We have interesting glimpses of the private life of the king. 
He sometimes permitted himself to indulge in drinking 3 , in all 
probability at sacrifices, but never to an excess as he might fall 
a victim to foul plots of ambitious women. He did not sleep 
in day time, and even at night he had to change his bed occa- 
sionally as a precaution against attempts on his life 4 . 

The court of Chandragupta was no less imposing than his 
palace. In later times the grammarian Patanjali could still 
recall the Chandragupta-sabhd 5 . Here the king conferred with 
his councillors and assessors who excelled in wisdom, received 
ambassadors, listened to the reports of the episkopoi who inquired 
into and watched all that went on in his vast dominions, and 
administered justice to his subjects even when the time came 
for attending to his person, that is, when he was to be rubbed 
with cylinders of wood 6 . 

The prominent figures of the sabha, who were outside the 
class of diplomats, are known more from tradition than from 
documents of unassailable fidelity. Mention is no doubt 
made in an inscription of the Rashtriya Pushyagupta, the 
Vaisya, who was put in charge of an important province. It is, 

i. Simhasena may have been only an epithet of Bindusara. 

*. Megasthenes and Arrian, p. yof. 

3. Cf. Bindusara ’s letter to Antioch us Soter, asking the latter to buy 
for him sweet wine. {Inr. Alex. 409n). 

4. Meg . and An. p. 70E 

5. I. I- IX. 

6. M eg 'is f fumes and Arrian, pp. 41, 70!, 85, 2 iy( 



chandragupta and bindusara 


161 


however, not known definitely whether he graced at any time 
the central darbar of his sovereign. 

Tradition has preserved for us the names of several persons 
who are reputed to have attended the court of Chandragupta. 
Among these the place of honour should be given to the cele- 
brated Kautilya or Chanakya, the all-powerful chancellor of 
the Maurya empire. We have already referred to the famous 
work on statecraft attributed to him The contemporaneity 
of the king and his famous minister, though not proved by irre- 
fragable evidence, is rendered possible by the unanimity of 
traditions to that effect recorded in the works of Indian, Cey- 
lonese and Burmese writers of different persuasions. A second 
minister of Chandragupta, according to Buddhist legends, was 
a Jatilian, Maniyatappo by name, mentioned in the Maka- 
ti ami a 

Among other personages who figured in the Sabha mention 
may be made of envoys who came from foreign courts. Of 
these the most celebrated was Megasthenes. He brought his 
credentials from Seleucus and resided long enough in Patali- 
putra to observe things for himself. He wrote a book on India but 
unfortunately this interesting work has been lost. Only frag- 
ments have survived in the quotations of later classical writers. 

If tradition is to be believed, the court of the first Maurya, 
like that of many of his successors who wore the imperial crown 
of India, opened its portals to a third group of personages, besides 
ministers and diplomats, viz., religious teachers. Jain writers 
emphasise that in his later days Chandragupta came into inti- 
mate touch with pontiffs of their faith, the most eminent among 
whom was Bhadrabahu who is reported to have died in 1 70 A. V., 

1 - e -, 15 years after the accession of the first Maurya according 
to one reckoning 2 . He was the reputed author of the Kalpasutra 
and other works. According to the Rajavalikathe he was born 
m a Brahmana family at Kotikapura in Pundravardhana 3 . 

*• Tumour, op. cit>, p. xlii. 

2. Parishhiaparvan, pp. vii, xx, 248 (IX. 112). 

3 « Ind. Ant. y 1892, p. 157. 

Fleet (Ibid.) pp. 136^ : jf.R.A.S. 1909, p. 2311) is sceptical about the Jain 
S or J* Jacobi ( Parnishtaparvan , pp. vi — vii : Kalpasutra p. 22) thinks that simc 
worjcs, e.g., the JVirnktas, attributed to the sixth Patriarch, who died in 1 yoA.V^ 
e a ly proceeded from the pen of a late namesake. According to him the 
Mnacharis .may be regarded as the work ol the great Bhadrabanu. 



162 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


The king, says Strabo, left the palace usually on four occa- 
sions, viz., to lead the army in person in time of war, to 
administer justice, to offer sacrifice, and lastly, to go to the chase. 
Hunting was a favourite pastime. The king marched out of 
the palace to the accompaniment of drums and gongs, and was 
surrounded by a host of armed women who rode “some on 
chariots, some on horses and some even on elephants”. Spear- 
men were posted to protect the whole company. The king 
hunted in fenced enclosures, either from a platform in his chariot 
Or from the back of an elephant 1 . 

On occasions he seems to have attended public spectacles. 
One such show is referred to by Pliny (on the authority of 
Megasthenes) in which foals of kartazons — a kind of one horned 
animal, probably the rhinoceros, — were set to fight each other 2 . 
Some of the facts mentioned by the classical writers receive 
confirmation from the inscriptions of Asoka. The predecessors 
of that king, we are told, went on vihara-yatra , an important 
feature of which was hunting. They also celebrated samajas 
which may be compared with the public spectacles of Pliny. 

In a passage of Strabo 3 reference is made to a great festival 
on the occasion of the hair-washing ceremony of the Indian 
king when the people brought him costly presents and made a 
display of their wealth. Certain writers are inclined to think 
that the Greek geographer got his information from Megasthenes, 
and that therefore the ceremony pertains to the court of Patali- 
putra. They further urge that the festival was borrowed from 
Persia and regard it as a proof of India’s indebtedness to Persian 
culture. It may however be pointed out that Strabo introduces 
the passage in question with the words “the following state- 
ments are made by historians ”, and makes special mention of 
Clitarchus 4 . The festival in question might, therefore, have 
been current even before Chandragupta. At any rate there is 
little warrant to connect it definitely with the court of Chandra- 
gupta at Pataliputra. 


r. Megasthenes and Arrian p. 71* 

2. ibid, p. 58. 

3. XV. I. 69. 

4. .author of a Life of Alexander > and a contemporary of that king* 

(Cf. j/,r Alex . pp. 8, io : CM./., 399, 675) Jayaswa! in J.B.O.R.S., II., p. 9& 
irises the refeiencc to CliUichus. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


163 


The personal gifts of Chandiagupta were of a varied kind. 
Reference has been made to his interpidity and ability as a 
soldier, vigour and wisdom as an administiator, to his keen 
sense of beauty and love of nature. To these he added a wide 
intellectual curiosity and, according to traditional accounts, 
a deep interest in religion. These were probably imbibed from 
contact with philosophers. Megasthenes tells us that it was a 
general practice among Indian kings to consult through 
messengers a class of philosophers called the Hylobioi — a section 
of the Sarmanes ( Sramanas ) — who dwelt in the woods and lived 
a life of continence. The questions regarding which rulers sought 
illumination related to the cause of things and other matters. The 
services of these philosophers were also employed for the worship 
or supplication of deities 1 . Again, at the beginning of the year 
a great Synod of philosophers was called by kings in order that 
they might communicate useful suggestions in writing concern- 
ing the improvement of crops or the cattle or the promotion of public 
interest 2 . It will perhaps not be unreasonable to surmise that 
the Greek envoy learnt about some of these things from what 
actually came under his observation at Pataliputra. 

The king who conversed with philosophers, to benefit by their 
wise counsel, included within the range of his interest, even 
wild races. This is well illustrated by stories about the Astomi, 
who lived near the source of the Ganges and were brought to 
the court, and the Enotokoitai who died on the way as they 
refused to take food 3 . These stories may not be worthy of 
credence in all their particulars. But they prove that the classical 
writers credited Chandragupta with an amount of curiosity, not 
unworthy of a modern anthropologist. 

The reign of Chandragupta was not altogether devoid of 
literary interest. We have already seen that tradition associates 


1. McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian, pp. 102 ff. Next in rank 
to the Hylobioi were the physicians who lived indoors, and effected 
cures by regulating diet rather than by the use of medicines. Among 
philopsophers there were some women. Medicine received attention 
along with philosophy. 

2. Ibid., pp. 38, 83, 214. Or, according to another interpretation, 
prosperity of either fruits or living beings or concerning government. Geography of 
Strabo (Loeb), VII, p. 69. 

3 - PP* 75 , 80. 



164 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the authors of the Kautillya Arthasasira and the Jaina Kalpasutra 
with his court. The existence of a body of literature including 
Suttas , gathas , and apadanas in the early Maurya period is vouched 
for by the inscriptions of Asoka 1 . The reference to the story 
of Herakles and Pandaia 2 in the fragments of Megasthenes 
points to the popularity of epic tales ( akhyanas ) in some shape. 
In explaining the statement of Megasthenes that the Indians 
had no written laws Buhler suggested that the Greek envoy 
took the term Smriti used by his informants in the sense “memory” 
instead of “sacred tradition concerning law” or “the law books 3 ” 
If this view be correct then a part at least of the Smriti litera- 
ture was probably in existence in the days of Cliandragupta. 
The Indika of Megasthenes, though largely based on personal 
observations of the famous ambassador, may have drawn upon 
texts of this type 4 as well as myths and legends some of which 
had probably a place in the folk literature of the day. 

We have seen above that one of the occasions when the 
king came out of the palace was to offer sacrifice. This possibly 
implies that Cliandragupta was known to the Greeks as a 
follower of the Brahman i cal religion. The celebrated Jaina 
author Hemachandra admits that the emperor patronised 
heretical (i.e., non-Jaina) tcacheis { ' mithyadrikpashandimatabha - 
vitam 5 ) . As has been noted above one of the king’s ministers 
was a Jatilian or a follower of “a class of ascetics, so called on 
account of their matted hair 6 ”. Jatilakas figure in a list of 
“schools or corporate bodies of Wanderers, or of Hermits” men- 
tioned in early Pali Canon 7 . We do not know what was 
exactly the attitude of Chandragupta towards the Buddhists. 

If the Ther agatha Commentary is to be believed he put into prison 
the father of an Elder {Thera) at the instigation of Chanakya 8 . 

t, Cf. the Bairat Edict and PJiar Edict VII. (EE, dhammapadane) 

2. Megasthenes ana Arrian , pp. 163, 206. 

3. Monahan, Early History of Bengal, pp. 167 f. 

4. Compare the statement of Stiabo (McCrindle, Ancient India as 
aevitl r,} hy Megasthenes and Arrian, p. 69) : 

‘ c They marry many wives, whom they buy from their parents, giving in 
exchange a yoke of oxen”, with Smriti texts on Arsha marriage (Gautama, IV. 
Baudhayana, I. n. 4. : Manu, III. 29). See also Monahan ob. cit , p. 165. 

5. Pa iiishlaharvan p. 232 (VIII. 415), 

6. M 'Eh^ekrra, Dictionary nf Pd { proper Names, Vol. I. p. oar. 

7. ivtiys LVtvi Is, Buddies* India, p. 113 
0. Makdasekcra ob. cit . pp. C4G SGo 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


165 


But the person in question may have suffered for his political 
views or conduct. Jain tradition avers that towards the end of 
his life he became a convert to the religion of the Tlrtharikaras 
after the rival teachers had been discomfited in a synod 1 . It 
is also affirmed that when Magadha was confronted with a 
famine of twelve years Chandragupta abdicated in favour of a 
son named Siihhasena and retired to Sravana-Belgola in Mysore 
with the Saint ( Sruta-kemlin ) Bhadrabahu. There he starved 
himself to death in the Jaina fashion 2 . Several inscriptions in 
Mysore dating from about 900 A.D. refer to the pair (yugma) 
Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta 3 . 

Bindusara 

Chandragupta died after a reign of 24 years, probably some 
time after 301 B.C. But his work did not perish with him. 
This was no doubt due in large measure to the vigour and effi- 
ciency of the system of government which he had organised, 
and the wise policy he had followed. But the machinery of 
administration would by itself hardly have worked smoothly 
if it had not at its head a man who appreciated the ideals and 
methods of the dead king and did his best to preserve the tradi- 
tions of the illustrious founder of his line. This is not the only 
title of Bindusara, the son and successor of Chandragupta, to 
fame. If he sought to preserve unimpaired the heritage of his 
father, he also prepared in some respects the way for his great 
son. His reign is not merely a continuation of that of Chandra- 
gupta. It also presaged in some respects the glorious epoch 
of Dharmasoka. 

Little is known about the early life of the new king. If 
Jain tradition is to be believed the name of his mother was 
Durdhara. Histoiy does not record if he was one of the young 

1. Parishhtaparvan. (Jacobi), 2nd cd., p. Ixxix, VIII. 415 ff. 

2. Ibid., VIII, 444 , Samadhimaranam prdpya Chandragupto d:iam 
yayau : Rdjavalikaihe I.A. 1892, p* 157 * 

3. Rice, Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions, pp. sff. 

Fleet (I.A. 1892. pp. 156 ff : J.R.A.S., 1909, p. 2 4 n) regards the stop' as 
presented in the j Rdjavalikaihe as “probably of quite modern invention”. 
Even the legend in its earlier form ‘‘has not the slightest historical value a s 
affecting Chandragupta, the grandfather of Asoka”. 

Smith ( E.H.I. , p. 154) however thinks “that the tradition probably is true 
in its main outline.” 



166 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


princes who, according to Aelian, amused themselves while 
fishing in the unruffled sheets of water within the palace grounds 
of the greatest of all the kings of India, and learning how to sail 
their boats. In later life he showed an aptitude for government 
and a taste for culture which in all possibility were a cquir ed in 
boyhood. The name of Amitrochades (variants, Amitrachatcs 
and Allitrochades, the X X having arisen from a loosely formed 
cursive M) 1 2 by which he is known to the Greeks suggests not a 
weakling brought up amidst the pleasures of the harem, but a 
man of steel, fit to bear the weight of a great empire and defend 
it against all enemies. Fleet takes the Greek appellation as 
meaning <f Amitrakhada ,5 J ‘deyourer of enemies’, which occurs 
as an epithet of Indra. Lassen and others prefer to equate it 
with the Sanskrit Amitraghata, slayer of foes — a term that 
occurs in the Mahabhdshya 2 of Patanjali. Amilranam hantd is a 
well known title of royalty in the Aitareya Brdhmana and Amitra - 
ghatin is frequently used in the Mahdbharata as an epithet of 
princes and warriors. 3 

As Chandragupta, according to the evidence of Plutarch 
and Justin, had not yet mounted the throne in 326 — 25 B.G. 
and is traditionally credited with a reign of 24 years, his succes- 
sor could hardly have obtained the imperial crown before 301 
B.G. The new mona rch must have ceased to rule before 270 — 
69 B.G. if the king Magas, mentioned in the rescripts of his son 
written not earlier than the twelfth regnal year, died in 258 B.G. 
Regarding the actual period of Bindusara’s rule the evidence is 
discrepant. The Puranas allot to him a period of 25 years. 
Burmese and Ceylonese chronicles raise the figure to 27 and 28 
respectively. 

Greek historians say little about the internal affairs of India 
in the days of Bindusara. Our main reliance has to be placed 
on tradition. The accounts of the Buddhist and Jain writers 
of a late date suggest that the services of the most able and astute 
of Chandragupta’s officials were retained by his son. Among 
these was Kautilya or Chanakya who is said to have had a rival 

1. Fleet J.R.A.S.. 1909., p. 24,0. 

2 . III. 2 . 2 . 

3. AitBr. VIII- 17 : Mbh. II. 30. 19 ; 62. 8, VII. 22.16. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


167 


in Subandhu . 1 The post of chief minister (« agramatya ) even- 
tually went to Khallataka and later on to Radhagupta 2 . The 
name of the principal queen was, according to the Mahavamsa 
Tika , Dhamma. The Asokavaddna calls her Subhadrangi 3 . 

Bindusara was fortunate in having in his sons, especially 
Aioka, proconsuls of exceptional ability who did much to curb 
the impetuosity of some of his officials in the outlying provinces. 
With their help it was not difficult for him to maintain 
unimpaired the empire he had inherited from his father and 
even to extend its boundaries. The Divyavadana tells the story 
of a revolt in Taxila, the citizens of which complained of the 
high-handedness of certain amatyas. That there was a substra- 
tum of truth in the complaint appears not improbable in view 
of certain words of Asoka himself in the Kaliriga edicts that 
refer to the measures adopted by that great emperor to check 
ministerial oppression in the provinces. When Bindusara was 
confronted with a difficult situation in Taxila, he is said to have 
commissioned Asoka with the task of restoring order. This 
the prince accomplished without much difficulty as the people 
“were not opposed to the Kumdra or even to king Bindusara” 
and had grievance only against the “wicked officials” ( dusht - 
dmatyah). The Maurya prince is said to have pushed on to the 
Svasa rajya, evidently a mislectlon for Kha£a rajya , the realm of 
the Khasas, whose settlements extended, according to Stein, 
in a wide semicircle from Kastvar to the Vitasta (Jhelum) valley 
in the south and west of Kashmir . 4 

Some interesting details about the warlike activities of Bindu- 
sara and his Chancellor, the Brahman Chanakya, are recorded 
in the history of Taranatha. We are told that they destroyed 
kings and nobles of about sixteen cities and reduced to submission 
all the territory between the eastern and the western seas. In 
view of the late date of the author it is difficult to say what 


I* Part fishtapar van , VIII. 446. ff. Cf. Kathdsarits&gra Kathapithalam- 
Saka 5th Taranga , Verse 115 j Penzer’s edition, I. p. 57* 

2. Divydvaddna y p. 372. P.H.A.I. 4th ed. J pp. 2430, 248. The 
Divyavadana , p. 372 refers to a council of five hundred under Bindusara. 

3 - R- L. Mitra, Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepcd, p . 8\ Biganded II, 
p. 128. 

4 - Extra No. 2, 1899 p. 69 



168 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


element of truth is contained in his narrative. The vanquished- 
monarches “between the eastern and the western oceans” have 
been taken to refer to the petty sovereigns of the Peninsula. 1 
This is not a necessary inference as North India from Kathiawar 
to Bengal may also be said to extend from sea to sea. Kalinga 
on the eastern coast of the Deccan is known to have retained its 
independence till the days of Asoka. The statement of Tara- 
natha, if based on authentic tradition, need mean nothing more 
than the suppression of revolts of the type alluded to in the 
Divyavadana in the vast stretch of territory between Surashtra 
and the Gangctic delta. No Greek or Indian record of any 
early date connects the name of Bindusara Amitraghata with 
the conquest of any large tract of Peninsular India. Inscrip- 
tions of Kalinga and Mysore, which tell us so much about the 
Nandas, Chandragupta and Asoka, are silent about the second 
Maurya . 

Bindusara seems to have been perfectly pacific abroad. He 
maintained the relations of friendship with the Hellenic world 
that had been established in the later days of his illustrious 
father. Diodorus testifies to the great love of the king of Pali- 
bothra (Pataliputra), apparently an early Maurya monarch, 
for the Graecians. The policy was reciprocated by the Greek 
contemporaries of Bindusara. Strabo refers to the sending of 
Deimachos to the court of “Allitrochades, son of Sandrokottos” 2 . 
We learn from Pliny that another envoy named Dionysius came 
from (Ptolemy II) Philadelphus, king of Egypt (285—47 B.C.) 3 
The name of the monarch to whom he presented his credentials 
is not stated. The Egyptian king appears to have been a con- 
temporary of both Bindusara and As'oka. The silence of Greek 
and Latin writers regarding Asoka, when contrasted with 
repeated references to Chandragupta and Amitraghata makes 
it probable that the monarch in question was Bindusara, rather 
than his great son. Athenaeus, a Greek writer of the third 
century, tells us on the authority of Hegesander, that Amitro- 
chates, king of the Indians, wrote to Antiochus (I of Syria) asking 
that monarch to buy and send him sweet wine, dried figs and a 

i. J.B.O.R.S. , II, p. 79 ff. 

9 * II. 1.9. ; Megasthenes and Arrian , pp. 12, 19. 

3. Ibid. pp. 13, 20 l Ancient India in classical Literature , p. 108. 



CHANDRAGUPTA AND BINDUSARA 


169 


sophist. The Syrian king replied “we shall send you figs and 
the wine, but in Greece the laws forbid a sophist to be sold 1 ”. 

The passage, brief as it is, is important in more respects 
than one. It reveals Bindusara as a man who sought like his 
father to foster friendly contact with the outer world. The 
mention of sweet wine and figs coupled with the information 
vouchsafed by Phylarchus, Strabo and Appian, affords a glimpse 
of the kind of pacific intercourse between India and the west, 
diplomatic, social and commercial, that was ushered in by the 
treaty between Chandragupta and Seleucus. But the most 
significant fact noted by Hegesander is the demand for a Greek 
sophist. It affords proof not only of Bindusara’s taste for 
culture, but his special interest in philosophy. We may also 
take note of the story related by Diodorus of a Greek author 
Iambulous, who was hospitably received by the king of Pali- 
bothra who had a great love for Graecians. The name of the 
king is not given. But the tale admirably fits the correspondent 
of Antiochus. Nor was the interest of the king of Pataliputra 
confined to Greeks alone. The Divydvadana has an interesting 
reference to an Ajiva-parivrajaka as a prominent figure in the 
court of the second Maurya 2 . Aji vikas, it may be remembered, 
were special objects of the bounty of the later kings of the line 
like Asoka and Dasaratha. The intensity of Asoka’s devotion 
to matters spiritual is better understood when we remember 
the kind of men his father loved to gather round himself It 
is said in the Seventh Pillar edict that kings in times past also 
desired that “men might be made to progress by the promotion 
of Dhamma”. Bindusara might well claim a place among 
these past rulers. From him and some of the brilliant men who 
graced his court, Asoka may well have imbibed ideas that fructi- 
fied in later times, when he came into close touch with the 
Buddhist Sangha. The reign of Bindusara may with plausi- 
bility be regarded as a prelude to that of his great son. 

Certain unhappy incidents clouded, according to tradition, 
the last days of Bindusara. He had doubtless many children, 
both sons and daughters, as we may infer from the Fifth Rock 
edict of Asoka. If reliance can be placed on late chroniclers. 



170 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the relations among some of them were none too friendly. ASoka, 
whom we have seen taking a prominent part in the affairs of the 
state during the life-time of his father, is represented as having 
seized the throne as the outcome of a fratricidal struggle. The 
story lacks confirmation from contemporary sources and its 
verification must await future discoveries. The incidents to 
which it refers, if they really took place, must have helped to 
deepen in the long run the religious conviction of Asoka who 
sought to make amends for the misery he had inflicted on his 
fellow creatures in his unregenerate days. 



CHAPTER V 


MAURYAN POLITY 

India attained political unity for the first time under the 
Mauryas ; it was the realization of age-long dreams associated 
with the names of many legendary heroes — Prithu, Bharata, 
Rama and many other monarchs whose names occur in tradi- 
tional lists of the performers of imperial sacrifices like the 
Rajasuya and Asvamedha. In talking of the Mauryan empire, 
however, or indeed of any empire of ancient and mediaeval 
times, we should beware of importing notions of modern econo- 
mic imperialism into the past. The Mauryan empire was 
indeed the first attempt in India to secure administrative centra- 
lization on an extended scale ; but it was nothing by the side of 
the ruthless concentration of policy achieved by modern empires, 
and the methodical and complete suppression of all local auto- 
nomy and initiative within their frontiers. Again, there was no 
belief then that the lord of the big battalions had a duty to impose 
the culture of his people on their weaker neighbours. Nothing 
can be farther from all this than the quiet tone in which Asoka 
records the despatch of his missions to preach the dharma in 
alien lands and provide for the medical treatment of men and 
animals. 


Sources 

For the study of the political and administrative system of 
the Mauryan empire we are fortunately in possession of an 
abundance of authentic contemporary evidence such as we do 
not get for any other period of India’s history until we reach 
the period of Mughal rule. Megasthenes, Kautilya and the 
Asokan inscriptions, when correctly interpreted, supplement 
one another to a remarkable degree, and literary sources like 
Divydvadana and Mudrarakshasa, though they belong to much 
later times, appear to preserve a correct tradition in some parts 
and have their own contribution to make ; likewise the Gimar 
inscription of Rudradaman (A.D. 150) provides a welcome peep 
into the provincial administration of Gujarat under the Mauryas. 



172 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


The real date and authenticity of the Arthasastra of Kautilya 
has been the subject of a long debate, which, while clearing up 
many issues, has led to no general consensus of opinion, though 
the balance is clearly in favour of the bulk of the work being 
accepted as a genuine picture of the conditions prevailing in the 
Mauryan epoch. In our view the book has stood the test of 
criticism and must now be accepted, with reservations, as the 
work of Kautilya, who shares with Chandragupta, the credit 
for the establishment of the empire and laying dow n the founda- 
tions of its administrative system. The position is set out in 
detail in an excursus at the end of this chapter. 

The evidence of Greek and Latin authors and of the Asoka 
inscriptions has been studied in some detail elsewhere in this 
volume, and will be adverted to only to the extent neces- 
sary for completing the sketch of polity attempted here. 

Empire of Magadha 

Magadha had already grown into a large imperial state under 
the Nandas, and the reports that reached Alexander’s generals 
in the Punjab of the strength and efficiency of the army of the 
Prasii fixed them in their resolve not to hazard an encounter 
with a foe far more powerful than Porus, and thus compelled 
Alexander to abandon his dream of world conquest. The 
prestige of the empire of the Nandas, the failure of the tribal 
republics of the North-West in their hard-fought w r ars against 
the Greek invader, and subsequently the example of the empire 
of the Seleucids doubtless favoured the tendency already at work 
towards the formation of an all-India empire. The ideal of 
the chakravartin is for the first time brought down to earth from 
the cloud-land of religious myth and legend, and the chakravarti~ 
kshetram , the sphere of the emperor’s rule, is clearly defined in 
the Arthasastra as the whole of India extending from the Hima- 
layas to the Indian Ocean and a thousand yojanas across . 1 The 
Mauryan epoch marks thus the definite triumph of the monar- 
chical state against rival forms of political organization, parti- 
cularly that of the tribal republic which became henceforth 

i. K.A . IX. i. I do not accept Dr. RaychaudhurFs limitation of the 
passage to Northern India, and I read tiryak and not atiryak . See P HAI 4 * ? P* 
220 n ; also JayaswaJ, Hindu Polity , Sect. 365 ; and Rangaswami Comm . Vol. p. 81. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


173 


much rarer than before and practically died out in the course 
of the next few centuries. There is reason to believe that 
Chandragupta and Kautilya were hostile to the non-monar- 
chical states and that their policy was not averse to taking 
advantage of the weakened and impoverished condition in which 
these states found themselves after the ravages of the Greek war. 
The short section on policy towards Sanghas (republics) in the 
Arthasastra (Bk. XI) gives a list of the names of important 
sahgh%s still in existence, and describes numerous ways of sowing 
dissension among them and breaking them up that are open 
to a monarch who seeks to dominate them ; though, indeed, to 
preserve th; chuucter of a scientific treatise the section is con- 
cluded on a not? of friendly advice to the sanghas on how they 
coni I counteract the subtle assaults from ambitious monarchs 
on their unity and strength. 

Republics 

The names of republics actually mentioned by Kautilya fall 
into two groups ; one devoted to economic pursuits and to fight- 
ing with weapons like the Kambhojas, Surashtra, Kshatriya- 
sreni (Khathoi of the Greek writers) and others ; the others who 
used the title of raj ! , apparently fi>r marking the status of the 
members of the executive body of the republic, such as Licchi- 
vika, Vrijjika, Mallaka, Madraka, Kukura, Kuru, Pahchala 
and others. The Asoka inscriptions mention Kambhojas and 
some other tribes. These republican states were apparently 
spread all over India at the begipAig of the Mauryan empire, 
and many of them succeeded inretaining their individuality 
and surviving the Mauryan empire in spite of their hostile envi- 
ronment ; the use of the term raja in many of them was perhaps 
a concession to a deep-rooted popular sentiment that favoured 
the name of the king. 

Foreign Models 

The age of the Mauryan empire was the age of the large 
monardfeal slate not only in India, but in all the lands that had 
formed the empire of Alexander for a brief period ; there was 
much similarity in the problems of political organization that 
had to be faced by the successors of Alexander and by Chandra- 



174 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


gupta Maurya. Considering the fairly steady contact main- 
tained between the court of Pataliputra and the Hellenistic 
monarchies, we may even suppose that Kautilya did not omit 
the study of foreign models in planning the administration of the 
newly established Indian empire and in the composition of his 
treatise on the Arthasastra . In fact he says expressly that he 
composed the work for the sake of his monarch after consulting 
all the sastras then known and collecting information on the 
practices prevailing in states . 1 Without pressing the idea 
too far, we may find in it the explanation of the fairly close 
resemblances between the fiscal and bureaucratic arrangements 
in contemporary Egypt and Syria on the one side and the system 
of the Arthasastra on the other. 

Royal Power 

In an epoch of great monarchies, it was natural to exalt 
the power of the monarch. According to the general theory 
of Hindu Polity, the king was only the guardian of the law, not 
its maker ; laws depended for their validity on their intrinsic 
conformity to the standard of equity ( dharma ) and on the sanc- 
tion of social usage ; and every decree of the king had to conform 
to both these sources of legal right . 2 With Kautilya, on the 
other hand, the royal decree has an independent validity of its 
own ; moreover, its validity is of so overriding a character that 
it must be taken to prevail against equity, private treaty or 
contract, and social usage . 3 This view of the supi emacy of the 
royal decree is exceptional £mong Indian writers ; it comes in 
first with Kautilya, and is tiaced only in Narada among subse- 
quent texts. Kautilya also exalts reason (nydya) above the 
prescription of texts (sastra) in cases of conflict between the two, 
and boldly justifies the course on the plea that texts become 
corrupt with lapse of time. These statements placed by Kau- 
tilya at the head of the section on the administration of justice 

1. End of KA. II. io Sasanadhikara, a chapter in which Stein sees evi- 
dence of a revision in the light of royal letters of the Early Roman Empire. 
£//. Band 6, pp. 45—71- 

2. Thus K&tyayana : 

nyaya-sd stra-virodhena desadrishtes tathaiva cha I 
yam dharmam sthapayndraja nyayyam tad rajasdsanam II 
cited in Pardsara-Madhat zya, Vyavahara, III. p. 13. 

3. KA., III. 1 verses at end. 


MAURYAN POLITY 


175 


in the Arthasastra , clearly mark an attempt to evolve a new norm 
in civil law in the establishment of which the royal authority 
would be actively exerted both directly by the king himself,, 
and indirectly by the judgements and rulings of the higher 
officials of state delivered in the name of the king. The same 
feature obtained in all the contemporary Hellenistic monarchies^ 
and it is by no means unlikely that Kautilya was influenced by 
contemporary foreign practice when he put forward this new 
principle in his work. 

Mauryan monarchy, however, was by no means a mere copy 
of foreign institutions any more than Mauryan art was an un- 
thinking imitation of foreign models ; in either case specific 
features were borrowed but assimilated to the indigenous scheme 
so as to produce a harmonious whole ; that these efforts left no 
permanent results in Indian tradition is another matter. 

The King 

The king was primarily the wielder of the sceptre ( danda - 
dhara ), and his chief function was to maintain the social order by 
restraining the wrong-doers and ensuring the peace necessary 
for lawful men to pursue their avocations without hindrance . 1 
Kings were described in this period as devanampriya , beloved of 
the Gods, and perhaps also as priyadarsana , of gracious appearance. 
The throne looked for support to the sacerdotal power and 
generally got it ; this becomes clear from the relation in which 
Kautilya stands to Chandragupta, from the place of the pnrohita 
in the state as the special adviser of the monarch with whom he 
conferred alone in a difficulty, and from the comprehensive 
statement in the Arthasastra which clinches the traditional view 
saying : c ‘Royal power ( Kshatra ) triumphs (even) without 

arms and ever remains invincible when it is held up by the 
Brahmana, is sanctified by the counsels of ministers, and follows 
the precepts of the sastras ”. 2 The king led a strenuous 
life and was ever intent on the promotion of the well-being of 
his subjects. His daily routine was prescribed by the text-books, 
and Kautilya also reproduces this model time-table ; but he 
adds wisely that the monarch is to adjust his programme of work 

1. KA. i. 4. 

2. Ibid. . I. 9, final verse. 



176 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


according to his capacity and inclination . 1 He should ever be 
prepared to deal with urgent matters with quick despatch and 
should not make himself inaccessible to persons who wished to 
meet him on business, as this would lead to grave political dis- 
affection. Diligence is his first duty. Asoka, we shall see, lived 
up to this exacting ideal ; we have no reason to believe that 
Chandragupta and Bindusara did otherwise. The observations 
of Megasthenes on the arrangements in the royal palace and the 
precautions taken for ensuring the safety of the king’s person 
are fully borne out in the chapters of the Arthasastra 2 . All 
personal services to the monarch were performed by women ; 
the risks of food poisoning, and intrigues in the harem were 
carefully guarded against ; and on the occasions when the king 
issued from the palace, his route was guarded by armed soldiers. 
The princes were trained carefully and employed in situations 
suited to their capacity and taste ; on this question, apt to be 
particularly vexatious owing to the prevalent polygamy of kings, 
Kautliya dismisses all the antiquated and ingenious views 
put forward in the works known to him, and lays down the course 
dictated alike by common sense, propriety and the public good ; 
he is very clear that in no case should an ill-disciplined prince, 
even if he happened to be the only son of the reigning monarch, 
be employed in the affairs of state or permitted to sit on the 
throne. Ill-natured princes were to be put under restraint 
and kept out of harm’s way. 

Ministers and Council 

The king was assisted by a number of ministers, the purohita 
being in a separate and highly respected category by himself ; 
the ministers were generally men of proved ability and character. 
There was no hard and fast rule regarding their numbers at any 
time, and they often met in council for transacting public busi- 
ness, and in cases of difference in views decisions were taken by 
majority of votes. Ministers who were absent from the court 
were sometimes consulted by letter. The king considered him- 
self free to consult a single minister, or a number of them, or 


1. Ibid. I. 19. 

2. I oid, I. 20 — 21. 



I 


MAURYAN POLITY 


177 


the whole council according to the requirements of the subject 
on hand . 1 


King not owner of land 

The evidence of the Greek writers on the royal ownership 
of all land in the state has been noticed elsewhere. But the idea 
of the whole state being the property of the king was unknown to 
Indian tradition, and Kautilya does not assert such ownership 
for the king. It was admitted on all hands that the king had an 
interest in the land in as much as he was entitled to a sixth of its 
produce, the price of the protection he accorded to the people 
and their possessions ; by virtue of this eminent domain, the 
monarch controlled and regulated the use of land, and in the 
chapter on the superintendent of agriculture ( Sitadhyaksha ) 2 
Kautilya is seen stretching this right of regulation to its utmost 
limits. The rules in this chapter, if enforced all round, would 
have made all agriculture a vast state-regulated enterprise ; 
the scheme of warehouses maintained by the state and controlled 
by a superintendent, Koshtbagaradhyaksha , set forth elsewhere in 
the Arthasastra , sh tws that this plan of regulation included exten- 
sive market operations on the part of the government. Thus 
without actually asserting the king's ownership of the soil, 
Kautilya advocated and doubtless introduced into the adminis- 
tration all the detailed supervision and control of agricultural 
and marketing operations that would have arisen from such 
ownership ; and Greek observeis who saw them with Hellenistic 
eyes naturally thought that in India as elsewhere, as for example 
in Ptolemiic Egypt, the king was the owner of the soil, the culti- 
vators being his tenants 3 . 


1. Ibid. i. 15. 

2. Ibid . II. 24 ; also II. 2. The phrase svabhumau in II. 24? 2 does 
not mean ‘Royal domain’ but ‘land suited to the growth of particular produce’, 
as Ganapati Sastri rightly glosses. Perhaps it is a mistake for sva-sva b human. 

3 * The Hellenistic view is set forth thus by Rostovtzeff in his Social and 
Economic History of the Hellenistic world , p. 269. “Absolute rule meant, 
alike from the Egyptian and from the Macedonian point of view, the owner- 
ship of the State, of its soil and subsoil, and ultimately of the products of the 
soil and the subsoil. The state was the ‘house’ ( oikos ) of the king, and it* 
territory his estate. So the King managed the state as a plain Macedonian or 
Greek would manage his own household’. This view of polity never obtained 
in India. So far as I know there is only one instance in Indian literature of the 
apparent assertion of royal ownership of all land and water, ani that is ia 



178 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Bureaucracy 

In fact the great elaboration with which the machinery of 
central government is dealt with by Kautilya in the Adhyaksha* 
prachara (Book II) is worthy of a modern Manual of Adminis- 
tration ; it contemplates a vast, numerous and all-pervading 
bureaucracy keeping itself in touch with all phases of the econo- 
mic and social life of the country, and having at its command a 
mass of accurate and detailed information on the human and 
material resources of the entire country. The speedy and success- 
ful creation of an army of officials and the organisation of 
them into a well-ordered bureaucracy was by no means an easy 
task ; and the performance of this great task with reasonable 
efficiency is another point of resemblance between the Mauryan 
State and the Hellenistic monarchies. Both were aided here 
no doubt by models set by the empire of the Achaemenids ; for 
there is good reason to believe that the Persian administration 
had in its hands itineraries containing descriptions of 
the roads in the empire with a record of distances and 
stopping places, and that for purposes of taxation and prepara- 
tion for war they maintained a fairly reliable census of the towns 
and villages, their inhabitants and resources. It is certain 
that the administrative machinery of Alexander and his succes- 
sors was virtually a continuation of that of the Persian monarchs, 
and such continuity would not have been possible without the 
help of documents and information accumulated and preserved 
in the Persian archives. 

Mauryan administration was a growing system subject to 
constant change under the stress of new situations and problems ; 
and the Arthasdstra , though to a large extent based on contem- 
porary practice, is still a sastra , a normative plan rather than a 
description of existing conditions. Asoka, as will be seen, intro- 
duced changes into the system, some of which he outlined in 
his inscriptions. Nevertheless, the central machinery of 

the verse cited by Bhattasv^mi in his commentary — KA. II, £24 : Raja bhunteh 
patirdrshtah sastrajnair udakaya cha , tabhydm any at tu yad dravyam tatra siamyam 
kutumbinam. But even here pati may indicate no more than the right of eminent 
domain, as is clearly the case with the expression *bhusDami ’ in a closely argued, 
passage of Katyayana which has not been always correctly understood in spite 
of the excellent gloss attached to it. See U. N. Ghoshal, Beginnings of India* 
Historiography etc., pp. 153 — 66 . 



MAURYAN POLITY 


179 


administration envisaged in the Arthasastra may well be accepted 
as a representation of its condition towards the close of Chandra- 
gupta’s reign, and Kautilya probably had no small share 
* in building it up. 

y Central Offices 

/ 

/ The business of supervising the collection of revenue from 
the whole kingdom was the work of the Samdharld (Collector- 
general) ; he had to give his attention to all fortified towns, 
provinces, mines, gardens, forests, quadrupeds and trade-routes, 
which were the chief sources of income. Tolls, fines, fees for 
assaying weights and measures, police, currency, pass-ports, 
liquor, slaughter-houses, the manufacture of yarn, oil, ghee and 
sugar, goldsmiths, warehouses, prostitutes, gambling, buildings, 
guilds of carpenters and artisans, temples, and dues collected at 
the entrance (to towns) from troupes of performers (bdhirikas ) , 
formed the chief sources of revenue from towns. In the pro- 
vinces the sources of income were land and agriculture, trade, 
ferries, traffic in rivers and roads, pastures and so on. The 
Samaharta had the control of expenditure as well ; the chief 
items of expenditure were religious worship and gifts ; the royal 
family and the royal kitchen ; embassies, warehouses, armouries, 
factories and free labour, infantry, cavalry and elephant corps 
of the army ; cattle-farms and menageries, and storage of fodder 
and fire-wood. The Sannidhata whose duties combined those 
of chamberlain and treasurer had charge of the construction of 
treasuries and warehouses of suitable strength and proportions 
wherever they were required, and was the custodian of the 
realised revenue in cash and kind. He cut counterfeit coin*" 
and received all articles only if they were of proper quality, jfc 
wa ialsojnade responsible for the construction of royal trading- 
houses, armoury, jails, courts of justice and offices of ministers 
and secretaries {mahamdtriya) . All these buildings were to be 
equippedjwith wells, priviqg, bathrooms, fire-fighting appliances 
and other accessories. The accounts branch of the government 
had an elaborate organization, and the account year ran from 
Ashadho to Ashadha (July-August) as it does to this day in indi- 
genous firms and banks ; expenditure was classified into current, 
recurrent, occasional and so on ; there were a number of 



180 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


prescribed registers calculated to facilitate checking, and detailed 
instructions laid down for the detection of embezzlement ; 
evasion of detection by clever officials was regarded as always 
possible, and frequent transfers advocated as a means of pre- 
venting them from eating into the substance of the state. The 
central accounts office was also the general record office 
{akshapatala ) . 

The chapters of the Arthasdstra dealing with the duties of 
superintendents (i adhyakshas ), of whom no fewer that twenty- 
six are mentioned in a regular series besides others incidentally 
referred to elsewhere, give a fair idea of the variety and range 
of the tasks attempted by the central executive of the empire. 
These superintendents were what we should now call heads of 
departments, functioning under the general control and super- 
vision of a minister ( mantri ) who had charge of a group of allied 
departments. Their duties comprised the exploitation of crown 
property as well as the regulation and control of the economic 
and social life of the community. The names of the depart- 
mints mentioned in the Ar this as Ira ^ are: Treasury, Mines, 

Metals, Mint, Salt, Gold, Storehouses, Trade, Forest produce, 
Armoury, Weights and Measures (capacity), Measurement 
of space and time, Tolls, Spinning and weaving, Agriculture, 
Intoxicating liquor. Slaughter houses. Courtesans,, Shipping, 
Cattle, Horses, Elephants, Chariots, Infantry, Passports, Pas- . 
tures, Elephapt-forests, Spifes, Religious Institutions, Gambling, 
Jails, and £6rts. The duties of these superintendents are des- 
cribed in considerable detail and some of them at least were 
assisted in their work by boards 1 which seem to have caught 
the attention of Megasthenes rather more than the individual 
officers presiding over them. We need hardly enter here into 
all the administrative details found in the Arthasdstra ; but only 
note that a government which undertook such delicate tasks as 
the medical inspection of er the regulation of the rates charged 
by courtesans, of the punishment of householders who turned 
ascetics without making adequate provision for their dependents, 
and of the control of the visits to villages of peripatetic parties of 
musicians, dancers and aciobats so as not to interfere with the 

i. Such boards arc expressly mentioned by Kautilya for the four main 
divisions of the army. KA. II. 4. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


18! 


productive activity of the villagers 1 must have displayed an 
energy in administration altogether new in India. In other 
respects like the care of the sick and the destitute as well as of 
widows and orphans, the provision of work for the unemployed 
and regulation of wages and prices, the Arthasastra may be said 
to systematize and amplify administrative duties which had been 
accepted in principle by earlier Indian writers. 

District and Town Administration 

The revenue and general administration was carried on in 
the districts by sthanikas and gopas , with their own staffs of 
officials. The gopa had charge of five to ten villages in which 
he supervised the maintenance of boundaries, registered gifts, 
sales and mortgages, and kept an accurate census of the people 
and their material resources. The sthanika had similar duties 
in the district under his charge and the gopas necessarily func- 
tioned under him. The sthanikas were responsible to the 
samahartd who command the services pradeshtrs , 2 3 doubtless 
identical with the prddesikas of the Asoka inscriptions, for the 
supervision of the details of local administration. Urban 
administration was organised on more or less similar lines under 
a nd gar aka (city magistrate) with sthanikas and gopas assisting 
him, the gopa having charge of the details of a fixed number of 
families in the city instead of a number of villages as in the rural 
areas. 


Villages 

The villages were, as ever in ancient India, semi-autonomous, 
enjoying a good deal of freedom in ordering their affairs; they 
regulated land and waterrights, cultivation and payment of 
revenue through th egramani, an official of the central govern- 
ment ; the village-elders (grama-vriddhas) are often mentiond 
in the Arthasastra 3 and they must have had a large share in 
guiding the people generally and in assisting the officials of the 
government in disposing of petty disputes arising in the village. 
Cultivable land was parcelled out in estates belonging to indivi- 

1. Ibid . II. i. 

2. Ibid. II. 35. 

3. Ibid . II. 1 ; III. 5, 9, 12. 



182 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


duals, while pasture and forest lands were held in common. 
The check and control of the bureaucracy was provided not 
only by officials openly charged with such duties of inspection, 
audit and report like the pradeshtris , but by the regular employ- 
ment of spies and agents provocateurs ; the role of spies is no doubt 
greatly exaggerated in the scenes of the Mudrdrdkshasa which 
purports to dramatise the revolution by which the empire of the 
Nandas was overthrown and that of the Mauryas founded 
by Kautilya and Chandragupta ; but the constant use of secret 
means in administration, diplomacy and war was everywhere 
taken for granted and few modern governments could be said 
yet to have outgrown the practice. 

Provinces 

That the empire was divided into a number of provinces, 
each under a governor, and that princes of the blood royal were 
employed as governors whenever possible, becomes clear from 
the Asoka inscriptions and Buddhist literature. The avadanas 
contain stories of oppression by wicked ministers in the outlying 
provinces like Gandhara, and of the revolt of subjects against 
such oppression. But few definite facts bearing on the details 
of provincial administration are forthcoming, and we do not 
know exactly the relations of the governors to the central 
government on the one hand and the autonomous tribes and 
kingships comprised within their sphere of control on the other. 
We may guess that the provincial courts were smaller replicas 
of the imperial court at Pataliputra, from which the emperor 
directly administered the home provinces. The distinction 
between rural and urban administration must have prevailed 
in the provinces also. There is a short and pithy reference 
in the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman (A.D. 150) to the 
construction of lake SudarSana by the Rashtriya Vaisya 
Pushyagupta in the reign of Maurya Chandragupta, and its 
extension and improvement by the addition of pipes, sluices 
and so on by the Yavanaraja Tushaspa acting on behalf of 
Asoka 1 ; this is solid testimony to the continuous attention 
given by Mauryan emperors to large works of public utility. 


x. El, VIII. 43. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


183 


to the efficiency of their bureaucracy, and to the preservation 
of the memory of both through several centuries. Two records, 
the Sohgaura copper-plate from the U. P. and the Mahasthan 
inscription from Bengal, both fragmentary, are engraved in 
characters of the Mauryan epoch, and may well belong to that 
age ; but difficulties of interpretation detract much from their 
value to the historian. The Sohgaura plate seems to record 
an order of the Mahamatras of Sravastl issued from their camp 
at a place called Manavasiti ; the order mentions the kosh- 
fhagaras of some places and the articles stored in them 1 . Store- 
houses also find a place in the Mahasthan record the import 
of which is still less certain. 2 Even these faint gleams should 
serve as warning against the facile characterisation of the 
vast administration of the Mauryan empire as ‘no doubt more 
effective in theory than in practice.’ 

Finance 

Of the revenue resources, public expenditure and the finan- 
cial position of the Mauryan empire we can form only vague 
impressions as the data for quantitative estimates are totally 
lacking. Mention has already been made of the principal items 
of revenue in town and country listed by Kautilya in describing 
the duties of the Samahartd (collector-general). Using modem 
expressions for easy comprehension, we may say that the 
main heads of revenue were : (1) a share of the produce of 
land, theoretically a sixth part, but in practice generally 
a higher proportion varying with local economic con- 
ditions ; (2) other dues and cesses laid on land including a 
water-rate which varied according to the nature of the land 
and crop, and tax on houses in towns ; (3) income from crown 
lands, from forests which must have been very much more 
extensive then than at present, and from mines and manufactures, 
some of them monopolies like salt, undertaken by government ; 
(4) customs at the frontiers, and octrois, tolls and ferry dues 
in the interior levied on merchandise in transport ; (5) profits 
of coinage and gains from trade operations carried on by the 

I. IA. XXV. ; JRAS. 1907, p. soiff ; ABORT. XI. 32 ff ; 

El. XXII. 1—3. 



184 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


government ; (6) fees for licenses of various kinds to be taken 
out by artisans, craftsmen, professionals and traders ; (7) fines 
levied in law courts ; (8) miscellaneous receipts like presents, 
escheat of ownerless property and share in treasure-troves. 
In times of emergency c benevolences 1 ( pranaya ) were resorted to, 
and the rich were forced to pay considerable amounts to the 
state under one pretext or another. Patanjali mentions the fact 
that the Mauryas introduced images with a view to gain gold — 
Mauryair hiranyarthibhir arcah prakalpitah ; the exact method 
of thus replenishing the treasury is not clear. The practice 
had become established even in this early period of granting ex- 
emptions from payment of revenue — particularly land-revenue — 
in favour of Brahmins and religious institutions, and of making 
assignments of revenues, in whole oi in part, in favour of state- 
officials, in lieu of or in addition to their salaries ; a careful regis- 
ter of such remissions and assignments was of course main- 
tained, the village of Lumbini for instance w r as the recipient 
of a partial remission from Asoka on the occasion of his visit 
to the place, it being required to pay only an eighth share 
of its produce to the royal fisc, instead of the usual 
fourth. 

Under expenditure we should notice the maintenance of the 
monarch and his court and of the members of the royal family 
in due pomp and the salaries of ministers and other officials, 
high and low ; these salaries are defined in the Arihasdstra (V. 3), 
but neither the unit of currency nor the period to which the 
figures relate is expressly stated. Public works including build- 
ings, roads and irrigation works, the demands of the vast army 
in its various branches, the erection of forts and arsenals and 
their proper equipment, grants to religious institutions of 
various kinds, the maintenance of the families of soldiers and civil 
officials dying in state service, the care of the unemployed and 
the indigent are other heads that figure prominently in the 
AfihasdstTd. There must have been a considerable outlay on 
industrial, mining, and other enterprises worked by the state 
which recognized a special responsibility towards skilled artisans. 
Herdsmen and hunters were encouraged by allowances granted 
to them to keep the land clear of wild beasts and secure the 
safety of the roads. Asoka spent large sums in establishing 



MAURYAN POLITY 


185 


hospitals for men and animals and raising gardens of medicinal 
herbs within his vast empire and even outside it. 

Justice 

For the administration of justice, there were two sets of courts 
besides the village tribunals that dealt w T ith petty cases under the 
guidance of the headman and elders ; these were styled the 
Dharmasthiya and Kantakasodhana. At the top of the whole 
system was the king w r ho could no longer make himself personally 
responsible for the entire administration of justice as in the 
smaller kingdomsof the earlier times reflected in the early dharma - 
sutras , but was ever ready to hear matters on appeal and dispose 
of them without undue delay. The dharmasthiya courts were 
presided over by three dharmasthas learned in sacred law and 
three amdtyas, and there were courts in all important cities 
and other convenient centres ; rules w r ere laid down about cir- 
cumstances which rendered agreements void, and about proce- 
dure in court — plea, counterplea and rejoinder. The main 
heads of civil law dealt with (1) marriage and dowry including 
divorce ( moksha ), (2) inheritance , (3) houses, house-sites and 
disputes regarding boundaries and water-rights, and trespass, 
(4) debt, (5) deposits, (6) serfs, (7) labour and contract, (8) sale, 
(9) violence, (10) abuse, (11) assault, (12) gaming and miscel- 
lanea. In many respects Kautilya is seen to lay down rules 
that alter and liberalise the precepts of the ancient texts, and in 
his hands the exposition of the whole subject is more rational 
and progressive than orthodox and conservative. In the absence 
of witnesses the ordeal was resorted to. Punishments were carefully 
graded and executed by royal authority ; they included fines, 
imprisonment, whipping and death with or without torture. 
There must have been in existence also caste panchdyats and 
guild courts which regulated the affairs of communities and pro- 
fessions and dealt with disputes among them in the first instance. 

The kantakasodhana (removal of thorns) courts were presided 
over by three pradeshiris or three amdtyas. The basis 
of the distinction between these courts and the dharmasthiya 
courts is nowhere clearly explained. The suggestion has been 
offered 1 that while the dharma courts dealt with disputes brought 
i. Kane, History of Dharmaidstra III. p. 257. 



186 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


before them by the parties and strictly corresponded to our 
civil courts, in the kantakasodhana courts the actions started 
on the initiative of the executive. This looks plausible in the 
light of modern juristic ideas, but it may well be doubted if the 
distinction between the two sets of courts was so simple and 
clear-cut. For instance, while assault and hurt were generally 
dealt with by the dharma courts, assault ending in manslaughter 
was reserved for the kantakasodhana . 1 The truth seems to be that 
the kantakasodhana courts were a new type introduced to meet 
the growing needs of an increasingly complex social economy, 
and to implement the decisions of a highly organized bureaucracy 
on all matters that were being brought under their control and 
regulation for the first time and were unknown to the old legal 
system. These courts were special tribunals which followed a 
more summary procedure than the regular dharma courts that 
dealt with vyavahdra as developed in the tradition of the dharma - 
iastras ; their functions were only quasi-judicial, and their 
methods had more in common with those of a modern police 
force than of a judiciary. Their aim was to protect the state 
and people from baneful actions of anti-social persons, the 
thorns ( kantaka ) of society. They resorted to the use of spies 
for the detection of such activity and of torture for the extortion 
of confessions. The merchant who used short measure or false 
weights, the artisan who failed to keep his conti act with his 
employer, the physician who caused the death of his patient 
by his lack of skill, the official who swindled the state or took 
bribes, and the conspirator who contemplated treason against 
the king — were all dealt with by these courts. Theft, murder, 
burglary, combinations to raise or depress prices, rape, defiant 
violation of caste rules and so on, are also among the offences 
brought before these courts. In these courts we may well 
recognize another innovation of Kautilya, based on foreign 
models and calculated to strengthen the power of the monarch 
and the position of the new bureaucracy. They represent an 
effort at once to safeguard government and society from the 
possible evils of the new order that was being introduced. 
Government control and regulation of activities of the people was 

i. KA. III. 20. vipaltau kantakaiodhaniya myeta — Gaaapati 

^istri’s reading. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


187 


becoming more and more far-reaching and ubiquitous, and new 
offices carrying vast discretionary powers were coming into 
existence ; a mass of new regulations bearing on agriculture, 
trade and industry was being promulgated ; to secure the 
enforcement of these regulations and to see that they were not 
either employed by officials to tyrannize over the people or 
evaded by the people with the connivance of corrupt officials, 
there was required some machinery which would furnish the 
drive needed and provide the necessary checks and controls ; 
the kantakasodhana courts were calculated to do all this. Later 
law books do indeed talk of kantakasodhana 1 ; but in them we 
miss the note of urgency that dominates the chapters of Kautilya 
on the subject, though the restraint of the wicked came generally 
to be accepted as part of the king’s duty ancillary to the pro- 
tection of the lawful citizens ( dushta nigraha sishta paripalana ). 

Asoka maintained the framework of polity as he found it 
though he created some new offices for the spread of Dharma 
and sought to impart by example and precept an earnest moral 
tone to the entire system of administration ; a detailed account 
of the emperor’s work as administrator will be given in the 
chapter on his reign. 

Foreign Policy 

It is in the sphere of foreign policy that Kautilya’s work 
seems to conform more to the tradition of his predecessors. That 
tradition was dominated more by a desire to make the sdstra 
complete by a systematic exposition of all possibilities than by 
an attempt to discuss real political situations. It is indeed often 
enough true that neighbouring states are seldom friendly to each 
other ; but the tnandala theory erects this into a principle, makes 
the unvarying assumption that the neighbour state is an enemy 
and the alternate one an ally, and works out the implications in 
tedious detail. We need not pursue this scheme here ; for the 
concepts of the vijiglshu (conqueror), the four updyas (instruments 
of policy), the sixfold policy ( shadgunya ) and so on are common 
to the treatises of polity of all ages in India, and had the least 
direct relation to political facts in the best days of the Mauryan 
empire when practically the whole of India acknowledged its 
i. Mamu IX. 252 — 3. 



188 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sway and there was little or no scope for the application of the 
precepts of the mandala theory. Modern writers have often 
remarked on the unscrupulous and ‘Machiavellian 5 nature of these 
precepts ; but one may well doubt whether the work of modern 
foreign and war offices described with a due regard, not to their 
professions, but to what they actually perform, will be seen to 
evince a better respect for morality. On the other hand the 
Indian text-books often developed extravagant theories having 
little relation to practice for the sake of the completeness of the 
sastra. The ascertained facts bearing on the relations of the 
three great Mauryan emperors with the few independent states 
in India and the Hellenistic monarchies outside have been noticed 
in the accounts of the reigns of these monarchs. 

Army 

The Mauryan empire maintained a large standing army 
adequate to all its needs, internal and external. Pliny, doubt- 
less basing his statement on Megasthenes, put the strength of 
Chandragupta’s forces at 600,000 infantry, 30,000 cavalry and 
9,000 elephants. He says nothing of chariots, but their number 
was placed at 2,000 by Diodorus and Curtius, and at 8,000 by 
Plutarch — all of them recording reports that reached Alexander 
about the number of chariots in the army of the King of the 
Prasii, that is, the Nanda predecessor of Chandragupta. The 
Arthasdstra mentions different types of chariots — war chariots 
and chariots used for assaulting fortresses among them 1 . Refe- 
rences to Mauryan war chariots seem to occur in some Tamil 
poems of a somewhat later date. 2 There were superintendents 
( adhyakshas ) set over each of the four sections and they were 
charged with the duty of procuring the necessary supplies and 
keeping the men, animals and machines in proper trim. Stress 
is laid on the importance of the elephant corps and great atten- 
tion devoted to the proper maintenance of elephant forests 
( ndgavana ). Among the infantry Kautilya distinguishes diffe- 
rent types — hereditary troops, doubtless the same as the fighting 
class (Kshatriyas) whom Megasthenes placed next to the cultiva- 
ting classes in numbers and importance ; hired troops ; troops 

1. KA. II. 33. 

2. Chapter on South India and Ceylon. 



MAURY AN POLITY 


189 


maintained by guilds and available to the state at need ; and 
forest tribes who furnished troops to the king in times of war. 
The organization of the army in the field was an elaborate affair, 
and there are discussions of the value of different formations 
based on clear distinctions between vanguard, centre, rear, wings, 
reserves and so on, and between the requirements of march, 
attack and defence. The value and use of different types of 
weapons was also much canvassed, and among such weapons 
were a variety of stationary and mobile engines — one of them 
being known as the hundred-slayer. t£ The art of fortification 
was well understood and Indian forts of the time were strong 
and systematically designed with ditches, ramparts, battlements, 
covered ways, portcullises, and water-gates ; and in the assault 
the arts of mining, countermining, flooding mines were employed 
no less than the devices of diplomacy” (F, \V. Thomas). 
Further details on the equipment of Indian troops and their 
mode of fighting preserved by Greek observers have been noticed 
elsewhere. The superintendents of the forces functioning either 
alone or with the assistance of boards must have been subject 
to the general control of the commander-in-chief ( Senapati ) 
who was among the most important officers of the state. There 
were periodical inspections of all the troops by the commander- 
in-chief and the emperor ; according to Bana, it was at one such 
military review that Pushyamitra contrived to do away with 
the last Mauryan ruler, the weak and shiftless Brihadratha. 
Kautilya mentions a navadhyaksha , superintendent of ships, 
which might have included fighting units besides merchantmen. 

Review 

Tne polity of the Mauryan empire was thus in part a culmi- 
nation of the development of an indigenous tradition of imper- 
ialism which had begun to take shape under the Nandas and in 
part comprised wise borrowings and adaptations from contem- 
porary foreign models, immediately Hellenistic, but ult mately 
traceable to the Achaemenid empire of Persia ; the work of 
Kautdya which expounds the principles and describes the machi- 
nery of government was likewise based on the Indian tradition 
of the various schools of Arthasastra on the one side and on tne 
known practice of foreign states on the other. Wnatever 



190 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


was due to alien inspiration in Kautilya’s system failed to take 
root ; the Mauryan system of administration like Mauryan art 
was in some of its essentials an exotic — a parenthesis that broke 
the course of normal indigenous development ; but both were 
splendid efforts marked by a considerable measure of success 
in their time. That Kautilya kept close to the fundamentals 
of Indian tradition is seen from his categorical statement that 
in order to be effective and successful, political power must 
command the support of the sacerdotal power besides having 
the sound advice of experienced statesmen at its disposal. He 
also gives to the welfare of the citizens the first place in all con- 
siderations of policy ; the good of the people and their sustained 
happiness are the main ends for the service of which he rears 
up the elaborate administrative system briefly described above. 
He does not by any means overlook the supreme importance 
of the presence of an able, energetic and good monarch for the 
proper functioning of that system ; that such rulers were not 
forthcoming after Asoka was the tragedy of the Mauryan empire, 
as of all hereditary monarchies. Kautilya’s ideal of good 
government is best seen from his exhortation to the king to place 
the happiness of the people above his own personal comfort, 
and feel that his happiness consists in their well-being. 
prajd sukhe sukharh rajnah prajandm ca kite hitam I 
ndtmapriyam hitam rajnah prajanarh tu priyarh hitam II 
“The hapiness of the subjects is the happiness of the king ; 
their well-being, his. The king’s welfare lies not in his own 
pleasure, but in that of his subjects.” 

Excursus on the Arthasastra 

There is not, and probably there never will be, a general 
agreement about the date and authorship of the Arthasastra of 
Kautilya ; but doubts regarding the age and genuineness of the 
work have not been allowed to hinder the free use of the book in 
studies on Mauryan administration and society. 

The volume of polemical literature that has grown round the 
work is too great to be reviewed here in its entirety. Prominent 
among those who have stood up for the genuineness of the work 
and a Mauryan date for it are : Shama Sastri who discovered 
the book and edited and translated it (1909 — 15) for the first 



mauryan polity 


191 


time, Jacobi, V. A. Smith, Jayaswal, Ganapati Sastri — who 
issued a fresh edition of the text with an excellent commentary 
and J. J. Meyer who translated the work into German, and more 
recently Breloer. On the other side we have Jolly, Keith, 
Winternitz, O. Stein, F. W. Thomas, E. H. Johnston. Other 
scholars like Hillebrandt hold that the present text contains a 
genuine core much overlaid with additions and emendations by 
later hands. 

In the introductions to his ediLcn of the Arthasasira and 
his English translation, Dr. Shama Sastri briefly set forth the 
evidence, internal and external, in favour of the work being 
accepted as a genuine production of Kautilya, the celebrated 
Chancellor of Chandragupta Maurya. That evidence is strong 
and remains unshaken in spite of everything that has been said 
to the contrary. 

Some of the objections taken are trivial and due to mis- 
understanding of Indian literary practice 01 of the Sanskrit idiom. 
That Kautilya (Crooked) is not a name that a great minister 
of State would have borne, that if he was the author he 
would not cite himself as c iti Kautilyah\ much less 
refute himself, and that Dandin refers to the w r ork of dcdrya 
Visnugupta as recent, are examples. Other objections, vague 
and inconclusive, are of value only as indices to the prejudices 
of those that propose them : such are, for instance, the view 

that the Chancellor of the first Mauryan emperor had enough 
to do otherwise and could not have found time to write so syste- 
matic a treatise on politics and administration ; that the Artha - 
sastra is so full of pedantry and schematic classifications that it 
could only have been writ ten by a Pandit and no practical adminis- 
trator or statesman ; that the polity of the Arthasasira is a small 
state and not an all-India empire like that of the Mauryas. The 
last statement appears a little more plausible than the rest 
only if we forget that the Arthasasira contains a specific reference 
to the whole of India being the Cakravartiksetram (IX i), that 
Indian imperialism seldom resulted in the destruction of the 
polity of subject states, and that in the whole range of Indian 
political literature there is no other work with a better claim 
than the Arthasdstra to be considered a manual of Imperial 
polity. 



192 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


The KA., it has been argued, is too cyclopaedic a work to 
be considered the production of a single author, and in several 
technical sciences, civil and military, in architecture, metallurgy 
and so on, it represents a state of advancement which we can 
hardly ascribe to India of the fourth century B. C. This ignores 
Kautilya’s express statement that he consulted all the artha - 
sdstras of his predecessors in the field ( ydvanti arthasasirani 
purvacaryaih prastdvitani ), and arthasastra is a wide term which, 
as Winternitz has recognised, embraces technology, science, 
and all knowledge of practical arts besides politics. For the 
knowledge of agriculture, forestry, methods of elephant-lore, 
horse- training, mining and so on, the author may well have 
drawn upon such pre-existing works. And what right has 
any one to judge a priori the level of attainment in the practical 
arts that could legitimately be ascribed to India of the Mauryan 
epoch ? Let us not forget that the Asoka pillars still exhibit 
a fine polish which time and neglect have not effaced, and of 
which the secret is yet to be discovered by the technicians of our 
own age. J. J. Meyer discusses these questions more fully in 
his introduction to his German translation of KA. 

It has been said that no writer earlier than A.D. 300 is defi- 
nitely known to allude to Kautilya ; but the Girnar inscription 
of Rudradaman (A.D. 150) knows of pranoya , vishti , and other 
technical terms in the sense in which they are employed by him, 
and the Tolkappiyam the earliest extant Tamil grammar, 
borrows the whole list of Tantrayuktis given at the end 
of the Arthasastra and adopts them with very minor and 
insignificant changes. 

Kautilya deprecates the use of wood in fortifications and 
defences ; but that Pataliputra was surrounded by a wooden 
palisade is evident from Greek writings and the results of excava- 
tions. But to assume that Kautilya must belong to a much 
later age is not by any means the only way in which this dis- 
crepancy could be explained. Other equally inconclusive 
evidences that have been cited as proof of a much later date 
for the Aithasadra than the Mauryan epoch are : the use of 
Sanskrit as the language of royal rescripts contemplated in the 
Sd^anadhikdra which is in striking contrast with the employ- 
ment of Prakrit in the inscriptions for several centuries from the 



MAURYAN POLITY 


193 


days of Asoka ; and the mention of Parasamudra and Cinabhumi 
(II, ii) which remind us of Palasimundu of the Periplus and of 
the contact with the Chinese silk trade of a later epoch. 

Several attempts have been made along different lines to 
arrive at a date for the Arthasdstra later than the Mauryan epoch. 
Jolly has compared the Arthasdstra with the Dharmasastras ; while 
he has succeeded in discovering many close parallels, it cannot 
be said that any clear conclusion can be drawn from them about 
the relative age of KA. Jolly has himself changed his mind ; 
in 1913 1 he was ready to concede that the text of Yajnavalkya 
as we know it did not exist when KA was written ; he said that 
while many neologisms are common between KA and the 
youngest smrtis, there is little clue to decide which of them is 
earlier ; he was struck by many differences between KA and the 
smrtis (torture, ordeals, divorce etc.) and accounted for them by 
assuming that they were due to deep-lying differences in stand- 
point known from the beginning between a code of custom and 
a text-book of politics. Finally he said that the kernel of KA 
belonged to about 300 B.C. and much of its contents was seen 
to be genuine by numerous early citations as shown by Zacha- 
riae, Hillebrandt, Hertel and Jacobi. The resemblances with 
the later smrtis puzzled him and he left it an open question if 
the smrtis revised the old law in the light of the KA or later 
ideas entered into KA and fused themselves inseparably with 
the text. Ten years later, in 1923 Jolly wrote : ‘One cannot 
help arriving at the conclusion that Kautilya must have been 
acquainted with the whole body of Dharmasastra literature 
much as we now have it, from the earliest Dharmasastras down 
to the most recent metrical smrtis and smrti fragments’. Even 
the great authority of Jolly cannot gain assent for so extravagant 
a conclusion in preference to the hesitant tone that marked his 
expressions a decade earlier, especially when we find him adding 
as an afterthought : ‘It is true that some facts seem to point 
the other way, so that Yajnavalkya instead of Kautilya would 
have to be regarded as the borrower, either directly or indirectly 
through the medium of a common source/ 

i. ZDMG. 1913, pp. 49-96. 
a. Introd. pp. 17-18. 



194 


AGB OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


Jolly employs a more general argument. ‘Generally 
speaking’, he says, ‘the Dharmasastra or science of duty and 
religion has far better claims to a high antiquity than the Artha- 
Sastra or science of gain which in its turn is older than the Kama- 
£astra or science of love, the three sciences based on Tri varga 
having followed each other in point of time as well as in rank 
and value 5 . 1 One may well doubt this ; for even the earliest 
dkarmasutras known contain a core of rajamti, the subject-matter 
of Arthasastra. Even granting the correctness of this sequence 
in the evolution of the sciences, we can get no decision from it 
about the age of any single work in view of the long tradition 
each of the sciences lays claim to. A plausible a priori case can 
be made out for the view that early Indo- Aryan life was gayer 
and more materialist in its outlook, that the sciences of gain 
and love had a better chance of coming up in that period than 
in a later time when Indians became more and more intent on 
the other world and began to lay greater stress on dharma and 
conceived of moksa as the summum bonum of life. In truth, 
we know as yet too little of the growth of the concept of purusdrthas 
to be in a position to affirm or deny the truth of Jolly’s proposi- 
tion regarding the sequence of the sciences. But the Indian 
writers are seen to have recognised An their works the inter- 
dependence of the different ends of human endeavour, and no 
work is purely a work cf dharma or artha to the exclusion of the 
other. And one of the best summaries of general dharma is 
found in the pages of the Carakasamhita, a work of medicine. 

It is not much use laying stress on the open recognition in KA of 
Reprehensible practices such as the murder of distinguished offi- 
cers, the levying of highly oppressive taxes, the corrupt system of 
espionage 5 , and seek to draw any inference from it either about 
the age of the work or on the character of administration in the 
age which produced the work. The author of the Kamasutra 
gives the clue which has not received the attention that it 
merits. He says : 

na sastram-astityetena prayogo hi samiksyate / 

sastrdrthdn vydpino vidydt prayogamstv-ekadesikan jj 
Science is all-embracing thought ; practice is quite another 
affair. The relentless logic with which the implications of 
I# lb. p. 20. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


195 


state policy are worked out in the KA is an example of the 
perfection of scientific thought such as it was, and is no index 
to everyday practice. 

The Kamasutra of Vatsyayana borrows from KA its plan 
and scope, and many peculiar terms as well as entire paragraphs. 
Hence, says Jolly, ‘no long interval of time can have passed 
between the composition of two such cognate productions. 1 ' 
Jacobi, as Jolly knows, did not think so, and in truth theie can be 
no rule governing the interval necessary between an original and 
its imitation. The same consideration applies to the similaiity 
of textual structure and of tantrayuktis between KA and the 
Susruta to which attention has been drawn. 2 J. J. Meyer has also 
studied the relation between KA and the smrtis with a view to 
determine the place of KA ; though his conclusion on the age 
of KA puts it in the Mauryan age, his views regarding the 
relative ages of the other smrtis have not gained general 
acceptance and it seems unlikely that they ever will 3 4 5 . 

The comparison of the KA with the epics has also led to 
no better results. Following up a line of thought suggested by 
Jacobi in the first instance, Charpentier compared the legen- 
dary examples cited by KA with the corresponding episodes 
in the Mahabharata, and he reached the conclusion that the 
current text of the epic must have come into existence sometime 
between the date of the KA and that of the Kamandakiya Nilisara*. 
He also pointed out that KA (1, 5) defines itihdsa in a manner 
that shows that K. was not thinking of our epic. On the other 
hand Hillebrandt and Meyer point out that the Mahabharata 
knows all the predecessors of K. mentioned by him, but not K. 
himself ; and that the kaccit chapters in the Ramayana (II 100) 
and the Mahabharata (II 5) which agree with one another closely 
contain phrases which recall whole chapters of KA to the mind 6 . 
Hillebrandt shows further that the Ramayana is fully acquainted 
with the detailed terminology of the Arthasdstra and apparently 
draws several verses from older systematic treatises on the science. 


1. Inirod \ pp. 21-24. 

2. 1 C. IV. pp. 439-40. 

3. Uber das Hesen and IHO. IV. (1928) pp. 570-92. 

4. WZKM. 28. (1914). pp. 211—40. 

5. Meyer : Das Artkasastra Intr. pp. xxxvii ff. Also HiUeberandt 5 

Altindischt-Politik . pp. 6-16. 



196 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Clearly there is no hope of reaching along this line any precise 
chronological indications regarding the date of KA. 

Another inconclusive effort to place KA about A. D. 250 
is that made by E. H. Johnston 1 . He argues that Kautilya’s 
work must have come into existence after the time of Asvaghosa, 
but not very long after ; Asvaghosa does not use the term 
vijlgisu though he knows the forms jigisat and jigzsu, and he re- 
mains well within the limits of Dharma in his references to politics; 
hence he must have preceded Kautilya. Yet, the common use 
of neologisms by the two writers (of which examples are cited) 
shows that no long interval separated the two writers. And 
the fact that Aryasura (A. D. 434) unlike Asvaghosa parades his 
knowledge of Arthasastra in the Jatakamala , and refers to 
Kautilya, shows clearly that he came later than Kautilya. But 
the only certainty that emergts from Johnston’s arguments is 
that Kautilya wrote earlier than Aryasura’s time. For Asva- 
ghosa was under no compulsion to accept Kautilya’s outlook 
and vocabulary if he had the work before him ; many later 
writers are known to have declined to do so like Dandin and 
Bana, and to have condemned his doctrines and methods. 

O. Stein’s attempt to demonstrate that Megasthenes and 
Kautilya could not have belonged to the same period cannot 
be held a success. The detailed comparison of the fragments 
of Megasthenes with corresponding passages from the Artha~ 
sastra is valuable so far as it goes ; but as Breloer has pointed out 
the method followed is too superficial and mechanical. On 
important subjects like the ownership of the soil, slavery, social 
organisation, legal procedure, and administrative arrangements 
it is quite possible, as we have seen, to explain the apparent 
differences and discover much closer similarity than Stein has 
found between the statements of the Hellenistic ambassador 
and of the Brahmin Chancellor of the first Maury an emperor. 
And Stein apparently fails to note that some of his results e.g. 
the difference between the two writers on milestones point 
logically to the conclusion that Megasthenes must have written 
after Kautilya. But we may not follow Breloer the whole 
length 2 . For we see little reason to accept his view that the 


MAURYAN POLITY 


197 


theory of State-landlordism was introduced into India for the 
first time in the Mauryan. epoch and borrowed from Ptolemaic 
Egypt ; as a matter of fact, as Breloer admits, there is no clear 
statement of this theory in the whole of Kautilya’s work. 
According to Egyptian notions, the State was the ‘house’ of 
the kingand its territory his estate 1 . Such an idea was not accep- 
ted in India even by extieme advocates of State-landlordism who 
only made the king adhipati suzerain or major partner, whose 
rights were strictly limited by law and custom. Much less are 
we persuaded that the Kautilyan polity was a completely planned 
economy after the Nazi model as Breloer seeks to make out in 
the latest and most comprehensive of his Kautilya-studies. The 
principle of local and sectional autonomy was too deeply rooted 
in Indian cultural tradition for even the all-powerful bureau- 
cratic control and regulation of the Mauryan empire to extin- 
guish it or even to curtail its operation to any very considerable 
extent ; witness the multiplicity of metayage arrangements in 
ch. II 14 on sitadhyaksa which finds parallels in several other 
sections of the work. In the war years German scholarship 
turned, possibly had to turn, to Nazi propaganda which no one 
should take seriously 2 . 

The great value of the Kautilya studies of Breloer cannot 
be gainsaid. They offer several convincing interpretations 
by which the apparent conflicts between Megasthenes and 
Kautilya are resolved ; and they have done well to stress the 
fact that after Alexander’s astonishing career, the world was no 
longer the same as before 3 . The great economic and political 
revolutions initiated by the establishment and the early break 
up of Alexander’s empire, the increase in trade due to the multi- 
plication of armed camps in the wars of ‘the successors’ and the 
divisions of the empire, the accumulation of large fortunes by 
some and the coming up of a proletariate, the dispersion of the 
large gold treasures of Persia and the quickening transition from 
a rural to a money economy, and the rise of several large terri- 
torial states under absolute monarchs were the chief features 

1. RostovtzefT, Soe. and Ec. His. of the Hellenistic world ( 1941) p. 269 

2. Cf. Hauer, Glaubengescfdte der Indo-Germanen i where Hitler is 
compared to Sri Krishna. 

3. KS. i. 108 ff. 


198 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of the new epoch. India was drawn more and more into this 
welter, and Chandragupta and his teacher grew up in this 
atmosphere of rapid change and new formations. War, trade, 
diplomacy and travel, opened up numerous channels of increas- 
ing contacts with the outer world, and it should be no wonder 
if the unique character of the Arthasastra is partly due to the stress 
of foreign ideas and influences pressing their way into the poli- 
tical and administrative system of the newly founded empire 
of the Mauryas. There is much force in Rostovtzeff’s observa- 
tion that ‘if one believes in the historical character and the early 
date of the kernel of the Arthasastra of Kautilya and in the 
radical centralization of Indian government effected by Chandra- 
gupta on Hellenistic lines, one may say that Chandragupta 
did more to Hellenize India than Demetrius and Menander.’ 1 
It is, however, not merely a question of Hellenic influence; 
for we know with certainty that the administrative system of 
the Hellenistic monarchies in Asia and Africa ‘was practically 
a continuation of that of the Persian kings and it is equally 
certain that no such continuation would have been possible 
without the help of the documents and information assembled in 
the Persian archives’ 2 . In the natural reaction against Spooner’s 
pompous announcement of a ‘Zoroastrian period’ in Indian 
history, there is a danger of Persian influences on Indian life 
being either altogether denied or considerably under-estimated. 
The mass and variety of detailed statistical information which 
the Arthasastra requires the officials of the State to collect and 
arrange for ready reference (e.g. in II 35 on samahartd and 36 on 
nagaraka) is something unique in all Indian political literature ; 
we are tempted to suppose that the model for Kautilya and the 
Hellenistic states was furnished by the practice of Persian kings 
and satraps maintaining lists of inhabited centres ofeachs atrapy, 
together with approximate estimates of their population and 
material resources, lists which they employed alike for purposes 
of taxation and preparation for war 3 . Kautilya’s categorical 
statement in III (i) that a royal edict (rajasasana) overrides dharma 9 
vyavahdra and caritra is somewhat exceptional in the political 


1. Op. Jt. pp. 550-1. 

2. Ib. p. 1034. 

3. Ib. p. 1033. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


199 


literature of India though Ndradasmrti follows the Arthasdstra 
on this point ; the more usual rule is to require the king to frame 
his edicts in conformity to Dharma, and some writers even go 
the length of implying that if this condition was not satisfied 
the royal order was invalid. Kautilya’s exaltation of the royal 
edict above canon and custom deserves to be compared with 
the growing dominance of royal legislation and jurisdiction, 
and the active exercise of royal authority in the sphere of civil 
law that were characteristic of the Persian empire and the Hel- 
lenistic monarchies 1 . 

Sylvain Levi has argued that the mention of coral from 
Alexandria ( pravalam Alakandakam II, 11, 41) shows that 
the Arthasdstra must be later than the first century A.D. when 
the coral trade shifted to India according to Pliny and the Peri- 
plus 2 . But there are numerous references to pravala (coral) 
in the earliest strata of the Mahdbhdrata not to speak of the occur- 
rence of the word in the ganapdtha where we cannot be sure of 
the sense of the term. There is little reason to doubt that the 
coral was known in India much earlier than the first century 
A.D., and we know that coral was a valued article of trade in the 
Hellenistic world. 

It has been pointed out 3 , lastly, that while Kautilya prescribes 
at II 6 the recording of the year, month, paksa and the day in 
specifying dates, the inscriptions of Aioka nowhere follow this 
system while an approach to it is seen in the Kusana records 
which give the regnal year, season and day, and the exact adop- 
tion of the rule of Kautilya is found for the first time in the 
Girnar inscription of Rudradaman. Rudradaman’s inscrip- 
tion also employs the terms pranaya and visti in the same senses 
as those known to KA. But this only shows that the composer 
of the Girnar prasasti may have known the KA, and means 
little for the date of that work. The Kusana inscriptions do not 
follow the system of KA and may be left on one side ; Asoka 
gives only the year from his coronation in his records and no 
other detail, evidently folk wing the Persian models which he 



200 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


consciously followed. The Persian monaichs knew of a system 
of dating quite like that of the KA, but they did not employ it 
on all occasions, and the chronology of Darius’s insciiptions is 
rather vague. Let us not forget also that the prescription in the 
KA regarding the manner of dating occurs in the chapter on 
revenue collection, and obviously bears a close relation to the 
form of accounts and is not connected with the issue of proclama- 
tions or edicts. 

The author of the Arthasastra has been hailed on the one 
hand as the Indian Bismarck and a Realpolitiker, and dismissed 
on the other as a Pandit, a schematic theoretician whose logical 
i categories had no relation to realities.*^ An open-minded study 
of the entire work will reveal that there is some support from 
the work for either view; while the author does not shrink fiom 
pursuing traditional theories relentlessly to their logical conclu- 
sion as e.g. in the mandala theory, still there are other sections 
of the work particularly the adhyaksa pracara which, like modem 
administrative manuals, deal with details of day to day work 
in public offices. And we should not omit to notice that in its 
concern for details of practical administration the Arthasastra 
is unique in the whole range of the Artha literature of ancient 
India. And some of its administrative terms like purusa , yukta y 
mahamdtra and so on re-appear in the edicts of A3oka. 

^ Considering its age and its technical character, we have 
reason to think that the text tradition of the KA has been quite 
good. Its length is indicated as 6,000 slokas in the text itself 
and by Dandin ; and our text, according to Dr. Shama Sastri 
*is of about the same extent.’ 1 But scribal errors, particularly 
in the transcription of unfamiliar geographical names about 
which Biihler has uttered a clear warning, and occasional inter- 
polations or even rehandlings of parts of the text are not alto- 
gether ruled out of the range of probability. In a very useful 
and penetrating analysis of the Sasanddhikara (II 10)*, Stein 
has sought to establish that this chapter as it stands bears a 
composite appearance and shows signs of having been remodelled 
in the light of Roman Imperial letters of a later time. But in 

j. p. VII of the English translation, 
a. ZJI. VI (1928} pp. 45-71. 



MAURYAN POLITY 


201 


the opinion of the present writer the Arthafastra has stood the 
test of very vigorous criticism for so long that its genuineness 
must now be recognised to have been placed beyond doubt and 
that, with minor reservations, the work may properly be looked 
upon as the authentic production of the scholar and statesman 
who took a hand in the foundation of the Mauryan empire. 



CHAPTER VI 

ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


The reign of Asoka forms the brightest page in the history 
of India. The ruler himself takes rank easily among the master- 
minds of the world, and under his leadership India came to 
occupy the foremost place among the civilized nations of the 
time. Inheritor of an extensive and highly organised empire; 
Aioka proved fully worthy of his heritage ; he was a man of 
unbounded energy and he gave himself without stint to the tasks 
of perfecting the administration of his empire and ensuring the 
happiness of his subjects. The range of his sympathies was 
wide, and he was by no means unwilling to adapt foreign models 
of administration and art to the growing needs and tastes of his 
country. 

His own inscriptions clearly reveal to us the chief stages in 
the history of his reign and the motives underlying his activities. 
For more than a century these famous records have been the 
subject of patient and critical study by generations of scholars, 
and as a result of this study there has emerged a general agree- 
ment about. the meaning of all inscriptions, though a few expres- 
sions still remain obscure. But the inscriptions are by no means 
evenly spread over the reign ; most of them fall into two large 
groups, one about the thirteenth and fourteenth years after the 
Icing’s coronation, and another in the twenty-seventh and twenty- 
eighth years. Though they do mention a few events with the 
time of their occurrence, they are far from being a full record 
of the reign. In this respect they constitute a complete contrast 
to the difficult Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela, and the 
much later prasastis of the various mediaeval dynasties. 

Sources 

Legend has cast a halo of glory around ASoka as around all 
such heroes of nations ; and the legend of one age often derives 
its colour from the history of its predecessor. The cycle of 
Aiokan legends has come down to us in two versions. The 
southern recension, found in the two Pali chronicles of Ceylon 



ASOKA 


203 


— Dlpavamsa and Mahavamsa, in its present form, dates from the 
fourth and fifth centuries A.D., but rests on material of much 
earlier origin. The northern account in the avadanas presents 
the same features with variations. Some indication of 
the age of the avadanas we get from the fact that* they are 
illustrated in the sculptures on the gateways of Sanchl. Both 
versions contain amplifications, under the influence of local 
conditions, of a more primitive legend that had grown up among 
the Buddhist communities in the neighbourghood of Pataliputra. 
KausambI ^nd Mathura might have been the centres where the 
peculiarities of the Southern and Northern recensions were 
developed round about 150-50 B.C 1 . The legends were 
primarily meant for the religious edification of the faithful ; 
the more valuable on that account to the historian are the his- 
torical details which they have preserved and which fit in with 
the data from the inscriptions. For the rest we must accept 
as fact whatever is not intrinsically improbable, though we have 
no means of deciding between contradictions in the rival versions. 
Was Asoka in his youth viceroy at Ujjayini ( Mahavamsa ) or at 
Taksasila (. Avaddna ) ? Was Tissa Moggaliputta or Upagupta 
the spiritual guide of Asoka ? Both are placed by legend in the 
same relation to Buddha by a chain of four intervening patri 
archs. Or did Asoka, as seems not improbable, follow his own 
bent and the redactors of legend invent the relation between the 
emperor and the patriarchs each after his own fashion ? To 
such questions no definite answers can be given. 

‘The extent of Asoka’s empire may be guessed already’, says 
Hultzsch 2 , ‘from the distribution of his rock-edicts, which it 
seems were engraved along the very confines of his territories. 

In the west they are found at Girnar on the Kathiawar Penin- 
sula and at Sopara on the Bombay coast ; in the south in the 
Raichur district of the Nizam’s dominions and in the Chital- 
droog district of the Mysore State ; and in the east at Dhauli 
and Jaugada in the Purl and Ganjam districts. The north- 
eastern boundary line is marked by the rock edicts at Shahbaz- 


1. Przyluski — La Legends , ch. v. Also Marshall and Foucher — Afonu- 
merits of Sanchl. 

2. Inscriptions of Asoka, pp. xxxvi — vii. 



204 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


garhl and Mansehra in the Peshavar and Hazara districts and at 
KalsI in the Dehra Dun district, and it is continued by the Nigall 
Sagar and Rummindel pillars in the Nepalese Taral and by the 
Rampurva pillar in the Champaran district’. The discovery 
in 1929 of a fresh set of the Fourteen Rock-Edicts and a minor 
Rock Edict at Yerragudi (near Gooty) in the Kurnool district 
and that of fragments of Rock and Pillar edicts in Aramaic script 
in Laghman 1 do not materially alter our estimate of the extent 
of the empire as borne out by the spread of the inscriptions* 
But one may legitimately doubt the surmise that th<j rcck-edicts 
were engraved ‘along the very confines 5 of Asoka’s territories ; 
for tradition and probability alike suggest that the empire 
extended in some directions particularly in the north and 
north-west well beyond the extent so defined. 

The inscriptions of Asoka fall into the following classes which, 
are set forth in the order in which they were issued in the course 
of the reign : 

(1) Two Barabar cave inscriptions recording gifts of caves 
to Ajivakas when the king had been anointed twelve 
years. 

(2) The Minor Rock Edicts found in slightly different 
versions in several places — Bairat (Jaipur), Sahasram 
(Bihar), and Rupnath (M, P.) in Northern India; 
Maski, Palkigundu and Gavlmath (Hyderabad), 
Brahmagiri, Siddapura and Jatinga Ramesvara in 
Mysore, Yerragudi (Kurnool district) in the South. 
The Mysore and Yerragudi versions have a closer 
agreement among themselves, and they contain an 
addition to the edict of which the Yerragudi version 
is the fullest. These were issued in the thirteenth 
year after Anoka’s coronation, along with 

(3) The unique Bhabra edict, designated the Calcutta- 
Bairat rock inscription by Hultzsch, and addressed 
to the Buddhist Sangha* 

(4) The Fourteen Rock Edicts found in seven more or less 
complete versions at Girnar, KalsI, Shahbazgarhl, 
Mansehra, Dhauli, Jaugada and Yerragudi, not to 
speak of the small fragment of the eighth rock edict 

i. BSOS . xiii, p. 8o 



ASOKA 


205 


found in Sopara and others in Laghman. These were 
issued about the fourteenth year after the coronation. 

(4a) The two Kalinga edicts, ‘separate rock-edicts’ as they 
are sometimes called, meant only for Kalinga ; at 
Dhauli and Jaugada they take the place of the eleventh 
to the thirteenth edicts in the other collections, and they 
must have been issued along with (4) or very soon after. 

(la) The third Barabar cave inscription, the king having 
been anointed nineteen years. 

(5) The Rummindel and Nigali Sagar pillar inscriptions 
dated twenty years after the Coronation. 

(6) The Seven Pillar Edicts dated 26 and 27 years after 
the coronation and found in six places ; the seventh 
edict, the longest and in some ways most important, 
is found only once with the others on the Delhi-Topra 
pillar. The Delhi-Mirath, Lauriya-Araraj, Lauriya 
Nandangarh, Rampurva, and the Allahabad-Kosam 
pillars contain only the first six edicts ; the last has in 
addition two short inscriptions, the unique record, 
called ‘Queen’s edict’, and ‘KausambI edict’ on 
Sanghabheda which falls into another class. 

(5a) The minor Pillar edicts found in SancI and Sarnath 
besides Kausambi, the Sarnath version being the best 
preserved. This must have been issued towards the 
end of the reign sometime after the Seven Pillar Edicts. 

There are thus thirty-three Asoka inscriptions of varying 
length and importance, many of them available in different 
versions. The language of the inscriptions is MagadhI, the 
official language of the royal chancery at Pataliputra ; only 
some versions, particularly those of Girnar and Shabazgarhl, 
exhibit certain not very important indications of the influence 
of local dialectical variations. 1 The inscriptions in Shabazgarhl 
and Mansehra are in the Kharosthi alphabet written from right 
to left; at the end of the inscriptions in the Mysore state the word 
lipikarena is also found written in Kharosthi ; otherwise all the 
Asoka inscriptions except the Laghman fragments are written in 
one variety or other of the Brahml script. At Yerragudi, the 


i. Senart in I A. xxi, p. 174. 



206 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Minor Rock Edict is found written partly in the boustrophedon 
style, that is alternately from left to right and vice-versa 1 . 

There are two lines of evidence bearing on the chronology 
of Asoka’s reign, in fact, of the history of the Mauryan empire ; 
neither of them leads to a precise conclusion, though both to- 
gether may be taken to point approximately to the truth. 

One is the reckoning in the era of the pari-nirvana of the 
Buddha, preserved in the Dlpavamsa , which dates Asoka 5 s 
accession in 214 A.B. and his coronation in 218 2 . These 
precise indications unfortunately lose much of their value owing 
to the uncertainty of the date of the nirvana. The choice seems 
to lie between 543 B.C. and 483 ; with the first date as the start- 
ing point, 218 A.B. would bring us to 325 B.C., a date more 
suited to the beginning of the Mauryan empire and of Chandra- 
gupta’s reign than that of Asoka. And the suggestion has been 
offered that in the chronicles of Ceylon, the epoch of the begin- 
ning cf the Mauryan empire was mixed up with that of the 
Coronation of Asoka which was the event they really cared for 3 . 
Ingenious as this reconciliation is, it is not easy to accept it 
in view of the fact the Buddha-varsha of 543 B.C. is a compara- 
tively modern fabrication, whereas 483 B.C. has much better 
claims to be considered the true date of the Buddha era., 4 
With this as starting point, we get 265 B.C. for the coronation 
of Asoka, 269 B.C. for his accession, 297 for that of Bindusara 
and 321 for the accession cf Chandragupta, a scheme which 
has intrinsically much in its favour 5 . Some writers would, 
however, prefer the date 486 B.C. for the death of the Buddha, 
on the strength of the Chinese ‘dotted record 6 . 5 

This scheme gains in strength from the confirmation it 
receives from the second line of evidence furnished by Rock- 
Edict XIII whicn gives the names of five contemporary Helle- 
nistic mcnarchs : ‘the Yona king Antiyoka, and beyond him 
four kings, viz., Turumaya, Antekina, Maka and Alikasudara*. 

% 

1. A SI. 1928-9 p. 164. 

2. Obviously the Divayavadana (p. 368) and other northern works giving 
100 years as the interval between the pari-nirvana and Asoka are confusing 
two Asokas — Geiger tr. MV. p. lx. 

3. JBORS. i. 97 - 

4. See Geiger’s tr. of MV. Intr. Sectt. 5 and 6. 

5. Hultzsch doubts the value of the figure 218 — p. xxxiii. 

6. JRAS 1905, p. 51. 


ASOKA 


207 


The same monarchs are mentioned more summarily in the 
second Rock-Edict as : ‘the Yona king Antiyoka and the kings 
who are the neighbours of this Antiyoka’. These kings are now 
identified respectively with Antiochus II Tbeos of Syria 
(261-46 B.C.), Ptolemy II Philadelphus cf Egypt (285-247),, 
Antigonus Gonatas of Macedonia (276 — 239), Magas cf Cyrene 
(c. 300-250) and Alexander of Corinth (252-C.244). The 
date of the edict, thirteen years after the abhisheka would fall 
therefore between 252 and 250 B.C. 1 , the period when all 
the kings mentioned were living, and the year of Asoka’s corona* 
tion must therefore lie between 265 and 263, and of his accession 
between 269 and 267 B.C. It is seen thus that these two lines 
of reasoning confirm and corroborate each other. 

Some writers prefer to think of Alexander of Epirus who died 
about B.C. 255 in the place of the less known Alexander of 
Corinth, and thus fix the date of R. E. XIII at about that date 2 * 

It is now settled that the figure 256 at the end of the first 
Minor Rock inscription, whatever its exact significance may be, 
has no reference to a date in the Buddha era, and that far from 
being one of the latest inscriptions of the reign, it is most pro- 
bably one of the earliest inscriptions of Asoka. 

Fleet drew attention to the references to the Tishya day 
in the Asoka inscriptions ; and assuming that Asoka held his 
abhisheka on such a day, and taking October 13, 483 B.C. as the 
day of Buddha’s nirvana, he calculated that April 25, 264 B.C. 
was the day of Asoka’s abhisheka 3 . But such precise calcula- 

tions rest on too many unproved assumptions and will by no 
means command easy assent. 

Name 

The name ASoka (sorrow-free) occurs but once in the 
inscriptions, in the Maski record which begins : devdnarhpiyasa 
Asokasa ; but this fact, first found in 1915, has confirmed the 
identity of Piyadasi of the inscriptions with Asoka of the Buddhist 
sources and Asokavardhana cf the Puranas which had long 

1. The limits would differ if Alexander of Epirus (272 — c. 255) is thought 
of. See also discussion of chruology under Cbandragupta by H. C. Ray- 
chaudhuri. 

2. Acta Orientalia y 1940 pt. «. 

3. JRAS 1909 pp. 26 and 28-34. 



208 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


been a matter of inference. ASoka the Maurya is mentioned in 
the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman (A.D. 150). In the 
Calcutta-Bairat inscription Asoka refers to himself as ‘Piyadasi 
laja magadhe’, Piyadasi, the king of Magadha. The more 
usual formula is ‘devanampiya piyadasi lajah The compound 
word devanampiya, meaning ‘ dear to the gods was in 
Asoka’s time and until much later, an honorofic term, 
sometimes used also as a synonym of rajan, though by some 
obscure transition it came to mean Tool’ in relatively recent 
times 1 2 . Piyadasi and the slightly altered form Piyadassana 
occur repeatedly in the Dlpavamsa as equivalents of Asoka ; 
and the same epithet is often applied by Valmiki to the hero of 
the Rdmayana 2 ; and was adopted by the Satavahanas and 
some rulers of Central Asia ; it is applied to Chandragupta 
Maurya in the Mudrdrdksasa ; the expression means both ‘of 
amiable appearance’ and ‘who sees with affection’. Whether 
piyadasi was the proper name and Asoka the biruda as has been 
thought, or the other way round, this great king will ever be 
known to history as Asoka. 

Early life. 

Of the birth and early life of Asoka we hear very little even 
from tradition. According to Divyavadana, his mother was 
JanapadakalyanI (Subhadrangi in other versions), the lovely 
daughter of a Brahman of Champa, who was kept out of her 
rights for some time by the intrigues of the other queens of Bindu- 
sara, but succeeded ultimately in winning the king’s favour and 
bearing him two sons, Asoka and Vigatasoka. Some modern 
scholars would make Asoka the son of the Greek princess, the 
daughter of Seleucus, who became the wife of Bindusara accord- 
ing to the terms of peace between the founder of the Mauryan 
empire and the Hellenistic ruler of Western Asia 3 . True, 

1. Hultzsch xxix — xxx ; also Ndgari Pracarini Patrikd 46.2 pp. 135 — 46. 
Bana ( HC . pp. 28, 268 : tr. 20, 239) knows the use of the phrase in the good 
sense while the great advaita teacher Sankara is seen using it in an ironical 
sense ( PS , I. 2.8) to indicate a ritualist. I see no irony in Patanjali on Panini 
Hi 4, 56 pace Kielhom and Hultzsch. 

2. In the very first chapter Valmiki asks Narada : 4 Kascaika-priya-d ar- 
Sanah’. (I. 1, 3,). Also Valle- Poussain, VInde aux temps des Mauryas, pp. 79-80. 

3. K. H. Dhruva — JBORS XVI (1930} p. 35 n. 28 ; Tam, The Greeks 

in Baciria and India , p. 152. 



aSoka 


209 


a mixed descent for AJoka might not have evoked such violent 
disapproval in his time as in later days ; and it may be taken 
to explain Asoka’s adoption and propagation of Buddhism and 
his close relations with Hellenistic rulers and even the disputes 
at the accession of Asoka to the throne ; but there is no clear 
evidence in favour of it. 

Tradition associates Asoka with the viceroyalties of Taksha- 
Sila and Ujjayini, and we know from the inscriptions 1 that 
these were held by princes of the royal family. The beginning 
of young Asoka’s viceroyalty of Ujjayini was marked by romance ; 
when he halted at Vidisa on his way to the provincial capital, 
he fell in love with Devi, the beautiful daughter of a merchant, 
and made her his wife; the two children born out of this marriage, 
a son and a daughter, were Mahinda and Sarighamitta, who 
having renounced the world attained celebrity as the authors 
of the conversion of Ceylon to Buddhism 2 . It is possible 
that Asoka founded a Sangharama and erected the stupa at 
Sanchi because of the pleasant associations he had with the birth- 
place of his beautiful Devi. 

When Bindusara fell ill and was near his end, Asoka left 
Ujjayini and went over to Pushpnpura (Pataliputra) and took 
charge of the administration of the empire. Legend 3 implies that 
this wiis done against the wish of Bindusara who had other ideas 
regarding succession, and there was an interval of four years 
between the end of Bindusara’s rule and the formed abhisheka 
of Asoka from which event his regnal years are counted in the 


1. Separate RE. I. AA — BB. 

2. MV. XIII 8— ii ; DV. VI 15 — 17. As Mahinda was twenty years 
of age in the sixth year after Ins father’s coronation (DV. VI 21 — 2 ,* VII 2i~ 2 
and 24), his birth would fall ten years before Asoka’s accession, and this gives 
us some idea of the duration of Asoka’s political apprenticeship under his 
father. Smith {Asoka, pp. 48, 50) accepts Hiuen Tsang’s statement that 
Mahendra was a brother, not son, of Asoka, and follows Oldenberg in doubting 
the real existence of Sanghamitra. 

3. Ceylon legends contain two different statements — one that Asoka 
killed ninety-nine brothers born of different mothers before becoming sove- 
reign (MV. V 20 ; DV. VI 21 — 2) and the other that after his father’s death 
he caused his eldest brother to be slain before seizing the sovereignty of Pushpa- 
pura, (MV. V. 40). The Divyavaddna says that when Bindusara, lying m his 
deathbed, wanted to anoint his son Suslma, his ministers substituted Asoka in 
his place : and when the dying monarch discovered the trick and became 
angry, Asoka established his right by successfully calling upon the gods to give 
him the diadem if it was his by right, (p. 372 — 3). But elsewhere in the same 
work Asoka speaks of his attaining sovereignty by killing his enemies (pp. 387, 
400). 



210 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


inscriptions. It seems probable that Asoka’s accession was not 
uncontested, but stories of wholesale destruction of all his 
brothers are given the lie direct by the inscriptions of the 
reign. 



Buddhism 


Like his father Bindusara, Asoka was an adherent of the Vedic 
religion at the commencement of his reign. According to the 
Dipavamsa , Asoka entered upon a religious quest and began 
‘searching where truth and where falsehood was* among the sects ; 
he sent for the exponents of all the various doctrines, offered 
them presents, and propounded questions. None of the answers 
he got satisfied him until one day standing at the window of his 
palace he saw the Samana Nigrodha going along the road for 
alms and felt attracted to him. Nigrodha was the posthumous 
son of the elder brother of Asoka, Sumana, whom Asoka had 
slain to clear his way to the throne. Asoka adopted Buddhism 
as his religion as the result of Nigrodha’s sermon to him. This 
was in the fourth year after the king’s coronation 1 . 

In truth, the conversion of Asoka is connected with the first 
historical event of the reign of which the inscriptions speak, 
the conquest of Kalinga, and this is given out by Asoka himself 
in the thirteenth Rock Edict. He says that he effected the 
conquest of Kalinga eight years after his anointment ; he deplores 
the slaughter, death and deportation of people involved in the 
conquest of an unconquered country, and affirms that 
150,000 men were deported, 100,000 were slain in battle, and 
many times that number died ; he lays stress on the injury to the 
beloved ones of the virtuous Brahmanas and Sramanas ; out of 


i. MV. v. 34 — 8 and 62 — 72 abridges and slightly alters DV. vi 25 — 99- 
The later account omits the religious quest part of the story and lays stress on 
the Svant of self-control* of the Brahmanas at the distribution of food, which 
led the king to send for the other sects. The Divydvaddna (xxvi) gives quite 
another account of Asoka ’s conversion. It describes a prison which the king 
established in Pataliputra under the control of Girika and the tortures to which 
persons who entered it were subjected ; Samudra, a merchant prince of Sra- 
vasti, turned monk, entered the prison and by his miraculous powers, escaped 
the usual fate of persons who went in there. Asoka heard of this, and witnessed 
more miracles performed by the Bhifohu and was converted (pp. 374 — 82) 
See also Watters, ii 88 — 91. Senart’s remarks at IA xx p. 235 seek to account 
plausibly for the earlier date for the conversion given by the Sinhalese chro- 
nicle*. 



aSoka 


211 


repentance ( anusochana ) for these evils of conquest, he began 
to study Dhamma with zeal, to love Dhamma and to 
devote himself to the instruction of people in Dhamma. The 
stages of Asoka’s spiritual progress we may infer from the hints 
scattered in other inscriptions 1 . In the opening sections 
of the Minor Rock Inscription he says that for over a year after 
he had openly proclaimed himself a Buddha-Sakya (Maski) 
he was not very zealous ; then he visited the Sangha and by the 
time he issued this inscription he had been exerting himself 
with zeal for over a year in the realisation of Dhamma. The 
total period between the original conversion and this record 
is given as two years and a half. The visit to Sambodhi at the 
end of ten years after the abhisheka ( eighth Rock Edict ) may 
well have signalised the initial conversion of the emperor to 
Buddhism. 

Thus Asoka effected the conquest of Kalinga in the ninth 
and tenth years after the abhisheka (c. 256-5 B.C.) ; in the 
eleventh year, on account of his remorse at the thought of the 
incidents of the Kalinga war, he adopted Buddhism as his creed, 
undertook the pilgrimage to Gaya (Sambodhi) became an 
upasaka and gave up the time-honoured practice of going out on 
hunting and pleasure tours. 2 Not much happened for one 
year after that ; then he paid a visit to the Sangha, derived 
instruction, became more zealous in the cause of Dhamma, and 
began to live apart as a celibate ; after 256 nights spent in this 
manner 3 , he caused a record of his experiences to be made 
along with an exhortation to all to exert themselves likewise in 
the good cause (Minor Rock Edict.). About the same time 
(253 B.C.) he declared his mind to the Sangha in a letter which 
was engraved on a rock in Bairat (Rajaputana). In this letter 
Asoka says that his faith in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha 
is well known to the monks and proceeds to pick out and name 


1. These have been discussed by Hultzsch p. xlvi J also Senart IA xz 
pp. 229—31. 

2. RE. VIII C — Hultzsch p. 15 and n. cf. also MV. xi 34. 

3. Fleet’s suggestion (JRAS. 1910 p. 1308) that 256 represents the 
number of years after the nirvana may yet hold, if we relate it not to the pari- 
nirvana of Buddha, but to his enlightenment — which seems not unlikely consi- 
dering that Asoka signifies his conversion at the outset by a journey to the 
spot where the Buddha attained knowledge. 



212 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


seven texts from the scriptures 1 which he desires the monks 
and nuns should hear frequently expounded and should meditate 
upon ; this, in his opinion, is calculated to secure the long dura- 
tion of the true Dhamma. At the same time he presented to the 
Ajivaka monks two caves with polished interiors in the Khala- 
tika mountain, now known as Barabar hills, in South Bihar. 
Seven years later Asoka presented a third cave -dwelling in the 
same hills, but the inscription does not say to whom, 2 

Rock Edicts 

The thirteenth and fourteenth years (252- — 1 B. G.) after the 
coronation were marked by the issue of the most important set 
of proclamations for the whole reign, the Fourteen Rock Edicts, 
and the two Kalinga Edicts which, in Kalinga, take the place of 
Nos. 11-13 in the series, and concern themselves particularly 
with the administration of the newly conquered country. In 
the Rock-Edicts which were engraved at different places all 
over the empire, Asoka sets forth the principles of Dhamma which 
he wishes to inculcate on his officials and on the people over 
whom they w T ere set to rule, and the steps he took to secure the 
observance of these principles within his empire and to propa- 
gate them in foreign lands. These w^e shall consider later in 
some detail. 


Pilgrimage 

In the fifteenth year (250 B. G.) he enlarged the stupa of 
Konakamana at Nigall Sagar in the Nepalese Tarai to double 
its original size ; six years later he came himself to the spot for 
worship and set up a pillar bearing an inscription briefly record- 
ing both tl e facts. Konakamana, also called Konagamana and 

For the identification of these texts see IA xli (1912) pp. 37 — 40 and 
19 1 3 P' 387 5 also Smith’s Asoka 3 pp. 156 — 7 and Hultzsch, p. 174 n2- 
The texts are (1) Vinaya Samukasa — Buddha’s first sermon at Benares ( Uddna 
X’ 3) ( 2 ) Aliya Vasani Anguttara ii. p. 27 (3) Anagata-bhayani — Anguttara 
f* 1 P;. J 93> sutta 78 (4) Muni-gatha — Sutta-nipata i. 12. p. 36 (5) Moneya-sute — * 
ib. 111. ii pp. 131-— 4 (g) Upatisa-pasine — ib . iv. 16, pp. 76 — 9 (7) Laghulo- 
vade Majjhima Nik. ii, 2, 1 Vol. i. p. 414 (references to PTS editions.) See 
also Wmternitz, Hist . of Ind. Liter. Calcutta, 1933 ii, App. iii. pp. 606 — g. See 
also the Chapter on ‘Religion’ post. £ 

2 . The Ajivakas might have been tkadandi worshippers of Siva earlier 
than Gosala whose disciples they arc generally represented to be. Charpen- 
tier in JRAS 1913 pp. 669 — 74. 



aSoka 


213 


Kanakamuni, is the name of one of the legendary Buddhas that 
preceded the historical Buddha Sakyamuni, and Hiuen Tsang 
records that in the course of his travels he saw the stupa contain- 
ing the relics of Kanakamuni Buddha, and in front of it an 
inscribed pillar about 20 feet high and surmounted by a lion ; 
he heard that the pillar was erected by Asoka. 

Asoka’s pilgrimage (244 B.C.) must have extended to other 
sacred spots as well. The short Rummindei pillar inscription 
states that he visited Lumbinivana and worshipped the spot 
where the Buddha Sakyamuni was born, caused a memorial 
pillar to be set up on the spot to show ‘that the Blessed One was 
born here’, and declared the village of Lumbini to be thence- 
forth free of taxes (ubalika) and liable to only an eighth of its pro- 
duce (. athabhdgiye ) in land assessment instead of the higher rate 
usually taken. The Divyavadana preserves the memory of 
Asoka’s pilgrimage to the sacred places under the guidance of 
Upagupta to whom Asoka declares his desire to go and worship 
all the spots hallowed by the presence of the Buddha and to leave 
marks there for the benefit of future generations of men. Lum- 
binivana is placed first among the places to which Upagupta 
guided Asoka 1 . 


Other edicts 

In 238 B. G. Asoka began the issue of the Pillar Edicts which 
together with the Fourteen Rock Edicts form the most important 
records of the reign. The first six Pillar Edicts which were 
issued in the first instance contained further elaboration of the 
principles of Dhamma and the administrative measures calcula- 
ted to secure their voluntary observance by the people, and 
their enforcement, where necessary, by the officials of the imperial 
government. A year later in 237, another edict, the longest 
in this series, was added ; and this inscription, found only on 
one pillar, constitutes a more or less systematic review of all 


i. Div. pp. 389-96, Upagupta is said to have made Aioka worship at 
the stupas of the apostles of Buddhism also. He made large gifts at each of 
the spots visited, except in the stupa of Vakkula where he gave a kakani for 
the reason that Vakkula did not do so much good to his fellow-creatures aj 
others. Cf. hida Budht jate Sakyamuni and hida Bhagavan jateti of the Rummin- 
dei inscr. with Upagupta’s words to Aioka : asmin maharaja pradeie Bhagavan 
jdtah. (Div. p. 389). 



214 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the steps taken by Asoka so far for the promotion of Dhamma 
and the motives which actuated them ; incidentally it gives 
some idea of the results obtained by the action of the monarch 
and of his hopes for the future. 

Asoki continued to reign for ten years after he issued the 
seventh Pillar edict, and the closing decade of the reign is nearly 
as poor in its epigraphy as the first. We have only two inscrip- 
tions, both undated but most certainly belonging to this period. 
One of them is the order of the king issued to his mahamatras that 
the monk or nun who causes schism in the Sangha should be 
punished by expulsion, being required to wear white robes and 
live outside the vihdra in a place not fit for the members of the 
Sangha to live in ; this order was to be properly circulated 
among the monks and nuns and lay worshippers ; officials and lay 
worshippers were to assist in carrying out this instruction by 
attending service on every uposatlia day. In the other record 
the king gives effect to the request of his second queen, Kalu- 
vaki, the mother of Tivala, and orders all his mahamatras to 
register in her name all the gifts made by her, mango-groves, 
gardens, alms houses or anything else. 

Tradition : Third Council 

Tradition helps us to eke out these meagre references to the 
doings of the great king in his long reign, though it is often 
characterised by grotesque exaggeration, and some of it is doubt- 
less pure invention 1 . The Dipavamsa contains the earliest 


i. Some stories from the Asoka cycle have been touched upon already, 
particularly in the notes. The execution by the king’s own hand of five 
hundred ministers for their refusing to carry out the order to cut down all 
fruit trees and flower plants and look after the thorny trees ; and the burning 
alive of five hundred women of the harem for their having denuded an Asoka 
tree to spite the king who bore its name ( D'uyavadana p. 373-4) are just edify- 
ing invention meant to stress the good effects of the conversion on Asoka ; 
the number 500 gives the show away. The construction of 84,000 stupas 
and the distribution of Buddha relics among them ( Divy . 380-1), the number 
representing the sections of Dharma according tot he Ceylonese books(DV. vi, 
86-99), and Queen Padmavatl bringing forth Kunala on the day on which 
the stupas were completed {Divy. p. 405) can hardly be accepted at face value. 
The story of Vitasoka, the brother of Asoka, (Div. xxviii pp. 419-29) may 
also be only edifving legend with no historical basis. The brother is at first 
devoted to the Tirthyas and accuses the Bauddha monks of being pleasure- 
lovers ; to teach him a lesson, Asoka gets his ministers to entice Vitasoka into 
assuming the insignia of royalty, condemns him to death as a traitor, and then 
grants him a seven days’ respite, during which ail the amenities of royalty are 
permitted to him ; fear of death made all enjoyment impossible to him during 


1 



aSoka 


215 


account we possess of the third Buddhist council held in the 
reign of Asoka 1 . That monarch’s patronage of Buddhism 
resulted in the enrichment of the Sangha and the relative 
impoverishment of other faiths ; many adherents of the neglected 
creeds, ‘Ajivakas and sectarians of different descriptions’ to 
the number of sixty thousands, began to wear the yellow robe 
and dwell together with the bhikshus in the Asokarama for the 
sake of the revenue ; they proclaimed their own heresies as the 
doctrines of the Buddha and caused much confusion by their 
unruly behaviour. This went on for a period of seven years 
during which ‘the uposatha ceremonies were performed by 
incomplete congregations’, ‘saintly, clever and modest men’ 
not making their appearance at them. At last, Asoka summoned 
to his aid the venerable Moggaliputta Tissa who was living at 
that time in solitary retreat to escape the confusion prevailing 
in Asokarama ; under Tissa’s presidency a council was held at 
which all the adherents of the false doctrine who had stealthily 
attached themselves to the Sangha were unfrocked, compelled 
to put on white robes and expelled, the Theravada was firmly 
established and the great thera Tissa ‘set forth the treatise 
belonging to the Abhidhamma, which is called Kathdvatthu\ 


the period, and then, being convinced that Bauddha monks who meditated on 
the death of hundreds of beings could not be pleasure seekers, he became one 
of them himself. Later, Asoka ordered all the nirgranthas (also called Aji- 
vakas Div. p. 427) of Pundravardhana to be beheaded, offering reward to those 
who did so, because they had painted the Buddha as prostrating before a 
niigrantha image : Vltasoka also fell a victim to this persecution as he was 
mistaken for a nirgrantha : in his grief at this occurrence, Asoka allowed him- 
self to be persuaded to declare immunity from fear for all creatures in his realms. 
This story is clearly a clumsy invention meant to account for the well-known 
fact that Asoka promoted ahimsd. The celebrated story of Kuriala losing his eyes 
by the machination of his step-mother Tishvarakshit a whose illicit passion for 
him he failed to reciprocate, and his miraculous recovery, is also a legend : the 
revenge of ‘women whose love is scorned’ is a popular motif (Penzer, Ocean of 
Story, ii. p. 120) and the name of the woman ‘Protected by Tisya’ is suspicious, 
for Tisya w*e have good reason to think was the asterism of Asoka’s birth or 
ahisheka (JRAS 1909 pp. 28 — 34). If this is accepted, Tisyaraksita’s jealously 
of thebodhi tree, her attempted destruction of it and its effects on the king, and 
the revival of both would also be mythical though some of the scenes are known 
to be representated in sculpture on the toranas of Sancht. ( Monuments of 
Saficht, Marshall and Foucher pp. 212 — 3). Asoka’s gift of everything he had 
including the whole earth to the Sangha to make up the 100 crores he had 
promised, the concern ofSampadi, the heir-apparent, and the ministers at this 
extravagance, and the steps they took to stop the effects of Asoka’s dotage, 
and his last gift of half a myrobalan which was all that was left to him to 
the Kukutarama — are likewise legends of pious fame. 

1. DV. 7. 34-59 5 MV. 5. 288 — 82 ; Samantapasadika in Oldenberg 
Vin. Pit. iii pp. 282 ff. esp. p. 312 for white robes given to degraded monks. 



216 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


The Council comprised one thousand of the best Arhats, was 
held under the King’s protection, and lasted nine months. 

This Council was held according to tradition at the end 
of 236 years after the Buddha’s death ( Dipavamsa ) and in the 
seventeenth year of the reign of Asoka ( Mahavamsa ) . But there 
is no mention of the Council in the Seventh Pillar Edict ; this 
has led some scholars to discredit the entire story of the third 
Council. This, however, is not easy in the face of the edict 
against schism ( sanghabheda ) which strikingly corroborates the 
account of the Council ; and judging by the position of its Kau- 
sambl version on the Allahabad pillar, it was issued some time 
after the Seventh Pillar Edict and fell towards the end of the 
reign ; the Council must have been held about the same time. 

Buddhist Missions 

At the conclusion of the Council Moggaliputta Tissa sent 
theras to different countries to preach and establish the Dhamma 
in those lands. The names of the missionaries and the countries 
to which they were sent are as follows 1 : 

Majjhantika Kasmira and Gandhara 

Mahadeva Mahisamandala (Mysore) 

Rakkhita Vanavasi (N. Kanara Dt.) 

Yona Dhammarakkhita Aparantaka (Northern half of 

Bombay Coast). 

Mahadhamma rakkhita Maharattha 

Maharakkhita Yona (Greek settlements in the 

N. W. of India) 

Majjhima Himalaya country 

Sona and Uttara Suvannabhumi 

Mahinda (Mahendra) and 
four others. Lanka. 

The Dipavamsa mentions that besides Majjhima, the mission 
to the Himalayas included Kassapagotta, Dundubhissara, 
Sahadeva and Mulakadeva. Some of these names figure in 
inscriptions on relic caskets from Sanchl and its neighbourhood. 
But Mogaliputa of these inscriptions could not be Moggaliputa 
Tissa .as was thought at one time, because he was the pupil of 

i. DV. viii, MV. xii. Thomas accepts Waddel’s identification of M. Tissa 
with Upagupta (CHI. i. p. 506) : but see Pryzluski ,* La Ltgtndt Pt. I ch. 2. 



aSoka 


217 


Gotiputa, the heir of Dimdubhisara who may well be identical 
with the missionary of the Himalayan region just mentioned. 
The names Kassapagotta and Majjhima are also found on the 
caskets, and the former is styled ‘Sava-Hemavata-acariya’ ; 
there was a Hemavata school among the Theravadins, and it 
might have had its origin in the Himalayan region converted 
by Kassapagotta, whose name is placed first in Dipavamsa in the 
list of missionaries to the Yakkhas of Himavanta. The inscrip- 
tions are clearly later than the age of Asoka, but this may be due 
to a redistribution of the relics undertaken some time subsequent 
to the death of the theras 1 . It is worthy of note that the name 
of a Yona (foreigner, Greek or Persian) thera is included among 
these early missionaries of the faith. 

This account of the missions given by the Ceylonese chroni- 
cles may be accepted as evidence that in the later years of his 
reign Asoka continued to strive for the spread of Buddhism 
with the same zeal as before. The action taken earlier in the 
reign had resulted in the establishment of a net-work of missions 
within the empire and outside. In the Thirteenth Rock Edict 
Asoka forswears war as a means of conquest, declares that the 
true conquest is conquest of Dhamma (Dhammavijaya) and 
then records : 

‘And this (conquest) has been won repeatedly by Devanam- 
priya both here and among all (his) borderers, even as far as at 
(the distance of) six hundred yojanas, where the Yona king named 
(Antiyoka) (is ruling), and beyond this Antiyoka (where) four 
kings (are ruling), (viz., the king) named Turumaya, (the king) 
named Antikini, (the king) named Maka, (and the king) named 
Aiikasudara, (and) towards the south, (where) the Chodas and 
Pandyas (are ruling) as far as Tamraparnl. 

‘Likewise here in the king’s territory, among the Yonas 
and Kambojas, among the Nabhakas and Nabbitis (Nabha- 
pamtis), among the Bhojas and Pitinikas, and the Andhras and 
Palidas, everywhere (people) are c r-nf arming to Devanampriya’s 
instruction in morality. 

‘Even those to whom the envoys of Devanampriya do not 
go, having heard of the duties of morality, the ordinances, (and) 


i. Monuments of Saickl i. pp. 291-4. 



218 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the instruction in merality of Devanampriya, are conforming 
to morality and will conform to (it)’. 

No tmgible evidence is forthcoming to enable us to estimate 
the measure of success that attended the missions to foreign lands ; 
some stones bearing the obviously Buddhist symbols of the wheel 
and trident have been found in Egypt, but in the absence of 
any inscriptions on them, their age must remain uncertain, and 
they may have nothing to do with the missions of Asoka. But 
the discovery at Memphis of some of Indian figures made in 
moulds about 200B.G. may be more to the point 1 . The conversion 
of Ceylon has been treated with epic fulness in the Ceylonese 
chronicles ; but even here the details of the story are open to 
doubt. Devanampriya Tissa was the contemporary of Asoka 
in Ceylon, and the two monarchs were friends c though they 
had never seen each other* . Soon after his accession Tissa 
sent an embassy to Asoka ; it was led by his nephew Arittha and 
carried valuable presents to Asoka ; the mission took a week 
for the journey by sea from Jambukola to Tamralipti and another 
week from there to reach Patliputra. It was received with 
great honours, spent five weeks in the Mauryan capital, and then 
returned to Ceylon bringing as a return present ‘all that was 
needful for consecrating a king* and the gift of the true 
doctrine in the form of a message telling Tissa that Asoka 
had become a lay disciple in the religion of the Buddha 
and exhorting him to do likewise. Tissa consecrated 
himself a second time thereafter ; Mahinda came one month 
later, says the Dipavamsa. Some time later Arittha was 
despatched once more to Pataliputra to fetch Sanghamitta 
for the ordination of Queen Anula and her companions, and a 


i. Aryan woman of the Punjab, seated figure in Indian attitude with 
the scarf over the left shoulder. ‘These are the first remains of Indians known 
on the Mediterranean. Hitherto there have been no material evidences 
for that connection which is stated to have existed, both by embassies from 
Egypt and Syria to India and by the great Buddhist mission sent by Asoka 
as far west as Greece and Cyrene. We seem now to have touched the Indian 
colony in Memphis, and we may hope for more light on that connection which 
seems to have been so momentous for Western thought’. Petrie in Man VIII 
(1908) No. 71 J See also Petrie — Seventy years in Archaelo^y p. 213 and British 
School of Archaelo % y in Egypt and Egyptian research Account — Fourteenth year, 1908 — 
Memphis by Petrie (1908) ch. VIII. I owe these references to Prof. T. Bala- 
krishna Nayar of Presidency College, Madras. For the Ptolemaic 
grave-stone with Buddhist symbols, wheel and triratna, see JRAS 1898, 
P* 875* 



A&OKA 


219 


branch of the Bodhi-tree for being planted in Ceylon 1 . Some 
modern writers are inclined to discredit the whole account, 
but there is nothing intrinsically improbable here, and Asoka’s 
reference to Tambapanni twice in his inscriptions shows that 
once more the chronicles are only embellishing historical occur- 
rences. 

After his conquest of K-dinga, the empire of Asoka extended 
practically over the whole of India with the exception of the 
extreme south of the peninsula which according to the second 
Rock Edict was occupied by the independent states of Chola, 
Pandya, Satiyaputa and Keralxputa. Hiuen Tsang notices 
the existence of numerous stupas ascribed to Asoka all over 
India ; this does not always help us to determine the limits of 
the empire. Towards the north and north-west the empire 
clearly reached much firther than the frontier of British India. 
The territory gained by treaty from Seleucus continued in the 
Mauryan empire, and Asoka refers to Antiochus of Syria in a 
manner that implies that their territories were contiguous ; 
thus the southern half of Afghanistan up to the Hindu Kush, 
and practically the whole of British B iluchistan was included 
in the empire which thus held the Scientific frontier’ which 
eluded the grasp of British rulers of India in the nineteenth 
century. Tradition is strong tint Kashmir was under Asoka’s 
rule. Following earlier authorities, Kalhana, the historian of 
Kashmir, records 2 that Asoka built the town of Srinagar! 
besides a large number of stupas and some shrines to Siva, two 
of which were called Asokesvxra after the king. Asoka is said 
to have been followed in this region by his son Julauka who 
expelled the mlecchas that hid overrun the land and then con- 
tinued the policy of his fither and introduced wholesome 
administrative reforms. Pandrcthan, a small village three 
miles above the modern city of Srinagar, is supposed to 
represent Kalhana’s Puranadhishtlxana (ancient capital), a name 
used even in Hiuen Tsang’s time for Asoka’s city. Kashmir 

1. DV. XI 25—40 : XII 1 — 7 l xv 74 — 95 j XVI 1 — 7, 38 — 41 and 
XVII 81-87. The account of MV is much better arranged. XI 18-42, 

XVIII and XIX. I have omitted from my account all reference to the part 
of Sumana, the son of Sahghamitta. 

2. I ioi — 23. ed. Stein. Watters, Yuan Chwang i, 158 — 70 l Beal. 
Life ch. 2 ; Albiruni (Sachau) i. 207. 



220 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


was a stronghold of Suivism in later historical times, and to 
this, rather than to any real leanings to Saivism on the part of 
Asoka, must be traced the notion that he built important 
Siva temples in Kashmir. We have noted already that Kashmir 
and Gandhara received one of the missions sent out for the 
spread of the Dhamma, and Hiuen Tsang, who saw four Asoka 
stupas in Kashmir, records several edifying legends of local import. 

Khotan 

In Khotan also legend connects the foundation of the king- 
dom with Kunala and Taxila, the seat of his viceroyalty. The 
story takes different forms in the pages of Hiuen Tsang and his 
biographer, and in Tibetan books of later date 1 . Miracles 
apart, all forms of the legend agree in tracing the origin of Khotan 
to two settlements one of Indians from Taxila and the other of 
Chinese, the former led by Kunala or the officials of Taxila 
who were banished for their share in his blinding, the latter bya 
Chinese prince ; the two settlements which were founded at the 
same time and in the same neighbourhood started by quarrel- 
ling, and their differences were composed by divine intervention. 
We may not now hope to discover the actual facts that gave rise 
to this tradition ; but we may note the facts in the ethnic and 
cultural history of Khota.n as now known which have a bearing 
on the historicity of these traditions. The earliest documents 
from Khotan so far known belong to about the middle of the 
third century A.D. ; they are numerous, and relate to secular 
affairs of public administration or ordinary private life ; they 
are written in Kharoshthi, a script used for some centuries before 
and after the Christian era in the region round Taxila, the 
traditional home of the Indian colonists of Khotan ; the language 
of the records likewise is ‘beyond all doubt an Indian language 
closely allied to the old Prakrits of North-Western India’ 
(Stein). Buddhism by itself cannot account for these features ; 
for the language of Northern Buddhism was Sanskrit and its 
script BrahmI. On the ethnic side a general resemblance between 
the features of the Khotancse and Kashmiris has been noted by 

i. Rockhill : Life of the Buddha ch. viii ; Beal — Buddhist Records i. pp. 143 
ffi ii. pp. 309 ff : Life, p. 203 : Watters ii. pp. 295-305. Stein, Ancient Khotan 
(Oxford, 1907) i. pp. 156.66, and 368. Konow, Khotan Studies JRAS 1914, 

PP' 344 ff 



aSoka 


221 


Stein, and in the early sculpture and painting of Khotan quasi- 
Mongolian facial features appear in the midst of art forms other- 
wise entirely Indian in character. Thus the cultural milieu 
of the antiquities of Ancient Khotan can be adequately explained 
by the postulate of an early connection between Khotan and 
the Taxila region, and there is nothing against our assuming 
that it began in Asoka’s reign. 

Nepal 

The Tibetan historian Taranath mentions a tradition that 
Asoka reduced a rising of the Nepalas and Khasyas, tribes 
of Himalayan mountaineers, during his father’s reign 1 . 
Asoka’s pilgrimage to the birth-place of the Buddha and his 
inscribed pillars at Rummindei and Kigali Sagar attest the 
inclusion of the Nepalese Tara! in the empire. Nepalese tradi- 
tion further affirms that the pilgrimage of Asoka under the 
guidance of Upagupta was continued into Nepal where he founded 
the city of Patan (two miles S. E. of Khatmandu) 
and built five chaityas , one at the centre of the new city and the 
rest at the cardinal points on its perimeter ; the latter subsist 
to this day and conform in shape to the Sanchl and Gandhara 
types. Many stupas marked the route of Asoka from and to 
Pat iliputra. The king is said to have been accompanied by his 
daughter Carumati for whom a husband was found among the 
Kshatriyas of Nepal, by name Devapala. Both Carumati 
and Devapala resolved to spend their days in Nepal, and the 
city of Deopatan, one of the oldest cities of Nepal, is said to have 
been founded by him. In her old age Carumati built a vihara 
named after her (now Chabahil) to the north of Deopatan, and 
she lived there a recluse till her death. The celebrated shrine 
of Svayambhunath in Western Nepal, consecrated to the pri- 
mordial Buddha, is also connected by tradition with the memory 
of the great emperor Asoka. 

Assam and Bengal 

Asoka’s empire did not extend to Kamarupa. No Asoka 
monuments have been discovered there, and Hiuen Tsang did 


I. Schiefner p. 127 : S. Levi — Le Nepal Index s. v. Asoka. 



222 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


not notice any in his time ; in fact he asserts that there had never 
been a Buddhist monastery in the land. The Brahmaputra 
must have been the frontier of the empire on this side. The 
discovery in 1931 of the Mahasthan inscription written in Brahmi 
characters clearly of the Mauryan epoch makes it certain that 
Bengal was included within the empire of Asoka ; Hiuen Tsang 
saw Asoka stupas in Samatata (E. Bengal) and in Tamralipti, 
which figures as a port of considerable importance in the events 
of Asoka 5 s reign as recorded in the Ceylonese chronicles. The 
southern limit of the empire may be taken to be indicated by the 
A^oka stupas mentioned by Hiuen Tsang in the neighbourhood 
of Kanchlpuram in the Dravida country (about 12° 
N. L.) ; the stupa near the capital (Madura ?) of Malakuta 
(Pandya) was built, according to him, not by Asoka, but by his 
brother Mahendra. 


Tribes 

In the inscriptions we find the n^mes of a number cf tribes, 
and not all of them can be identified with certainty. There is 
also some room for doubt about their political relation to the 
empire. Rock Edict V (J) mentions the Yonas, Kambojas, 
Gandharas, Rathikas, Petenikas and other Western borderers, 
and says that all the religious sects among these tribes were 
looked after by the new officials of the empire, the dharmama - 
hamatras. Rock Edict XIII (R) speaks of the tribes ‘here in the 
king’s territory 5 (iha rajavishye ), viz., ‘the Yonas and Kambojas, 
the Nabhakas and Nabhapahktis (Nabhiti-Shab.), the Bhojas 
and Pitinikas, the Andhras and Parindas’. Clearly the Yonas and 
Kamhojas of the lists are identical, and the hvestern borderers’ 
must be taken to have lived within the empire, *in the king’s 
territory.’ 1 The Yonas in this period obviously means Greeks, 
and they seem to have formed a small state ruled over by Greek 
princes in the north-west frontier 2 . The Kambojas are to 
be located in the region of the Pamirs, to the north of Kashmir 3 . 

1 . Contra Hultzsch p. xxxviii. Amta is a dubious term which may describe 
a *borderer* inside or outside the boundary, and the interpretation must depend 
on tlie context. 

2. f luitzsth p. xxx ix and Tarn, Creeks inBactiia and India p. ICI. 

3. Hultzsch says Kabul legion. I prefer on this point to follow Jaya- 
chandra Vid yalankara, Proc. Sixth All-India Or. Conference , pp. 102 — 9. 



aSoka 


223 


The Gandharas lived round about Peshawar, the ancient 
Purushapura, now included in the North-West Frontier pro- 
vince. We are less certain of the location of the other tribes 
named. The Rathikas may be the people of Kathiawad, if the 
name stands for Rashtrika ; the governor of this region 
was known as Rashtriya in Chandragupta’s reign 1 . The 
Petenikas or Pitinikas who are coupled with the Bhojas in Rock 
Edict XIII must also be looked for in the west ; but Petenika 
is not Pratishthana as the identification is phonetically impos- 
sible’, and the Bhojas could not be located in Berar. The 
Nabhakas and Nabhapanktis have been plausibly assigned to 
the Nepalese frontier, and the Andhras and Parindas were in 
Eastern Deccan 2 . 


Administration 

From other geographical references in the inscriptions we 
may form some idea of the scheme of Anoka’s administration 
of the empire. Pataliputra (Patna) was the capital, as in the 
days of Asoka’s grandfather Chandragupta 3 . KosambI 
(Kosam on the Jamna about 28 miles above Allahabad), Ujjeni, 
Takshasila (Taxila), Suvarnagiri (perhaps modern Zonnagiri 
in the neighbourhood of Yerragudi 4 ). with Isila (Siddha- 
pura) as a subordinate division, and Tosali (Dhauli) and Samapa 
(near Jaugada) in the Kalinga country are important centres of 
provincial administration that are expressly mentioned. There 
might have been others. Thus in an inscription of A.D. 150 
the Yavanaraja Tushaspa is said to have represented Asoka’s 
authority in Kathiawad. The Viceroys of Tosali and Ujjeni 
are called Kumara in the Kalinga edicts ; and Ayaputa 
(Aryaputra) is the term by which the viceroy of Suvarnagiri is 
described in the Mysore (Brahmagiri-Siddhapura) edicts, and they 
were obviously princes of the imperial royal family. The more 
generic term for provincial officers is Mahdmatra. The two 

1. Junagadh Rock Inscr. of Rudradaman El. viii p. 46, n. 7. 

2. Hultzsch p. xxxix. The Puranas, however know of a land of the 
Paradas in Eastern India watered by the Ganges and noted for its horses, Br, 
II 18, 50 : 31, 83, : Mats. 12 1, 45. 

3. Hultzsch p. xxx. 

4. NIA i pp 596 — 7. Contra Hultzsch who suggests Kanakagiri in the 
Nizam’s dominions. 



224 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Kumaras were probably sons of the king. Rock-Edict V (M) 
mentions the harems of the king’s brothers, of his sisters and 
other relatives both in the capital and in all the outlying towns, 
a clear indication that the king availed himself freely of the 
assistance of his relatives in carrying on the administration of the 
empire. 

Officers of different grades are mentioned, and the highest 
rank seems to have been held by the Rajukas and Mahamatras. 
The word Rajuka is held by some to be connected with raja ; 
but the better view seems to be that of Buhler who considers it 
an abbreviation of Rajjugrahaka (rope-holder) of the Jatakas. 
This class of officer “originally ‘held the rope 5 in order to measure 
the fields of the ryots and to assess the land-tax”, and revenue 
administration must have been among their chief duties. 
Asoka says that he appointed the Rajukrs for the welfare and 
happiness of the country people (janapadasa hitasukhaye PE IV, 
I). The Arthasastra knows, how'ever, rajju and chora-rajju as 
sources of revenue in the rdshtra ( janapada ) 9 and chora-rajjuka as 
a rural officer ; and Mcgasthenes has described a class of highly- 
placed rural officers, agronomoi , whose duties are very similar 
to those of the rajukas of the inscriptions. We must assume 
therefore that Asoka did not create a new office, but 
reorganised and improved the existing arrangements for rural 
administration. The Rajukas each held sw r ay over hnany 
hundred thousands of men’, and ^either rewards or punishments 
were left to their discretion 5 in order that they should perform 
their duties confidently and fearlessly. Asoka desires that the 
care of these officers for the people should resemble that of an 
intelligent nurse for the child in her charge. The Rajukas had 
the pow r er of life and death ; but to secure that no mistakes should 
occur and opportunity may be found by Rajukas either on their 
own initiative or as a result of persuasion by the relatives of the 
condemned man to revise the order, and in order to enable the 
prisoner to prepare adequately by fasts, prayer and gifts, to 
meet his end, a respite of three days was required to be granted 
in all cases of capital punishment. And they were particularly 
enjoined to be impartial in the investigation of disputes and the 
award of punishments. This was not all. The Rajukas were 
kept in constant touch with the king by his agents, purushas 



aSoka 


225 


( pulisa ) who knew the king’s mind and were constantly on the 
move. (PE. IV). They were also to take a hand in the propa- 
gation of Dhamma among the people (PE. VII, N). and direct 
the Janapadas and rathikas employed under them to be active 
in this work (MRE, Yerragudi). 

The term Mahamatra indicated a certain definite high rank 
in the hierarchy of officials ; the duties that devolved on each 
were implied by more specific titles. Thus there were the 
Dhamma-mahamatras whose offices were newly created by 
Asoka thirteen years after his abhisheka as he states in Rock- 
Edict V which sets forth their duties in some detail. They were 
to establish and promote dhamma among all the sects in the land 
and promote the happiness of people devoted to dhamma among 
the Yonas, Kambhojas and Gandharas and other tribes on the 
western border. They were to help in all difficulties experi- 
enced by servants and masters, by Brahmins and Vaisyas, and by 
the destitute and the aged ; they reviewed all sentences award- 
ed by courts and mitigated or remitted them after taking into 
account the particular circumstances of each case such as motive, 
the presence of children, instigation, and advanced age 1 ; in 
Pataliputra and in all outlying towns, they had duties in harems 
and households of the king’s relatives, brothers and sisters, and 
generally they regulated morality and charity throughout the 
empire. The Seventh Pillar-Edict throws further light on their 
work ; after a general statement that their activity was fraught 
with benefit for ascetics and householders of all sects, Asoka 
makes the following declaration : ‘Some were ordered by me to 
busy themselves with the affi.irs of the Sangha ; likewise others 
were ordered by me to busy themselves also with the Brahmanas 
and Ajivakas ; others were ordered by me to busy themselves also 
with the Nirgranthas ; others were ordered by me to busy them- 
selves also with various other sects 2 ’. 

Then there were the mahamatras who were nagara-vyavahara- 
kas at Tosali and Samapa in Kalinga, and perhaps in other 
large cities elsewhere. They were obviously the same as the 

f have followed Jayaswal and Smith in the interpretation of this 
diificult section as Hultzsch’s translation seems to me wholly inadequate. 

_ 2 * PB. VII, X-AA I treat as one section dealing with Dhamma-maha- 
matras Cf. Smith, Asoka 3 p. 210 vi ; contra Hultzsch p. 136, n. 5. 



226 


AGE OF THE N AND A 3 AND MAURYAS 


Pauravyavaharikas of Kautilya. They administered justice 
in the cities*, as the rajukas did in the rural areas, and were, 
like the rajukas, required to be strictly impartial in the discharge 
of their duties 2 , and strive to overcome defects of personal 
character that might hamper them in attaining this end 3 . 
There were the amta-mahamatras, officers of the borders, who 
were engaged in civilizing and preaching dhamma among the 
wild tribes on the borders and elsewhere ; these tribes were not 
full members of the empire and retained something of their 
primitive independence, and the king’s policy towards them was 
one of benevolent paternalism . 4 Lastly there were the stri - 
adhyaksha-mahamatras , whose name indicates that they had con- 
trol of women, but of whose exact duties no details are forth- 
coming; they may be taken to correspond to the Ganikadhyaksha, 
‘the overseer of courtesans’ of the Arthasastra 5 . 

Tuktas 

The mahdma.tr as met periodically in Councils and discussed 
matters of common interest in the administration of their res- 
pective charges. They had control over the Tuktas of the 
Accounts Department (Ganana) and issued instructions to them 
to secure moderation in the expenditure of public funds and in 
the accumulation of treasury balances 6 . In the sixth Rock- 
Edict Asoka makes a statement which provides a glimpse into 
some details of administrative practice. ‘And if in the Council 
(of mahamatras) a dispute arises, or an amendment is moved, 
in connection with any donation or proclamation which I myself 
am ordering verbally, or (in connection with) an emergent 
matter which has been delegated to the mahamatras , it must be * 
reported to me immediately, anywhere, (and) at any time.* 

i* Hultzsch p. 95, n. 2. 

2. Cf. Sep. Ed. I, J-L and PE. IV, K-N. 

3. Sep. Ed. I M-Q. 

4. Sep. Ed. II F-M (Dhauli) and PE. I.F. 

5. RE. xii M. Hultszch p. 22 n 4. 

6. RE. Ill E. Here I follow D. R. Bhandarkar and Smith in preference to 
Liiders and Hultzsch. True this rendering looks like the abrupt introduction 
of a new idea : but sharp transitions are not uncommon in the Edicts : and the 
preceding sentence having commended to individuals the merit of moderation 
in expenditure and in possessions, the statement that the same principle was 
observed in the administration of public finance is not a serious break in the 
sequence of thought. 



ASOKA 


227 


The issue of oral orders by the king to be recorded and executed 
by ministers and other officials was an abiding feature of Indian 
polity ; the continuous interest in the execution of such orders 
evinced by Asoka was peculiar to him. The parisha (Council) 
of the Edicts is clearly the mantri-pari' had of the Arthasastra 1 ; 
but neither from the Edicts nor from the Arthasastra do we get a 
complete picture of its composition and duties. 

The higher officials were required to go on tours of inspec- 
tion ( anusamyana ) generally once in five years, but once in three 
years in the provinces of UjjayinI and Takshasila. Among 
these officials were Yuktrs, Rajukas and Pradesikas. The 
term Yukia is general, and known also to the Arthasastra ; in the 
second Kalinga edict, Asoka says that in all the divisions {desa) 
of the province he will maintain officers ( dyuktikas ) for the carry- 
ing out of his policy. Pradesika may well be the pradeshfr of the 
Arthasastra ; he has been taken to correspond to the Dis- 
trict officer (Collector) of modern times and his rank may have 
been that of a mahamdtra , though of this we have no certainty. 
The officers going on tour were, at least some of them, specially 
selected for their personal qualities of moderation and gentle- 
ness, and they had other duties, particularly to supervise the 
judicial administration 2 . 

The purushas (agents) were other officers who were organised 
under three different grades, and those who, as already noted, 
served as liaison officers between the Rajukas and the king, must 
have belonged to the highest grade ; they are said to be occupied 
with many people, like the Rajukas. A similar class of officers 
newly created by Asoka were the prativedakas (reporters) who 
were posted everywhere, as he says, ‘in order to report to me 
the affairs of the people at any time, while I am eating, in the 
harem, in the inner apartment, even at the cowpen, in the 
palanquin, and in the parks’. There were purushas of middling 
and lower rank also ; but we have no knowledge of the exact 
nature of the work entrusted to them 3 . 

1. Hultzsch p. 5 n. 7. 

2. RE. Ill C: Sep. E. Dhauli Z. CC: Jaugada II L. Hultzsch p.5.11.3. 
Thomas (IA. 1915 pp. 97 — 112) derives pradesika from pradeia meaning report 
and compares tena pradesena of KA ch. 39 with etena vyanjanena of the edict*. 

3. Purushas PE. I. E. : IV G : VII M. Prativedakas RE. VI B. Also 
Hultzsch p. xli. 



§28 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Other officers mentioned in the edicts are — Vacabhumikas , 
Controllers of cow-pens, whose duties must have been similar to 
those of the go-adhyaksha of the Arthasastra , and other groups 
( nikaya ) of officials whose names and duties are not specified 1 . 
The Seventh Pillar-Edict also mentions many chief 
officials, or departments according to Thomas, occupied with 
the delivery of gifts made by the king, his queen, his children, 
and the sons of other royal princesses (devikumaras) both in the 
capital city and in the provinces 2 . Obviously there are many 
gaps in our knowledge of the details, and the inscriptions are by 
no means a complete manual of administration. 

Atoka's part 

But they leave us in no doubt about the supreme importance 
of the part taken by Asoka himself in the daily work of the State, 
and of the tone imparted to it by the king’s precept and example. 
The monarch spared neither himself nor his officers in the conti- 
nuous and active promotion of the well-being of the people. 
His devotion to duty was keen and he displayed unwonted 
energy in discharging it. He affirmed that no duty was more 
important than promoting the welfare of all people. He 
valued glory and fame only in so far as they enabled him to 
promote morality, good will and happiness among men. He 
attached great importance to his personal contact with the 
different parts of his vast empire and the different sections among 
his subjects. ‘And whatever effort I am making 5 , he declares, 
‘is made in order that I may discharge the debt which I owe to 
living beings 5 ; and this time-honoured doctrine of rna (debt) 
is recalled repeatedly by Asoka, and his officers are exhorted 
by him to discharge to the full the debt they owed to the monarch 
for the proper care of subjects placed under their charge. Firmly 
convinced as Asoka was that persuasion was better than force as 
the means of moral reform, he had sufficient discernment to 
realise that in practice he could not altogether dispense with the 
police power of the state, or even the use of the army. He 
declares expressly that he will even put up with wrong-doing 

1. RE. XII M. 

2. PE. VII CG— DD. 



aSoka 


229 


within limits and forgive whatever can be forgiven ; and he 
exhorts people not to do the things that would compel him to 
exercise the power of punishment, for that would cause him 
pain and remorse, though he would not, on that account, shrink 
from the performance of his duty as king. The annual release of 
prisoners which Asoka regularly ordered shows that he was ready 
to uphold traditional forms where they coincided with his incli- 
nation to be merciful and considerate to all. After once wit- 
nessing the horrors of war in the campaign against Kalinga, 
he was struck with remorse, renounced war as an instru- 
ment of policy, and not only abjured fresh conquests for 
himself but recorded his wish that his descendants should 
follow him in this regard ; but he is by no means sure 
that his advice would be followed by them and takes care to add 
that if conquest should still have its attractions for them, they 
should be gentle and merciful in the pursuit of their plans, and 
never loose sight of the ideal of true conquest which is not con- 
quest by force, but conquest by moral superiority (dhamma- 
vijaya)- — —another proof that Asoka was no visionary who 
had lost touch with realities, but a practical statesman who had 
a shrewd knowledge of human nature and was not prepared to 
risk the possible improvements in society and administration 
in the uncompromising pursuit of impossible ideals. And he 
records with legitimate satisfaction that his example has borne 
fruit in his lifetime. ^Whatever good deeds have been performed 
by me’, he says in the Seventh Pillar-Edict, ‘these the people 
have imitated, and to those they are conforming ’. 1 


Religious policy ^ 

So far we have viewed Aioka as ruler, administrator and 
statesman. We must now turn to a consideration of the evi- 
dence of the inscriptions on his attitude to Buddhism and its 


i. PE. VII GG. For the energy of the king RE. VI H-K, N : his view of 
glory and fame RE. X A-C, PE . VI F : rna doctrine as applied to the king 
himself RE. VI L, Kalinga E. II H : to his officers Kalinga edict I, Q. U, 
II L : forbearance RE. XIII L-N : twenty-five jail deliveries are mentioned 
in the twenty-sixth year PE. V L. and Hultzsch’s n 8 at p. 128 : renunciation 
of arms RE. xiii O-AA ( Shall bazgarhi) : value of the king’s example PE. 
VII GG. Anoka’s view of Dhammavijaya has been discussed in some detail by 
the present writer in The Calcutta Review Feb. 1943 pp. 114 — 23. 



230 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


consequences to the people, the state, and to Buddhism itself. 
At the time of Asoka’s accession when he was still a votary of the 
orthodox Brahmanical faith, Buddhism was doubtless the most 
important among the various sects that flourished outside its 
pale and competed with one another for popular acceptance and 
royal patronage. The Sangha was from the beginning an 
organised brotherhood with a w T ell-established tradition of its 
own already fixed by the authority of two General Councils ; 
the bulk of the canon had come into existence in some form 
and was awaiting the finishing touch that Tissa gave it under 
Asoka’s patronage by the composition of the Kathavatthu . The 
erection of stupas and the worship of the Buddhas w’ho had 
preceded Gautama had come into vogue. Senart first pointed 
out the striking parallelism between the ethical ideas of the 
Asokan edicts and those of the Dhammapada and demonstrated 
that it extended to the terms and phrases employed by both in 
similar contexts ; they may both be taken therefore to mark one 
stage in the development of Bauddha doctrine and ethics. 
^Hultzsch has argued, however, that as Asoka’s inscriptions do 
not yet know anything of Nirvana, they must be taken to reflect 
an earlier stage in the development of Buddhist theology or 
metaphysics than the Dhammapada 1 . But it is highly impro- 
bable that the conception of nirvana which occurs in the eailiest 
strata of the canon was unknown to Buddhism in the days of 
Asoka and was developed later. The truth is that Asoka refrained 
studiously from introducing into his edicts any of the funda- 
mental tenets of the Buddhist faith — such as the Four Sacred 
Truths, the Chain of Causality, and the Noble Eight-fold Path, 
besides the Nirvana, all conceptions which must have been 
fully developed long before the time of Asoka. This omission, 
together with the repeated references to the doctrine of rna (debt), 
to svarga and to happiness in the other world as the reward of 
good deeds done here, has misled some to assert that Asoka 
never accepted Buddhism as his personal faith, but continued to 
remain all through his life what he was at its beginning — a fol- 
lower of the Vedic religion. Others have hailed Asoka for this 
very reason as a reformer of Buddhism who, being determined 

i. p. liii. See also Bagch on the development of the Canon in the 
Chapter on Religion post. 



aSoka 


231 


on propagating it not only in his own empire but beyond its 
borders, set about adapting it to suit the new requirements. 
On this view Buddha’s religion was in its earlier phase too 
restricted and monastic in its outlook, too puritanical and too 
cold in its reasoning and its individualism ; by simplifying it, 
by virtually inaugurating the cult of the stupa, and the worship 
of relics, Asoka introduced a more catholic spirit into the church ; 
indeed these were elements alien to the creed of the Founder, 
but they enabled the church to cast its net wider among all 
races and all classes of society ; and the simple principle of sound 
behaviour repeated often in the edicts, the Dharma of the ins- 
criptions, is purely ethical in its content and universal in 
its appeal . Asoka turned Buddhism from a dry academic pur- 
suit of the path of knowledge to a colourful and emotional reli- 
gion of devotion with a wide popular appeal. Such a view 
of Asoka’s work errs by attributing much too conscious a purpose 
to the great emperor, and by seeking to focus into his reign the 
entire development of Mahayana Buddhism on the one side and 
the transition on the other from Jnanamarga to Bhaktimarga, 
which after all had perhaps no place as such in the history of 
early Buddhist development ; it also exaggerates the academic 
and doctrinal side of primitive Buddhism and overlooks its 
strongly ethical character. 

After all, the inscriptions themselves are the best guide to 
Asoka’s attitude to Buddhism ; and a study of these documents 
shows decisively that Asoka’s approach to Buddhism was that of 
a profound humanist ; it was practical, pragmatic, and intensely 
ethical. The tragic war against Kalinga stirred his humanity 
to its depths ; he felt drawn to the creed” already well known 
for its ethical and humanitarian character. Progress in the new 
way of life was slow at first, but soon Asoka developed a greater 
zeal ; he visited the Sangha and gained instruction in the Faith ; 
he went on a pilgrimage, in due course, to the spots hallowed 
by the Master’s presence, and commemorated his visits by gifts, 
monuments, foundations, inscriptions. The worship of Buddhas 
and of their relics, enshrined in stupas was already known and 
practised ; when the great Mauryan emperor accepted the 
Buddha’s faith as his own, the vast material resources of an 
extensive empire were pressed into the service of that creed. 



232 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


and there ensued an enormous increase in the numbers of stupas 
and viharas, because the emperor naturally did all he could to 
spread the symbols of his faith all over his empire, and his exam- 
ple was followed by others who were near to him and naturally 
accepted his lead. But of any attempt on Asoka’s part to secure 
converts to Buddhism as such or to reform that faith by intro- 
ducing fresh features into it in order to render it more acceptable 
to the populace, there is no sign whatever. In fact Asoka is 
at some pains to mark off his innovations from the rest of his 
work where he was only following the established tradition 
(porana pakiti ) , breathing fresh life into it and adapting it to his 
wider aims for the moral upliftment of the people. The greatest 
of Asoka’s innovations, that for which he seems to claim the 
most credit, is that he rescued the ideal of Dharma from the 
relative neglect into which it had fallen and placed it in the 
forefront of national life, making it the touchstone of the whole 
of his life’s work. This ideal was more ethical and social, than 
religious ; though the energy with which Asoka pursued its 
propagation was the direct result of his having accepted Bud- 
dhism as his personal religion, the ideal itself was the common 
ground on which all Indian creeds met. Asoka himself says in 
the Seventh Rock-Edict : *AI1 sects desire both self-control and 
purity of mind’. In the sphere of formal religion, Asoka makes * 
it clear that he did not mind what a man’s particular creed was ; 
but he did require that all should cultivate mutual respect, 
should live in peace and friendliness, and should cultivate 
habits of social good conduct. Asoka bent the entire machinery 
of the state towards the practical realization of the ideal of good 
life among men within his empire, and to the extent possible 
even beyond its borders ; and his chief claim to statesmanship 
lies in his strenuous endeavour to discover the widest possible 
basis of agreement attainable among all the sections of his sub- 
jects and to build his policy on that basis. Asoka was the one 
ruler before Akbar who faced the problem of Indian national 
unity, and he came much nearer success than Akbar because 
he had a better understanding of human nature, and instead of 
seeking to invent a new common faith or compel everybody to 
adopt the faith he had accepted as his own, he took the esta- 
blished order for granted and struck the road along which there 



aSoka 


233 


was the best chance of healthy and ordered development. He 
never departed from his rule of tolerance, and the only two 
instances where he appears to have done so — the prohibition of 
animal sacrifice and the deprecation of tiresome rituals — are 
really particular cases of the general promotion of ahimsd which 
commanded widespread assent. 

Let us now turn to details and consider the content of Asoka’s 
% Dharma and the means he employed for its propagation. The 
method of publishing and popularising administrative orders 
and royal proclamations by having them engraved on rock- 
faces was well known to the imperial administration of Persia 
under the Achaemenids, and Asoka’s adoption of the same 
method for the propagation of Dharma — he calls his inscrip- 
tions Dharma-lipis — was doubtless inspired by familiarity with 
that practice. The preamble of many of Asoka’s edicts, often 
repeated in the body of edicts themselves to introduce important 
statements, viz. ‘Thus speaks king Devanampriya Priyadarsin’,. 
and the abrupt changes in the style of address from the third 
person to the first, are strongly reminiscent of the Achaemenid 
inscriptions ; the words dipt and nipishta of ASoka’s edicts are 
evidently taken over from the Ancient Persian language ; 
Tushaspa who, as we learn from an inscription of Rudradaman, 
was Aioka’s governor of Girnar, was doubtless a Persian, and 
might be, there were several other Persian officials like him in 
Asoka’s service particularly in the North-West which had been 
under Persian occupation for a considerable time before the 
coming of Alexander. The Kharoshthi alphabet and the Perse* 
politan capital of the A£oka columns also came from Persia 1 . 

The fourteen Rock-Edicts together with the two Kalinga 
edicts, and Seven Pillar Edicts are mostly given to descriptions 
of the different aspects of Dharma in accordance with the pro- 
gramme Asoka placed before himself when he issued the Minor 
Rock-Edict (Rupnath). In that edict, the first record of the 
reign issued very soon after the king began to be zealous in the 
practice of Buddhism and the propagation of Dharma, Asoka 
claims that good results had already attended his efforts, and 
gods had begun to mingle with men in Jambudvipa as they had 


I. Hultzsch p. xlii. 



234 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


never done before— a statement which remains something of an 
enigma. Two interpretations have been suggested : one by 
Smith — that the practice of Dharma raises men to the level 
of the gods ; the other, which seems better, by Hultzsch who 
explains the statement in the light of the fourth Rock-Edict 
which mentions ‘religious shows at which Asoka had exhibited 
to his subjects in ejfigie the gods whose abodes they would be 
able to reach by the zealous practice of Dharma’ 1 . Asoka then 
proceeds to say that his success has been the fruit of zeal ( pra - 
krama) and exhorts all persons of whatever rank, high or low, 
to practise the like zeal and attain heaven in due course ; he 
records his resolution to increase Dharma greatly, and to avail 
himself of rock faces and stone pillars for engraving his message 
of Dharma on them ; finally he orders his provincial officers 
to despatch men everywhere within their charges for preaching 
the Dharma. The two series of Rock and Pillar Edicts that 
followed comprised an elaboration and steady execution of the 
programme thus briefly sketched at the outset, and Asoka states 
expressly more than once in these Edicts that this was a new 
departure introduced by him to make up for the apathy of 
centuries in which the moral well-being and progress of the 
people, though vaguely recognised by monarch s as desirable, 
had seldom been actively promoted by them 2 . 

Asoka s Dharma 

Asoka’s Dharma is primarily ethical social conduct and it 
includes even the animal kingdom within the scope of its all- 
embracing benevolence. We read at the end of the Minor 
Rock-Edict (Yerragudi) ‘Obedience must be rendered to mother 
and father, likewise to elders ; compassion should be shown 
towards men ; the truth must be spoken ; these moral virtues 
(dhamma-guna) must be practised. . . .Pupils should respect their 
teachers in accordance with the ancient rule ( porana pakitiy 3 . 
Again in the third Rock Edict : ‘Meritorious (sadhu) is obedience 
to mother and father. Liberality ( danam ) to friends, acquaint- 
ances, and relatives, to Brahmanas and Sramanas is meritorious. 

1. ib. p. 168 n 3. 

2. RE. IV A : PE. VII B-E. 

3 ASI. 1928 — 29 pp. 165 — 7. cf. Brahmagiri N — P (Hultzsch p. 178)- 



aSoka 


235 


Abstention from killing animals is meritorious. Moderation 
in expenditure and moderation in possessions are meritorious 1 *. 
Emphasis is laid on qualities of mind ( bhava suddhi) in the Seventh 
Rock-Edict : ‘But even one who practises great liberality but 
does not possess self-control, purity of mind, gratitude, and 
firm devotion, is very mean 2 . 5 Proper treatment of serfs ( dasa ) 
and servants ( bhataka ) is particularly mentioned in the eleventh 
and thirteenth Rock Edicts 3 . The Second Pillar-Edict contains 
this striking and comprehensive statement of the emperor on 
Dharma : ‘To practise morality is meritorious ; but what does 
morality include ? It includes few sins, many virtuous deeds, 
compassion, liberality, truthfulness and purity. The gift of 
spiritual insight ( cakkhu-dana ) also has been bestowed by me in 
many ways 4 .* 

The promotion of toleration and harmony among different 
religious sects and of kindness towards animal life were 
two particular aspects of Dharma to which Asoka gave very 
special attention. The twelfth Rock-Edict sets forth the prin- 
ciples of religious toleration in very clear terms and constitutes 
one of the noblest documents of human history and we are 
justified in citing the edict in full 5 . 

“King Devanampriya Priyadarsin is honouring all sects 
(paskandas) : both ascetics and householders ; both with gifts 
and with honours of various kinds he is honouring them. But 
Devanampriya does not value either gifts or honours so highly 
as this viz., that a promotion of the essentials of r 11 sects (sara- 
urddhi) should take place. But a promotion of the essentials is 
possible in many ways. But the root is this, viz., guarding 
one’s speech (vaco-gupti ) , i.e. that neither praising one’s own 
sect nor blaming other sects should take place on improper 
occasions, or that it should be moderate in every case. But 
other sects ought to be duly honoured in every case. 

“If one is acting thus, he is both promoting his own sect 
and benefiting other sects. If one is acting otherwise than thus, 

1. Hultzsch p. 5 RE. Ill D. cf. RE IV C. 

2. ib. p. 14 VII E. 

3 * t*. p- 19 XI C : p. 47, XIII G. 

4. ib. p. ia 1, PE II B-D cf. PE VII EE, which with following HH forms 
a fairly complete account of Dharma. 

5. ib. p. 2i. 



236 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


he is both hurting his own sect and wronging other sects as well. 
For whosoever praises his own sect or blames other sects — all 
this out of devotion to his own sect, (be.) with the view of glori- 
fying his own sect, — if he is acting thus, he rather injures his own 
sect very severely. 

'“Therefore concord alone is meritorious, (i.e.), that they 
should both hear and obey each other’s morals (Dharma). For 
this is the desire of Devanampriya, (viz.) that all sects should be 
full of learning ( bahusrutah ), and should be pure in doctrine 
(, kalyanagamah ) . 

“And those who are attached to their respective sects ought 
to be spoken to as follows : Devanampriya does not value either 
gifts or honours so highly as this, (viz.) that a promotion of the 
essentials ( sdrvrddhi ) of all sects should take place. And many 
officers are occupied for this purpose, (viz.) the Mahamatras of 
morality, the Mahamatras controlling women, the inspectors 
of cowpens, and other classes of officials. And this is the fruit 
of it, (viz.) that both the promotion of one’s own sect takes place, 
and the glorification of Morality ( Dharmasya ca dipana ).” 

The universality of Asoka’s toleration, and his realisation 
of the limits set by common human nature to the success of his 
policy are best seen in his words in the seventh Rock-Edict 1 : 
*King Devanampriya Priyadarsin desires that all sects may 
reside everywhere. For all these desire both self-control and 
purity of mind. But men possess various desires and various 
passions. Either they will fulfil the whole or they will fulfil 
only a portion (of their duties)’. Some more details regarding 
the particular sects and the attention given to them by Asoka’s 
officials are vouchafed by the Seventh Pillar-Edict, and these 
have been noticed already in connection with the duties of the 
various classes of Mahamatras 2 . 

In the ninth Rock-Edict Asoka deprecates the observance 
of vulgar and useless ( kshudra and nirarthaka) ceremonies, parti- 
cularly by women on sundry occasions as during illness, at 
marriage or child-birth, when setting out on a journey and so 
on. He wants such fruitless mangalas to be reduced to a mini- 


1. ib. p. 14 VII A-D. cf. PE. VI D-E. ib. p. 129 ; 

2. Ante p, 225 and n. 2. 



aSokA 


237 


mum and that people should devote themselves more and more 
to the real mangala which is the practice of Dharma 1 . 

That men should treat animals kindly and not inflict pain 
on them unnecessarily was as much the concern of Asoka as that 
they should preserve concord among themselves. He became a 
wholehearted adherent of the doctrine of ahimsa , a nd devised 
several regulations for the encouragement of its practice and the 
prevention of cruelty to animals. In the first Rock-Edict Asoka 
forbids the slaughter and sacrifice of animals in his territory 
and the holding of all samajas (festive gatherings) except those 
considered meritorious by him. He also states that whereas 
formerly hundreds of thousands of animals were killed every 
day in the royal kitchen for the sake of curry [suparthaya ) , only 
three animals were slaughtered at the time the edict was being 
issued, viz., two peacocks and one deer, but even the deer not 
regularly, and that in future even these animals would not be 
killed 2 . , Asoka, it will be noticed, does not impose any restric- 
tions on others which he does not put upon himself, and in this 
edict we seem to find what was perhaps the most decisive step 
in the acceptance of vegetarianism by considerable sections of 
the Indian population outside the Jaina community. The prohi- 
bition of animal sacrifice has been viewed by some writers as a 
measure of intolerance directed against Brahmanism ; doubt- 
less Vedic sacrifices involving the killing of live animals fell 
under the prohibition, and to that extent it must count as 
virtually a hindrance to the practice of Vedic religion ; but its 
importance is easily exaggerated. The primacy of Vedic religion 
in all India v.v.s by no means as well assured in Asoka’s time as 
it became since; the followers of Vedic religion were themselves 
debating if the time had not come for a change in sacrificial 
practice giving up the immolation of live victims ; and in any 
case the number of such sacrifices would never have been 
very great as the smallest pasuyaga is a costly business, 
and the practical inconvenience caused by the prohibition 
would have been very little ; lastly, for every victim in 
a brahminical sacrifice, there would have been hundreds 

1. Hultzsch pp. 38 — 9. Jayaswal shows that Mangalas often involved 
sacrifices of birds and beasts (JBORS. iv pp. 144 — 7). 

2. Hultzsch p. 2. 



238 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


of victims sacrificed in the worship of lesser godlings by the mass 
of the populace who were still largely addicted to relatively 
primitive types of worship, and the prohibition affected them 
much more than the upper strata of society and religion. 
Likewise the samdjas that were prohibited were occasions for the 
slaughter of numerous animals for feeding the large numbers 
that gathered together and made merry on such occasions ; 
there was another type of samdjas approved of Asoka where 
semi-religious theatrical and other shows like representations of 
aerial chariots, of elephants, of agniskandhas and other divine 
figures, instructed and edified the assemblies, and these were 
actively encouraged 1 . All the prohibitions of the First Rock- 
Edict had therefore no other object in view than to minimise 
the destruction of animal life. 

The second Rock-Edict details the arrangements made by 
Asoka within his empire and beyond its borders for the conve- 
nience of man and beast ; they consisted primarily in the pro- 
vision of medical treatment ( cikitsa ) and gardens of medicinal 
herbs ( oshadhini ) beneficial to both. This pro vis ’on was made 
in the words of the Edict, ^everywhere in the dominions of King 
Devanampriya Priyadarsin, and likewise among his borderers 
such as the Chodas, the Pandyas, the Satiyaputa, the Ketala 
puta, even TamraparnI, the Yona king Antiyoka, and also the 
kings who are the neighbours of this Antiyoka.’ The location 
of Satiyaputa has not yet been satisfactorily settled 2 ; but 
Ketalaputa, for which we have Keralaputra in Mansehra, 
is doubtless the Malabar country. Besides medical aid being 
made available everywhere, wells with flights of steps leading 
to the water were caused to be dug at intervals of eight kos (nine 
miles) along the roads, and banyan trees and mango groves 
planted fer the use of cattle and men ; and numerous drinking- 
places ( dpana ) were also established in addition 3 . 

1. Cf. Smith, Asoka (3) p. 159 and RE. IV B, Hultzsch p. 7. 

2. Smith's latest surmise on Satiyaputa viz., that ‘in all probability it is 
represented by the Satyamangalam Taluk or sub-division of the Coimbatore 
district’, and the reasons urged by him in favour of it (Asoka 3 p. 16 1) can 
hardly be accepted. D. R. Bhandarkar’s reference to the current Maratha 
surname Satpute sounds more convincing, but Asoka ’s Satiyaputa was a king- 
dom definitely somewhere in South India, and so far as I can see nowhere in 
or near Maharashtra. Cf. Hultzsch p. 3 n. 7 See also ‘South India and Ceylon* 
post. 

3. RE. II D (p. 4) : PE VII R-T (pp. 134 — 5) and II E, (p. X2i). 



’ ASOKA 


239 


Asoka suppressed the tiir^ e -honoured institution of the Royal 
Hunt 1 of which we get a/^etailed account from Megasthenes. 
The final development -of Asoka ’s policy of ahimsa took the shape 
of a very elaborate code of regulation and restriction of the 
slaughter and mutilation of birds and animals. This code, 
which is set forth in the fifth Pillar-Edict ends by mentioning 
the twenty-five annual releases of prisoners that had already 
taken place. In both respects, Asoka seems to have amplified 
the traditional practices known to the Arthasastra and mentioned 
there particularly in the chapters on the Superintendent of 
slaughter-houses and on the pacification of newly conquered 
territory 2 . Asoka’s code begins with the absolute prohibi- 
tion of the slaughter t)f a long list of birds and animals which 
among others includes parrots, bulls set at liberty 3 , and she- 
goats, ewes and sows either with young or in milk, and their 
young ones which are less than six months old. It continues; 
‘Cocks must not be caponed. Husks containing living animals 
must not be burnt. Forests must not be burnt either uselessly 
or in order to destroy living beings. Living animals must not 
be fed with other living animals.’ After this catalogue of total 
prohibitions, there follow restrictions to be observed on specified 
holy days making up a good fraction of the year : ‘Fish are 

inviolable, and must not be sold, on the three Caturmu-i r - and on 
the Tisya full-moon during three days, (viz.) the fourteenth, 
the fifteenth and the first tithi, and invariably on every fast day. 
And during these same days also no other classes of animals 
which are in the elephant-park ( naga-vana ) and in the preserves 
of the fisherman (kaivarta-bhoga) , must be killed.’ Lastly the 
castration of bulls, he-goats, rams and boar was forbidden on all 
holy days, and so too the branding of horses and bullocks, prac- 
tices which Asoka did not consider it practicable to prohibit 

1. RE. VII A-D, Hultzsch p. 37. 

2. Hultzsch pp. 127 — 8 and n. 8 on p. 128. Also Arthasastra II 26, and 

xm 5 . 

3. Evidently other bulls and cows are not included in the protected list : 
all cows and bulls are so included in the Arthasastra which lays down : Vatso 
vrso dhenuscaisdm avadhyah ghnatah pancasatko dandah, klishtaghdtam ghdtaya- 
yatasca i.e. calves, bulls and cows shall not be slaughtered. Whoever kills them 
or causes them to be killed with torture shall be fined fifty Panas’. Opinion 
on beef-eating was apparently in a fluid state in the Mauryan epoch, and while 
the Arthasastra forbids it, Asoka’s edict does not appear to do so. See also 
Hultzsch p. 127, n. 8, and Smith’s Asoka 3 pp. 206—7. 



240 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


altogether. Though based on ancient tradition, this code 
bears on it the impress of Anoka’s mind, and it app ied to the 
whole of his empire. Its strict enforcement in all its details 
must have been found difficult ; but, though no sanctions 
are stated in the Code, as in the Arthasasira , it was certainly 
much more than the expression of pious wishes on the part 
of the emperor, and must have gone far towards the reali- 
sation of the practical objects Asoka had in view ; the rules 
were only elaborations of practices already well known in the 
land, and they could not have been felt as a vexatious inter- 
ference with the details of daily life. 

The Dharma of Asoka was thus a practical code of social 
e t hies, and had little to _ d o wTHTTettgro^^ 
sucFT anc * the emperor showed in many ways^ that he 
attac hed'ThF ^greates t . importance to the practice- -of— the. 
virtues he commended to his subjects. He lays stress on 
! (conduct^; points out how easy it is to fall into evil ways 

| and how difficut it is, particularly for the highly placed, to 

| be always well-behaved. He deprecates evil passions like 

fierceness, cruelty, anger, pride, envy, and warns all against 
being led to commit evil deeds by the force of such passions. 
's He praises dharmadana (the gift of morality) as the highest 

friends and relations, even neighbours, 
to practise mutualhelp by telling one another as occasion 
demanded : ‘This is meritorious, this ought to be done. 9 
He recognises the immensity of the task of the moral rege- 
neration of a whole nation, and says in the epilogue to the 
fourteen Rock- Edicts : * My dominions are wide, and much 
has been written, and I shall cause still more to be written. 
And -iomc of this has been stated again and again because 
of the charm of certain topics and in order that men should 
act accordingly 5 . And tie recognises tfte superiority of conversion 
due to moral education to administrative regulation as a means of 
moral upliftment, and avers his faith in the Seventh Pillar-Edict : 
( No\v this progress of morality among men has been promoted 
by me only in two ways, viz. by moral restrictions (< dhamma - 
niyama ) and conversion (nijhati) . But among these two, those 
moral restrictions are of little consequence ; by conversion, 
however, morality is promoted more considerably 5 . Above all 



ASOKA 


241 


he reinforced his exhortations by his untiring personal example ; 
he gave up the traditional pleasure tours ( ' pihdraya.tr as ) in which 
royal hunt was included, and substitued dharmayatras (tours of 
y morality) in their place, and explained their object thus : ‘On 
these tours the following takes place, (viz.) visiting Brahmanas 
and Sramanas and making gifts to them, visiting the aged and 
supporting them with gold, visiting the people of the country, 
instructing them in morality, and questioning them about 
morality’ 1 2 . And he repeatedly expresses the hope that his sons 
and grandsons will follow his steps in promoting morality among 
men. 

Asoka, then, was a great monarch whose reign constitutes 
one of those ‘rare and lightning epochs’ in the annals of nations 
when a people is vouchsafed a glimpse of happiness, perceived, 
if not possessed. His greatness lay in his early and clear realisa- 
tion of the values of human life, and in his endeavouring strenu- 
ously throughout his life to rouse India to listen to the call of moral 
life she received through him. He did much for Buddhism, 
and his memory has been kept green through the ages in all 
the vast lands where Buddhist tradition has prevailed to 
this day ; towards the close of the thirteenth century A. D., 
the Burmese recognised an old Caitya in Bodh Gaya as one of 
the 84,000 caityas built by Siri Dhammasoka when 218 years 
of the era of the Lord Buddha had passed away*. 

But was A3oka monk and monarch at the same time ? Did 
he accept the position and exercise the duties of the Head of the 
Buddhist Church ? Is it correct to describe his activity as ‘not 
so much that of a pious Emperor as of an archbishop possessed 
of exceptional temporal power’ ? 3 Such statements derive little 
support except from false analogies and wrong interpretations 
of the inscriptions of the reign. Anoka’s edicts, great as is their 


i. For emphasis on sila RE. IV H, F : difficulty of practising virtue RE. 
V B-C, PE I C i for the high in particular RE. X E-F. Easy to sin RE. V G : 
evil due to passions PE. Ill F J DharmadAna praised RE. IX J-L ; B, D., E. 
epilogue RE. xiv : restriction vs. conversion PE. VII J[J-NN : Dharmayatras 
RE. VIII A-D. Sons and grandsons RE iv F, V E, VI M. Further the follow- 
ing passages are also of interest : PE. VI B stating that engraving of Dhamma- 
lipis began in thirteenth year after abhisheka : ib. C. on king’s attention to his 
relatives ; PE VII J-L and P on active preaching of morality among the 
people. 

2. Ep. Ind. xi. p. 1 19. 

3. Smith, Asoka (3) pp. 35-6 : Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism i. p. 265. 



242 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


value, are not concerned with public affairs, but only with one 
aspect, though indeed a very important one, of Asoka’s work as 
ruler — the promotion of Dharma. They are in fact wliat he calls 
them, Dharma-lipis. And this Dharma, though inspired by 
Asoka’s conversion to Buddhism and coloured by the practical 
ethics so characteristic of that faith, was hardly more distinctive 
of Buddhism titan of any other Indian faith. Again, a church in 
the strict sense of the term, organised on hierarchical lines, and 
owning allegiance to a central authority, the Buddhist Sahgha 
was not ; there was no room for the Head of the Church in an 
organisation which comprised an infinite number of independent 
vihdras which were united in their professing a common faith 
in the triratna (Buddha, Dhamrna and Sahgha), but regulated 
themselves each according to their own views of Dhamma 
and Vinaya, Asoka’s letter to the Sahgha (the Calcutta- 
Bairat inscription or Bhabru edict as it is called) 
commending seven scriptural passages to them, far from 
asserting royal authority, is couched in the most respect- 
ful terms and ends with the statement : ‘I desire, sirs, that many 
groups of monks and many nuns may repeatedly listen to these 
expositions of Dhamma and may reflect on them. In the same 
way both laymen and laywomen should act. For the following 
purpose, Sirs, am I causing this, to be written, (viz.) in order 
that they may know my intention’ 1 . Surely this expression 
of opinion on the part of the great king, coming from him at 
the conclusion of his study of Dhamma, with the aid of the 
Sahgha and the reflection that followed upon it, would have been 
received with all the respect it merited ; but this is hardly 
an instance of the use of authority of any kind, royal or ecclesias- 
tical. The edict on Sahghabheda can with better justice be 
regarded as use of royal authority, for in plain terms it orders 
the officials of the civil administration to see that within their 
respective jurisdictions all schismatic monks are expelled from 
the Sahgha, compelled to wear white robes, and driven to live 
in places not suited for the residence of monks ( avdsa ) 2 . But 
here the authority of the king was obviously invoked by the 
Sahgha which had recently experienced great difficulty by the 

1. Hultzsch p. 174. 

2. ib. pp. 163 — 4 and Corrigenda. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF ASOKA 


243 


intrusion of undesirable elements within its fold ; a Council 
had been held and a fresh settlement of the affairs reached ; 
not feeling equal to the task of securing its proper observance 
without the aid of the secular arm, the Sangha appealed to the 
State for aid, and got it ; the assistance which Asoka gave to the 
Sangha in such circumstances, he would have given to any other 
corporate body which suffered similarly at the hands of assailants 
from outside- Lastly the evidence for Asoka’s taking orders is 
very meagre. The phrase Sarigham-upa-i in the Minor Rock-Edict 
is too vague to convey the precise idea of ordination ( pabbajjd ) 
which must have been well established by Asoka’s time. And 
the situation of a king turning monk while retaining the life and 
prerogatives of royalty is incompatible with all our notions of 
ancient monachism. And the Mahdvamsa says that in his message 
to the king of Ceylon Asoka said that he had become tf lay-dis- 
ciple in the religion of the Sakya son 51 . And barring the 
vague phrase in the Minor Rock-Edict there is no other evidence * 
in favour of Asoka’s ordination than that centuries afterwards 
I-tsing records his having seen an image of the emperor in 
monastic robes. This image may be satisfactorily explained in 
one of two ways : either Asoka may have worn the robes of a 
monk whenever he visited the Sangha for listening to the exposi- 
tion of Dhamma, an act of courtesy to the members of the Sangha 
which was commemorated by such an image ; or towards the end 
of his life, Asoka renounced the empire and turned monk as a 
prophecy attributed to the Buddha himself in the Asoka- 
vardhanavadana (XI) of the Divyavadana 2 may lead us to 
suppose. 


The successors of Asoka 

An impenetrable obscurity settles on the Mauryan empire 
after the reign of Asoka. The only certainty is that the great 
empire founded by Chandragupta and extended and main- 
tained in all its splendour by his son and grandson, did not long 
survive in its itegrity. Tlvara, the only son of Asoka named in 
his inscriptions, is not heard of again, and must be presumed to 
have predeceased his father. The Puranas, the Avadanas, 

i. MV. xi. 34. Also Hultzseh pp. xliv — xlv. 

3. Div. pp. 140 — 1. 



244 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and the Jaina accounts have different tales to tell, and later 
writers like Kalhana of Kashmir and Taranath of Tibet give 
their own versions of what happened. There is no means of 
reconciling these divergent accounts except to assume that the 
empire was in some manner divided among the surviving sons 
of Asoka, and that each of our sources preserves the story of 
that part of the empire with which it was concerned. A conti- 
nuous history of the Mauryan empire after Asoka is, in the 
present state of knowledge, out of the question ; all we can do 
is to reproduce the lists of monarchs w'ith the periods of their 
rule found in the authorities, and note what we know of 
them , 1 


The Purdnas Divyavaddna 

1. Kunala — * 8 years. 1. Kunala (did not reign) 

2. Bandhupalita, son (1) 8 years 2. Sampadi — son of (1) 

2 3. Indrapalita, dayada 3. Brhaspati — son of (2) 

(brother?) of (2) — 10 years 

4. Dagona, napta (grand' 4. Vrshasena — son of (3) 

son) of (2) — 7 years 

5. Dasaratha, son of (4) — 8 years 5. Pushyadharman — son 

of (4) 

6. Samprati, son of (5) — 9 years 6. Pushyamitra — son of (5) 

7. Salisuka— 13 years Tdrandtha. 

8. Devadharman — 7 years 1. Kunala 

9. Satadhanus,son of (8) — 8 years 2. Vigatasoka 

10. Brhadratha— 7 years 3. Virasena 

Though the Puranas generally agree in stating that altogether 
nine Mauryas ruled for a period of 137 years, none of the lists 
gives details corresponding to these total figures which refer 
presumably to Magadha and the eastern half of the empire. 
The only name in these lists confirmed by epigraphy is that of 
Dasaratha who is ignored in the Buddhist and Jain accounts i 
he is known by three shcrt dedicatory inscriptions bestowing on 
the Ajxvakas caves in the Nagarjuni hills immediately after his 


1. For Purana Texts— Pa rgi ter. Dynasties of the Kali Age, pp. 27—30 ; 
Div. ed. Cowell and Neil (*886) p. 430 ; Taranath, History of Buddhism, trans, 
Sduefher pp. 48 ff. 

2. Mentioned only in some lists. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF ASOKA 


245 


abhisheka (coronation) ; the script and the style of these records 
closely resemble those of the similar inscriptions of Asoka in the 
neighbouring Barabar hills 1 . For the rest we have only tradition ; 
though it is possible that tradition preserves the memory of 
what has been lost to history, perhaps for ever. 

Sampadi or Samprati is well known both in Buddhist and 
Jaina literature. According to the Divyavadana he was the son 
of Kunala and was established on the throne of Magadha by the 
ministers of state under strange circumstances ; Asoka had 
promised a hundred crores to the Sangha of which he had paid 
only ninety-six crores by the end of his reign ; so he handed the 
kingdom over to them in lieu of the balance of four crores. The 
ministers managed to raise this money, pay it to the Sangha, 
and thus redeem the kingdom over which they set Samprati 2 . 
The Jaina accounts also make Samprati the immediate successor 
of Asoka, and say that after his conversion to Jainism by Suhastin 
he did for Jainism nearly everything that Asoka did for Buddhi- 
sm, such as building temples and endowing them liberally 
and spreading the faith even in non-Aryan lands. Though 
Pataliputra is mentioned as the seat of his government in some 
accounts, others, with greater probability, make him ruler of 
Ujjain 3 . If Samprati was a grandson of Asoka ruling from 
from Ujjain, Dasaratha was perhaps another who held sway 
at Pataliputra. Whether Bandhupalita (Vayu) and Vigatasoka 
(Taranath) were alternative names of Samprati, or those of his 
brothers, is not easily ascertained. 

Kalhana, the historian of Kashmir, as we have seen 4 , 
reproduces from earlier accounts the stcry of Jalauka, a son cf 
Asoka, and his successor in Kashmir ; Jalauka is said to have 
freed his country from an invasion of mlecchas (Greeks?) and 
extended his dominions as far as Kanauj ; he was also a great 
patron of Saivism. 

Salisuka is a name attested not only by the Vayu and Vishnu 
Puranas but by the ‘Yugapurana’ section of the Gdrgi Samhitd 

1. IA. 1891 pp. 361 ff. 

2. Div. ibid; earlier in the same story, we are told that Samprati and his 
ministers took steps to prevent Asoka fulfilling his promise to the Sangha to the 
detriment of his kingdom and his subjects. 

3. Bom. Gaz. I. i. pp. 14-5. 

4. Ante, p. 2J9. 



246 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


where he is said to have done much to further the cause of 
Jainism even by the use of force. 

Taranatha’s Vlrasena, said to have been ruling in Gandhara, 
must have been related to Subhagasena with whom Antiochus 
the Great of Syria renewed his friendship about 206 B. C. Poly- 
bius says of Antiochus 1 : ‘Crossing the Caucasus he descended 
into India and renewed his alliance with Sophagasenus the 
Indian king. Here he procured more elephants, so that his 
total force of them amounted now to hundred-and-fifty, and 
after a further distribution of corn to his troops, set out himself 
with his army, leaving Androsthenes of Cyzicus to collect the 
treasure which the king had agreed to pay.’ Clearly this was 
a renewal of the friendly relations that had prevailed between 
the Seleucids and the Mauryas since the days of the founders of 
both lines ; as usual the Greek monarch asked for and obtained 
some elephants for his army from the Indian ruler. Subha- 
gasena may well have been a Maurya 2 . 

The Divyavadana is clearly wrong in including Pushyamitra 
among the Mauryas. By all other accounts, he was the first 
of the $ ungas who rose to power first as the commander- in- 
chief of the forces of Brhadratha, the last of the successors of 
Asoka. In his Harsha-charitra, Bana finds occasion to introduce 
a calendar of treacherous assassinations, and there occurs the 
statement : € The wicked generalissimo Pushpamitra crushed his 
master, the Mauryan Brhadratha, who had little sense, and to 
whom the general pretended to show the whole army in a review*. 
Likewise, the Vishnu Purdna says : ^Pushyamitra the com- 
mander-in-chief will uproot Brhadratha and will rule the king- 
dom as king 36 years’ 3 . The fall of Brhadratha must be taken 
to mark the end of the Mauryan empire as such; it occurred about 
185 B. C. 

Pushyamitra was doubtless a Brahmin ; the Chetas of Kalinga 
and the Satavahanas who succeeded the Mauryas in other 

1. Histories , xi. 39, Vol. IV p. 303 (Loeb classical library Tr. by W. R- 
Paton) . 

2. Cf. H. C. Raychaudhuri Political History (4) pp. 300-1 * Tam, The 
Greeks in Baciria and India pp. 130 and 154. 

3. The reading ‘Pratijhadurbalanf for ‘prajna-durbalam* in Bana's 
sentence, (H.C. Bombay N. S. Press 1897, pp. 198-9) and the far-reaching 
theories based on it (See Smith EHI (4) p. 208 n. 1) seem to me altogether 
unwarranted. For V. P. see Pargiter op. cit. pp. 31 and 70. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF ASOKA 


247 


portions of the empire are also held to have been Brahmins 1 . 
The argument has been advanced that the fall of the Mauryan 
empire was largely the result of a Brahminical reaction against 
the pro-Buddhist policy of Asoka, and possibly the pro-Jaina 
policy of some of his successors. Our account of Anoka’s reign 
has shown that far from being narrowly Buddhist in its character, 
that emperor’s religious policy deliberately aimed at universal 
tolerance and amity among all the religious sects ; the Brahmanas 
were, if anything, selected for being honoured equally with the 
Sramanas, and there is no reason to believe that Asoka was 
animated by an anti-Brahmanic;d bias to any degree. In fact 
we have little definite knowledge of what actually happened 
after the close of Asoka’s rule, and Pushyamitra, the Chetas and 
the Satavahanas are too far removed from the reign of Asoka 
for them to lend support to the idea of a Brahmin reaction against 
Asoka’s religious policy. The oppressive conduct of imperial 
officials in the provinces of the empire and Asoka’s pacificism 
have been adduced as other causes for the decline and fall of the 
Mauryan empire. The casual references to wicked officials 
(( dushta amatyas) in the legends of the Divyavadana can give no 
secure foundation for postulating the general prevalence of 
oppression throughout the empire ; and there is nothing in the 
separate Kalinga edicts that goes tc prove, as has been urged, 
that such oppression was a reality. Asoka’s pacificism, his 
abandonment of war as an instrument of policy, and his exhorta- 
tion to his successors to follow him in this respect, had nothing 
doctrinaire about it, and was kept within limits by a wise aware- 
ness of the complexity of human situations and motives. There 
is no evidence that he diminished the strength of the army or 
weakened the defences of the empire. 

Dynastic empires depend for their continued existence on 
the supply of able monarchs in the line ; Asoka was great in every 
way ; he was not only the greatest of the Mauryas, but one of 
the few truly great rulers of the world. There was evidently 
none among his children equal to the task of maintaining the 
unity of the vast empire, and the division which, according to 

i. Smith EHI (4) p. 204 and n, 2 contra H. C. Raychaudhuri, Pol. His 4. 
pp. 294 ff. where the arguments of Haraprasada Sastri who first propounded 
this view are examined at length. 


248 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


legend, threatened the empire even at the accession of Asoka, 
actually overtook it after the close of his reign. But in India the 
rise and fall of empires, important though they are as landmarks, 
do not touch the cultural life of the nation as deeply as in other 
lands. Indian imperialism was never a fully centralised form of 
administration ; without exception an Indian empire was more 
or less a loose confederation of nearly independent units, king- 
doms, cities, tribes and so on, held together by loyalty to the 
person of the emperor when he had the strength to dominate 
them ; but under the strongest emperor, the local rulers and 
institutions continued as before ; and the disruption of an empire 
or its division did not raise those difficult problems of reorganisa- 
tion which would have come up with the decadence of a more 
centralized system. In the day of its prosperity an empire did 
enhance the glory of the race and its achievements in the various 
spheres of national life did excel greatly those of the smeller 
kingdoms which usually filled the political map of the country ; 
but the disappearance of an empire led by no means to a relapse 
into chaos or barbarism. India’s ancient culture was the achieve- 
ment of Indian society, not of the Indian state ; an empire led 
to the efflorescence of that culture. 

Scions of the Mauryan family are heard of centuries after 
the fall of the Mauryan empire, and in remote parts of the 
country. In Magadha itself a certain Purnavarman is ment- 
tioned by Hiuen Tsang as a descendant of Asoka ; and Sankara, 
the great philospher of Advaita, might have had him in mind 
when he said ; there have been no world emperers ( sarvabhauma ) 
after Purnavarman ! The Mauryas of Konkan had their capital 
at Puri, a flourishing amporium on the Elephanta island near 
Bombay, and they became subject to the Chalukyas of Badami 
in the sixth century A. D. A certain Dhavala is heard of in the 
Kanaswa inscription (A. D. 738-9) in the Kotah state, Rsj- 
putana. And a Maurva chief Govindaraja is mentioned in an 
eleventh century inscription from Khcndcsh as a subordi- 
nate of the Yadava Seunachandra II 1 . The memory of Mauryan 
rule persisted in Kuntala for a long time and it is alluded to in 
Kannada inscriptions of the eleventh century from Karnataka. 

i. Watters II p. 115 ; Sankara B.S. II. 1. 18; BG. I ii pp. 282-4. P° r 
the location of Puri, Imp. Inscrr. from the Baroda Stats by A. S. Gadre (1943) 
pp. 44-5. 





TAMRAPARA/I 








CHAPTER VII 


SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 

The inscriptions of Asoka at Brahmagiri and Siddhapura 
in Mysore mark clearly the southern limit of the Mauryan 
empire which might have extended even a little further south 
to the latitude of the modern city of Madras. Kannada ins- 
criptions from Mysore and Bombay Karnatak of the tenth and 
eleventh centuries A. D. preserve f lint memories of the rule of 
Nxndas in those parts, but there is little tangible confirmation 
of this tradition, unless it be that the punch-marked purana coins 
found all over Deccan, South India and Ceylon are to be 
accepted as witnesses of ancient contacts between the North and 
South of which the det ils are now lost beyond recovery. Then 
there is the Jaina legend, late, multiform, and oft-discussed, 
of the migration of Chandragupta to Sravana Belgol.a when 
Bhadrabahu, the Jain patriarch, foretold a famine of twelve 
years 5 duration. Chandragupta is said to have lived several 
years as a Jain monk in Sravana Belgoja until his death by the 
rite of Sallekhana. The legend is improbable in itself and the 
identity of the Chandragupta it relates to is not above doubt. A 
late Pallava charter mentions an Asokavarma among the earliest 
rulers of Kanchl, and one may wonder if this is a reference to the 
Mauryan emperor. 

The most direct clues to the condition of South India and 
Ceylon in the Mauryan epoch are furnished by the references to 
the Southern kingdoms in Megaslhenes, in the edicts of Asoka, 
and in the short Brahmi inscriptions in natural caverns with 
rock-cut beds scattered all over South India and found in some- 
what larger numbers in the Madura and Tinnevelly districts, 
and much more on the island of Ceylon. The oldest strata of 
extant Tamil literature cannot lay claim to equal antiquity, but 
they contain references to Nandas and Mauryas, and it will be 
necessary to review them in their contexts, particularly because 
they have been made the basis of far-reaching theories regarding 
a Mauryan invasion of South India by some writers, while 
others have seen in them a reference to the Mauryas of Kohkan. 



250 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


Lastly, the Mahavamsa has conserved the story of Ceylonese 
affairs in much detail, and as the chronicle is obviously worked 
up from more ancient records, and some of its details find con- 
firmation in the rock-cut Brahml inscriptions above mentioned, 
we come to know a little more of Ceylon in this period than of 
the mainland of South India. 

The second and thirteenth Rock-Edicts of Asoka mention 
the Southern kingdoms and Ceylon ; the list in the second edict 
is fuller and comprises the names of Coda, Pandya, Satiyaputa, 
Keralaputa and Tambapanni. All these lands lay outside the 
empire of Asoka, but he was on such friendly terms with them 
that he could arrange for the medical treatment of men and 
animals in all these lands, and for the importation and planting 
of useful medicinal herbs and roots wherever they were needed ; 
he also sent missionaries for the preaching of the Dhamma among 
the people of these countries — thus evincing his interest in the 
physical and mental well-being of his neighbouring states. Now 
the merest mention of such facts raises the presumption of a 
certain level of culture and progress in the arts of life. The 
Tamils and the Sinhalese had a settled polity and lived in well- 
ordered states, and some decades before the date of the Asoka 
inscriptions, Megasthenes had heard somewhat of the trade of the 
Sinhalese and of the polity of the Pandyan kingdom 1 . He knows 
that Ceylon is an island more productive than India of gold and 
large pearls ; a good part of the island was forest inhabited by 
wild beasts, a large breed of elephants among them. His 
quaint account of the Pandyan kingdom seems to be an idealised 
mixture of fact and fable. He says that Heracles had a daughter 
Pandaea to whom he assigned the southernmost portion of India ; 
the people in this country comprised 365 villages which bi ought 
by turns their tribute to the royal treasury every day of the year ; 
what is called tribute here seems to have been the supply of 
the provisions needed for a day for the royal household ; in the 
Silappadikaram , a work of six or seven centuries later than the 
time of Megasthenes, we hear of households of shepherds in the 
capital city of Madura supplying ghee by turns to the palace 2 . 


1. K. A. N. Sastri, Foreign Notices, p. 41. 

2. xvii, I.7. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


251 


Much discussion has taken place on the name Satiyaputa ; 
it is now generally recognised that the ending -puta signifies 
membership of a tribe as demonstrated by Liiders. Satiya 
(which occur s as satiya in Khalsi) must be sanskritized into 
satya- truth, though the formation satiya or satiya must be 
held to be unusual. And the only tribe known to early 
Tamil literature, and answering to this description — 
‘members of the fraternity of truth* — are the Kosar who were 
well known for their unswerving fidelity to the plighted word 
in assemblies and halls of justice, as w r ell as for their heroism in 
war 1 . The land of Korigu, modern Salem and Coimbatore 
districts roughly, is said to have been their home, and in the 
early centuries A. D. they seem to have overrun the Tulu 
country on the West coast. After the three w r ell-knowm Tamil 
kingdoms, Pandya, Chola and Chera (Kerala), the tribe of the 
Kosar may be said to occupy a considerable place in the litera- 
ture of the Sangam period, and it seems highly probable that 
they should find a place in the earliest enumeration of the poli- 
tical divisions of the Tamil country. It has been suggested that 
Satyamangalam in the Coimbatore district, the home of a sub- 
division of the Brhat-carana sect of theBrahmanas of South India, 
has something to do with this name Satiyaputra 2 ; there is little 
direct evidence in support of the view, and it is difficult to trace 
the antiquity of Satyamangalam or the sub-sect which bears 
its name to such remote times ; but we know of several instances 
from the mediaeval period of Brahmin clans and groups distin- 
guished for the very qualities of excellence in council-room 
and on the field of battle for which the Kosar were celebrated, 
and there is no intrinsic improbability in the suggestion that 
Brahmins maintained this tradition continuously from the days 
of Bhishma and Drona of legendary fame. The Satputes among 
modern Marathas may have been emigrants to Maharastra from 
the South 3 . 

The impression of a fairly developed cultural milieu in 
the Tamil land derived from the references In Megasthenes and 
the Asoka inscriptions is confirmed by other lines of evidence. 

1. JRAS. 1923 pp. 609-13. 

2. Smith : AJoka 3 p. 161. 

3. JRAS. 1919 p. 584 n. 1. 



252 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Kautilya notes that the Pandya-kavata, a pearl fishery on the 
coast of the mainland on the gulf of Mannar, was noted for the 
quality of the pearls it exported, and that Madhura, the capital 
of the Pandyas, lent its name to some of the finest cotton fabrics 
of all India 1 . The Brahmi inscriptions in rock caverns in hills 
have many features in common with the similar records of 
Ceylon, and these are among the earliest monuments of the Tamil 
country to which we may assign a date with some confidence. 
The script employed has much in common with the brief ins- 
criptions from Bhattiprolu, and may well be assigned to the 
third century B. C. Though these inscriptions have not yet 
been fully elucidated, enough is known to say that they are 
mostly either brief donative records or simply the names of 
monks who once occupied the beds or caverns. The close 
resemblance between these monuments and inscriptions and 
others of the same age in Ceylon and the name Kalugumalai, 
Tamil for Grdhrakuta, of one of the places where such inscribed 
caves are found, have been held to establish an exclusively Bud- 
dhist origin for these monuments ; it is, however, premature to 
formulate any views conclusively on such questions. New 
caverns and inscriptions are still being discovered one by one — 
witness the inscribed natural cavern at Malakonda in the 
Nellore district 2 . And tradition is strong that Jainismc a me into 
South India about the same time as Buddhism if not earlier. 

While it is thus not possible to decide if these monuments 
are Jain or Buddhist or both in their origin, the study of the 
inscriptions made so far 3 suggests that though the script employed 
in them was Brahmi of the southern variety, the language was 
Tamil still in its fiarmative stages. The script was alphabetic, 
and already included signs for peculiarly Dravidian sounds like 
Til* h an d n\ other peculiarities are that vocalic consonants were 
represented by two symbols first the sign for the consonant and 
then the complete vowel signs— thus yu was written as y (a) u. 
These developments and other peculiarities, not detailed here, 
must have come as the result of a pretty long process of trial and 
error extending over several generations. 

1. KA. II. ir. 

2. ARE. 1937-8 IT. 1 

3. Proc. Third Oriental Conference . pp. 275 ff. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


253 


The exact contents of the inscriptions still remain obscure, 
but a few facts emerge from tentative studies of them. A husband- 
man ( kutumbika ) of Ceylon (ii a) figures as a donor ; and a 
woman, members of the Karani caste, and merchants ( vanikan ) 
figure in other inscriptions in a like capacity. These brief 
inscriptions are thus seen already to bear testimony to the support 
commanded from all classes of the laity by the ascetics who 
were engaged in the pursuit of the life divine in the solitudes of 
mountains and forests. 

We must now turn to a consideration of the references to 
the Nandas and Mauryas in early Tamil literature. They 
occur in five poems, three of which are by one writer, Mamu- 
lanar whose statements are the clearest, and one each by two 
other poets. The relative chronology of the Sangam poets is 
by no means settled, and the whole body of Sangam literature 
can only be dated within broad limits in the first three centuries 
A. D. Thus the mention of Nandas and Mauryas in these poems 
is by no means a reference to contemporary facts, but to events 
preserved in the memory of people or in other ways of which 
we have no knowledge now. It may even be doubted if 
two poets whose references are not half as intelligible as those 
of Mamulanar were really referring to the Mauryas of history 
or some aspects of an obscure mythology ; that they both refer to 
the same fact or myt his clear beyond doubt ; the expressions 
used are identical, though one of them Kallil Attiraiyanar 1 , 
gives more details than the other — Parangorranar 2 . The fuller 
account refers to the Moriyar, their victorious lance, their sky- 
scraping umbrella, and their chariots bearing banners ; it then 
states that their strong bright-rayed wheel cut across a 
mountain at the end of the earth and rolled past it and past the 
broad disc of the sun fixed near the pass so made. The com- 
mentator ekes out the sense by some additions of his own ; he 
says that the Moriyar ruled the whole world, and that the 
mountain cut across by their discus was the silver-mountain 
which separated this earth from another world, and that the 
sun’s disc was fixed near the pass by the gods. He also adds 
that the Moriyar were the Chakravala emperors or Vidyadharas 

1. Puram 175. 

2. Aham 69. 



254 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and Nagas, an interpretation which would suit the alternative 
reading ‘Oriyar* much better than the Moriyar, the Mauryas 
of history. But stress need not be laid on the alternative read- 
ing, because, the cutting of the hill and the rolling of the wheel 
are features that, as we shall see, recur in the unmistakable 
references of Mamulanar to the Mauryan emperors. It is 
clear at any rate, that if these two other poets were also thinking 
of the Mauryas, they had but vague notions about them and their 
achievements, and classed them with the superhuman beings 
whose deeds fill the annals of universal history for many aeons 
after the dawn of creation according to the Puranic lore of India. 

Mamulanar had a better knowledge of the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, and his statements are much more precise and credible 
though he too retains the quasi-legendary feature which is all 
that the two other poets recorded about the Mauryas. He men- 
tions the Nandas and the enormous treasure accumulated by them 
in a telling context. ‘What is it’, asks a love-lorn lady, ‘that 
has attracted my lover better than my charms?* ; and among the 
alternatives postulated occurs this 1 : ‘Is it the treasure accumu- 
lated in the prosperous Pataliputra and hidden in the waters 
of the Ganges by the Nandas of great renown, victorious in war?’ 
Here is much that we know of the Nandas from other sources, 
and one fact that is new — the manner in which they kept the 
treasure hidden under the waters of the Ganges, which reminds 
one of a similar practice attributed to the Maharajas 
of Zabag by Arab travellers of the eighth century A. D. Mamu- 
lanar’s mention of the Mauryas is accompanied by equally 
clear and precise indications of historical events. There are 
two passages for consideration, both from the Ahananuru . 
One 2 starts by saying that the lover would not stay 
behind even if he got the wealth of the Nanda for 
doing so — a second reference to this topic by this poet ; it 
then proceeds to say that Kosar of the victorious banner 
started operations against their foes and gained victories against 
several ; but as Mohur did not submit to them, the Moriyas 
who had a large army led an expedition ; and it adds that the 
Moriyar’s chariots rolled across a cutting made in the mountain 

1. Aham 265. 

2. Aham 251. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


255 


for that purpose. Here is perhaps some fresh support for the 
identification proposed above of the Kosar with the Satiyaputa ; 
but what is more important, the Mauryan imperial power was 
so friendly to the Kosar as to be ready to go to their help in 
their wars against their enemies; this active intervention in the 
politics of the Tamil country brings to our view a phase of 
Mauryan imperialism that has so far escaped notice. The last 
reference in Mamulanar 1 adds some more particulars; it says 
that when the Moriyar turned to the south, the war-like Vadu- 
gar preceded them as their van, and the mountain which was 
cut to make a way for the chariots on this occasion is described 
as the large snow-mountain reaching up to the skies — obviously 
the Himalayas. This test detail betrays that Mamulanar too 
is by no means free from the legendary notion about Mauryas 
that was the entire stock-in-trade of the two other poets; only he 
manages to convey to us some facts besides the legend. Vadu- 
gar is a rather vague term in Tamil literature ; it means literally 
northerners, and was generally applied to the Kannada-Telugu 
peoples of Southern and Eastern Deccan together. These 
peoples were included in the Mauryan empire, and it is proba- 
ble that in a move further south they were called upon to take 
the lead. 

One last reference to the Nandas is simple and clear ; 
it occurs in Kurundogai 2 and refers to the abundance of gold 
in Pataliputra besides mentioning elephants bathing in the Son 
river. 

These Tamil texts, separated from the age of the Mauryas 
by about three to five centuries, thus indicate to us that the 
Tamil states were within the sphere of Mauryan influence, if we 
may use a convenient modern expression for the relation, and 
that at least on one occasion the Mauryas went to the assistance 
of the Kosar to enable them to subdue the rebellious chieftain 
of Mohur ; the Vadugar took a hand in this expedition. 

And now one word on the legendary feature of the moun- 
tain being cut to make way for the wheel to roll across. This 
is obviously an echo of the mythology centring round the concept 
of the Chakravartin, the universal emperor, one of whose para- 

1. ib. 281. 

2. Poem no. 75. 



256 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


phernalia ( ratnas ) is the chakra (discus) ; this chakra leads the 
way in his digvijaya and has many mysterious properties, 
and Asoka was counted as one of such emperors as the 
Mahavamsa and other Buddhist books show. It is significant 
that in most of the references to the wheel cited above, it is net 
clear if the wheel of the war-chariots or the symbol of empire 
is meant, though once Mamulanar definitely says it was the 
former. This feature in any event cannot be treated as history. 

Ceylon, like South India, steps into the light of history 
with its notice by Megasthenes and by the Asoka inscriptions — 
both under the name Tambapanni which becomes Taprabane 
with the Greek writer. The opening chapters of the Mahavamsa 
contain much edifying legend about the Buddha’s visits to the 
island, the arrival of Vijaya, and his encounter with Kuvanna 
(Kuveni in other accounts), and his marriage with a princess 
from the Pandya country. Modern research has shown that the 
primitive population of the island were the Vaeddas, who were 
hunters living in forests and natural rock-dwellings ; the first 
immigrants into the island were probably people from the Mala- 
bar coasts who called themselves Nagas and gave the name 
Nagadvipa to the northern section of the island, the ancestors 
of the modern Nayars cf Malabar — Naya being but the Prakrit 
form of the word Naga. The Vijaya legend, the Sinhalese 
language, and the Brahmi script of the earliest inscriptions, are 
clear proofs of the advent of North Indian influences directly 
by sea, and the story of the marriage of Vijaya with a Pandyan 
princess represents perhaps the growth cf contact between 
Ceylon and South India after they had both been Aryanized, 
each in its own way. Sinhalese memory goes back to a time 
prior to the advent of Vijaya when trading vessels coming in 
search of local products like ivory, wax, incense, pearls and gems, 
were sometimes wrecked on the shores of Ceylon. Much of 
this pre-history is necessarily speculative, and there can be no 
certainty about details. By the beginning of the Mauryan 
period in India, however, we may be certain that important 
settlements had been established in different parts of Ceylon 
and a fairly high degree of culture attained. The northern 
plain where was located Anuradhapura, the capital city, Rohana 
in the South-east, and Kalyani in the South-west were perhaps 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


257 


the most notable divisions in this period, and they might have 
started as independent colonies established by separate groups 
of settlers from the different parts of the mainland, being the 
first fruits, as it were, of the overflow beyond the limits of India 
proper and across the sea of the great movement cf Aryan expan- 
sion begun in Vedic times. Agriculture was practised and rice 
grown in considerable quantity to meet the necessities of a 
growing population ; artificial irrigation by means of dams 
thrown across rivers and canals taking off from them had 
come into vogue ; and the art of building with large-sized 
burnt bricks was known. 

According to the Mahdvamsa , the period covered by this 
volume comprised in the history of Ceylon the reigns of Pandu- 
kabhaya (B.C. 377-307), Mutasiva (307-247), Devanampiya 
Tissa (247-207) and Uttiya (207-197). The chronology 
of the first two reigns is suspect, as there is good reason to believe 
that their duration has been unduly lengthened in order to make 
Vijaya and the Buddha contemporaries 1 . The account of 
Pandukabhaya’s reign in the Mahdvamsa 2 is much of it palpable 
legend ; but from it we may conclude generally that the king 
had to fight some of his collateral relations ruling in different 
parts of the island to impose his authority on those areas, that he 
made Anuradhapura the capital of the newly united kingdom, 
and that his reign witnessed decided advancement in the evolu- 
tion of Sinhalese culture by the blending of the indigenous 
Vaeda (Yakkha) elements with the Indo-Aryan elements which 
had entered the island with Vijaya and his followers. The 
capital city was well laid out with tanks, parks, and separate 
quarters for the different elements in the population including 
ydnas, and among the recipients of the king’s benefactions were 
Nirgranthas, Ajivakas and Brahmanas, besides various other 
heretical sects. Of the reign of Mutasiva the chronicle 
has nothing to say except that he laid out the beau- 
tiful garden called mahamegha-vana and that he ruled the 
fair land of Lanka from the splendid city of Anuradhapura. 
He had ten sons ‘each thoughtful of the others’ welfare* 

r. Geiger MV. (Tr.) p. xxi. 

2. ib . ch. x. 



258 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and two daughters. The second son Devanampiya Tissa 
was foremost among the brothers in virtue and intelligence, 
and succeeded his father. His friendly relations with the 
Mauryan emperor Asoka, the exchanges of embassies and 
presents between them, the introduction of Buddhism into 
Ceylon by Mahinda and the fetching of a branch of the bodhi- 
tree have been narrated in our account of Asoka’s reign. For 
the rest, there is good reason to believe that the development 
of culture by the reconciliation of the indigenous and exotic 
elements, by the growth of cities and the laying out of roads and 
extension of cultivation was going on apace. The Brahml 
inscriptions found by the score in practically all the caverns on 
every hill in the island and clearly belonging to the short period 
between the middle of the third century B. C. and the beginning 
of the first, attest the large numbers of Buddhist monks, votaries 
of the new sect introduced by Mahinda, and their peaceful 
occupation of these dwellings : but the primitive religious 
practices of the Vaedas seem to have been kept up side by side 
with other forms of worship. It is quite probable that some 
of the dagobas and viharas now in ruins, particularly those in 
Anuradhapura, may in their origin date back to the age of 
Tissa 1 and his successors, and that the style of these structures 
was borrowed from India along with Buddhism. The greeting 
of Mahinda by queen Anula and five hundred (i.e. many) other 
women 2 , and their subsequent ordination after the arrival of 
Sanghamitta 3 , as also some references to women in the cave 
inscriptions show that women enjoyed a considerable 
amount of freedom and influence in this early Sinhalese 
society. The earliest coins of Ceylon were like those of 
India, pur arms or salakas , pieces of silver or copper of varying 
shapes, generally circular or oblong with a corner or 
corners chipped in some specimens and bearing punch marks 
on one side. Silver and copper are not products of Ceylon, 
and the metals, if not the coins themselves, must have been 
imported from India. A fragment of an admirably engraved 
thin cornelian showingthe figure of a king sitting upon an orna- 

1. MV. ch. xx. 

2. ib. xv 1 8. 

3. ib . xix 65. 



SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 


259 


mental chair Svhich can be no other than a royal throne’ was 
found in 1884 among the debris left round the Yatthala dagoba 
at Tissa ; and this is considered by Parker a specimen of early 
North Indian work under strong Greek influence affording 
proof of the intercourse between Tissa and Asoka recorded in 
the Mahavamsa ; he even suggests that the seated figure on the 
cornelian may be Asoka himself 1 . 

Tissa had no son and was succeeded by his brother Uttiya. 
During his reign Mahinda and Sarighamitta attained nirvana 
and their remains were disposed of with all honours, and stupas 
erected in their memory. 


i. Anc. Ceylon, pp. 494*#* 



CHAPTER VIII 


INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 

Introductory 

The outstanding achievement of Mahapadma Nanda, the 
founder of the Nanda dynasty, was the completion of the political 
unity of Northern India, excluding the Indus basin, but includ- 
ing the Malwa tableland, the Kalinga seaboard and probably 
also a good part of the Deccan. Probably because of his low 
birth, he was led to make a clean sweep of the principal Ksha- 
triya ruling families of his time and make himself, in the expres- 
sive language of the Puranas, ‘the sole ruler of the earth.’ The 
consequence of this absorption of the petty States of Northern 
India into a large empire could not but have been highly bene- 
ficial to the cause of material progress. Northern India, by 
virtue of its fertile soil and favourable climate, its magnificent 
waterways and its extensive coastline must have from the first 
enjoyed exceptional opportunities provided by nature for eco- 
nomic prosperity. Under the strong and central. sed adminis- 
tration of the Nandas, trade and industry could not but advance 
greatly. In particular, the needs of their exceptionally wealthy 
court, to which later traditions bear witness 1 and their organised 
administration heralding that of the Mauryas must have given 
a great impetus to industrial and commercial effort. The 
direct interest of the Nandas in commercial development is 
perhaps indicated by their invention of a new standard measure 
referred to in theKasikd commentary 2 as well as their standardisa- 
tion of the old silver coinage to be described later on. 

Beyond the limits of the Nanda dominions lay the Indus 
basin conquered long before by the Achaemenids, but divided 
at this period into a group of small kingdoms and republics. 
Politically as disorganised as was Madhyadesa at the time of the 
Buddha more than a century earlier, it stood now at a high level 


1. Cf. Mudra-rakshasa Act in, r. 37 referring to the Nandas as navanavaU- 
fata-dravyakot isvardh . 

2. On Panini ii. 4. 21. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


261 


of economic prosperity. The accounts of Alexander’s officers 
inform us not only of numbers of rich and populous cities located 
in the land of the Five Rivers, but also of the wealth of the royal 
courts and republics. The devastating effects of Alexander’s 
invasion could not but have affected disastrously the economic 
condition of the territories subdued by his arms and none of his 
measures for laying the foundation of an extensive commerce 
between India and the Hellenistic world took root immediately. 

The liberation of North-western India by Chandragupta 
Maurya, preceded or followed in a short time by his deposition 
of the last king of the Nanda line, and the series of his subse- 
quent victories laid the foundation of an empire extending 
from the Bay of Bengal to the Afghan highlands and from the 
Himalayas to the Narmada and beyond. The military successes 
of Bindusara and ASoka helped not only to complete and conso- 
lidate the newly built empire, but extended its limits till it 
abutted on the Tamil Kingdoms of the far south. For three 
generations from the time of the founder the strong arm of the 
Mauryas ensured internal security and immunity from foreign 
aggression. Anoka’s vigorous propaganda further paved the 
way for the spread of Indian culture to distant Ceylon and the 
Hellenistic states almost to their furthest limits. It is not 
unreasonable to suppose that these favourable conditions were 
attended with a phenomenal development of industry as well 
as inland and foreign trade of the empire under Maurya rule. 

Industry 

The enormous advance of Indian industries which has just 
been postulated for the Nanda and Maurya times was rendered 
possible by the abundance of India’s agricultural and mineral 
resources to which the Greek writers allude with evident admira- 
tion. ‘India,* says Diodorus (ii. 35-7) quoting from Megas- 
thenes, ‘has many huge mountains which abound in fruit trees 
of every kind and many vast plains of great fertility — more or 
less beautiful, but all alike intersected by a multitude of rivers 
. . . .And while the soil bears on its surface all kinds of fruits, 
it has also underground numerous veins of all sorts of metals, 
for it contains much gold and silver and copper and iron in no 
small quantity and even tin and other metals India again 



262 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURTAS 


possesses many rivers both large and navigable 1 .’ A no less 
important factor of economic progress noted likewise by the 
observant Greeks was the extraordinary skill of the Indian 
craftsman which has been his heritage down to our own times. 
Thus, to continue the quotation from Diodorus given above, 
‘The inhabitants are found to be well skilled in the arts.’ 
Concrete instances of the skill of the Indian craftsmen are found 
in the Geography of Strabo (xv. 1 .67) from information supplied 
by Nearchus 2 3 . 

One of the oldest Indian industries is that of textile manu- 
facture. The technical terms for warp ( tantu ) and woof (oiu) 
are found in the Rigveda and Atharva-veda> while the shuttle 
( tasara ) and the loom ( veman ) are mentioned in the Tajtis - sarh - 
hita and other texts 5 . Among the textile industries, that of cotton 
manufacture held the first place. It found an excellent market 
at home in the habits of the people whose immemorial dress 
consisting of a pair of cotton garments is referred to alike in the 
early Buddhist texts and in the writings of the Greek observers 4 . 
No wonder then that among the presents offered by the Malavas 
and their allies to the victorious Alexander was included a large 
quantity of cotton cloth. While the cotton industry evidently 
was spread over the whole land, certain centres had early become 
famous for the excellence of their fabrics. The early Buddhist 
texts speak with high praise of Benares cloth ( Kasikuttama or 
Kasika-vatthd) as well as the cloth of the Sivi country ( Siveyyaka 
or Siveyyaka)*. We have a fuller list in Kautilya’s Arthasastra 
(ii. 11) where Madhura (capital of the Pandya country), 
Aparanta (Konkan on the western coast), Kasi, Vahga, Vatsa 
(Kausambi region), and Mahisa are said to produce the best 

i. According to the above account, gold, silver, copper and iron to a large 
extent along with tin and other metals to a much less degree were mined from 
India itself. Among the five sources of gold and five of silver specified in the 
Arthasastra (ii. 13), however, Gauda alone can be definitely identified as belong- 
ing to India. 

2. Thus we are told that Indian craftsmen, seeing sponges used for the 
first time by the Macedonians, immediately manufactured imitations of them 
with fine thread and wool. They also quickly learnt to make Greek articles 
such as the scrapers and oil flasks used by the athletes. 

3. See Vedic Index , s.v. 

4. See P. T. S. Dictionary , s. v. kappasa, and Arrian’s Indica, ch. xvi. 

5. Cf. Ahguttara Nikdya i. 248 : Vinaya Pitaka i. 278, 280 : Jatakas iv. 401 : 
vi. 51 etc. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


263 


cotton fabrics {karpasika). In the same context, the Arthasastra 
specifically mentions three varieties of dukiila (an unidentified 
species of fibrous fabric) distinguished by their place of origin 
and their colour. These were the products of Vanga (East 
Bengal), Pundra (North Bengal) and Suvarnakudya (in Kama- 
rupa). They were respectively white, dark and coloured like 
the rising sun. In the same connection, the Arthasastra mentions 
linen fabrics ( kshauma ) of Kasi as well as Pundra. Kautilya 
also refers to the fabrics produced in Magadha, Pundra and 
Suvarnakudya. Linen fabrics (khoma) are also referred to in 
the early Buddhist literature 1 . 

It will be noticed from the above that Bengal, Kamarupa 
and Benares were the regions noted thus early as centres of the 
textile industry. The technical perfection of the industry is 
well illustrated by the fact that the Arthasastra distinguishes 
varieties of dukula and kshauma according to their colour and 
process of manufacture, while those of patrornd are distinguished 
according to their material and colour. 

Coming to costlier textiles, we find references to silk cloth 
{koseya and koseyya-pavara ) in the Pali canonical works and the 
Jdtakas 2 . Kautilya (ii. 11) also mentions kauseya along with 
china-patta china-bhumija (Chinese fabric of Chinese manufac- 
ture). This last passage points to the fact that silks of Chinese 
origin competed at this time with the home-made product. 

On the other hand, the manufacture of wool was an old and 
indigenous industry. The fame of the fine wool of Gandhari 
goes back to the Rigveda which also knows a woollen garment 
called samulya 3 . The woollen fabrics of Gandhara along with 
those of Kotumbara or Kodumbara — a region connected by 
Jean Przyluski 4 with the Audumbaras of the Punjab — are men- 
tioned with high praise in the Jdtakas 5 . Kautilya, while silent 
about Gandhara, mentions by name (ii. 11) the woollen goods 
of Nepal called bhingisi or apasdraka . These are said to be formed 
of eight pieces, dark in colour and rain-proof. What advance 

1 . See P. T. S. Diet., s. v. khoma. 

2. Ibid., s.v. 

3. See Vedic Index , s.v., for references. 

4. Un ancien people de P enjab ; Les Udumbara in J. As., 1926, pp. 25-36. 

5. See Jat. vi. 500. 



264 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the manufacture of this material had attained during the period 
of the Arthasastra is proved by the fact that Kautilya specifies 
three varieties of fabrics of sheep’s wool distinguished by colour, 
four varieties distinguished by their manufacturing process, and 
no less than ten varieties distinguished by their use for human 
beings and for animals. The qualities of the best wool are 
carefully noted by the author in the same connection. The 
Arthasastra also distinguishes in the same context six kinds of 
fabrics manufactured from the hair of wild animals, and differing 
in their uses and qualities. 

Before closing the subject of textile manufacture, we may 
mention a few of its finer forms known at that period. The 
use of embroidered «loth (pesos) is as old as the Rigveda , its manu- 
facture according to a Yajus Samhita text being normally carried 
on by women 1 . The Jdtakas refer to golden turbans used by 
kings and golden trappings for the use of State elephants 2 . In 
the times of the Nandas and the Mauryas, gold-embroidered 
garments were worn by Indians evidently of the richer class. 
This is borne out by the testimony of Strabo, who says (xv. 1.54). 
‘They (the Indians) wear apparel embroidered with gold and 
use ornaments set with precious stones and gay-coloured linen 
garments 3 . 5 These gorgeous dresses were specially displayed 
during festive occasions. Describing the festive processions 
of the Indians, Strabo (xv. 1 . 69) mentions not only the train of 
elephants adorned with gold and silver, but also the attendants 
wearing ‘garments embroidered and inter-woven with gold.* 
Curtius, again, in the course of his description of the Indian 
king’s public appearance, says that the king is ‘robed in fine 
muslin embroidered with purple and gold. 5 

Wood-work is a very old Indian industry. Reference to the 
carpenter (takshan or tashtri) and his tools may be traced back 
to the Rigveda 4 . The art of the carpenter had attained a high 
skill by the time of the Pali canonical and other texts. There 

1. See Vedic Index , s.v. pdas. 

2. Jat. iv 404 r v. 322. 

3. Somewhat different is McCrindle’s translation which is as follows ; 
(Ancient India as described by Alegasihenes and Arrian , Calcutta ed., p, 69) : — 
*Their robes are worked in gold and ornamented with precious stones and 

they wear also flowered garments made of the finest muslin.* 

4. See Vedic Index, s.v. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


265 


we find the vaddhaki engaged in all kinds of wood-work including 
ship-building, the making of carts and chariots, the manufac- 
ture of machines and house-building 1 2 . To the absolute perfec- 
tion of the craft in Maurya times we have a surviving testimony 
in the shape of the mysterious wooden platforms that have been 
recently dug up in the vicinity of Patna*. The excellent sculp- 
ture of ASoka’s time is admittedly modelled upon the much 
older art of the indigenous craftsmen in wood and ivory. 

Reference has just been made to the Indian ivory-worker. 
The Indians have excelled in ivory- work from early times down 
to the present. Specially, in the Jdtakas we are introduced to 
various ornamental and useful articles prepared from this costly 
material 3 . The use of ivory ear-rings is noted by Arrian 
(Indica xvi) as a characteristic of very wealthy Indians. 

Another industry in which Indians have distinguished them- 
selves in ancient and mediaeval as in modern times is stone- 
cutting. In the Jdtakas the stone-cutter (pasdna-kettaka) is 
found engaged in building houses with the materials of a ruined 
village, in hollowing a cavity in a block of the purest crystal 
and so forth 4 . The wonderful stone pillars of Asoka’s reign are 
standing examples of the unsurpassed skill of the stone-cutters 
of the age. *The art of polishing hard stone,’ as Vincent Smith 
observes 5 , ‘was carried to such perfection that it is said to have 
become a lost art beyond modern powers.’ The ‘Mauryan 
polish’ is seen at its best in the walls of the Barabar caves of the 
hardest gneiss rock, which are burnished like glass mirrors. 

The use of deer and goat skins for clothing is as old as the 
Rigveda 6 . The leather-worker and his handiwork of various 
kinds are referred to in the early Buddhist literature 7 . Kautilya’s 

1. See P. T. S Diet., s.v. vaddhaki . : also cf. Jdt. ii. 18 (for house-building) : 
v. 159 : vi. 427 (for ship-building) : iv. 207 (for carts and chariots) : v. 242 
(for machines). 

2. Ann. Rep . Arch. Sutv . Ind ., 19 12-13, pp. 53 ff 

3. See P. T. S Diet., s.v. danta cf. Jdt . v. 302 (for ivory handle of a glass 
mirror) : vi. 223 (for an ivory chariot). 

4. Jdt, I, 470. 

5. Oxford History of India , Part I, 2nd ed., p. 113. 

6. See Vedic Index , s.v. ajina. 

7. See P. 7 ~ S Diet., s.v. upahdnd and chamma : cf also Jdt. ii. 153 (for 
traps of leather) : iii. 79 (for single soled shoes) : iii, 1 16 and vi. 431 (for leather 
sacks) : vi. 454 (for leather shield), etc. 



266 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Arthasastra (ii. 11) shows knowledge of a wide variety of 
skins (charma) distinguished by their place of origin as well as 
colour and size. It is interesting to observe that the principal 
varieties are said to be products of various Himalayan regions. 
In the description of the Indian dress by Arrian ( Indica xvi), 
to which we have referred above, we have an incidental allusion 
to the skill of the Indian leather-worker. ‘The Indians/ we 
are told, ‘wear shoes made of white leather and these are ela- 
borately trimmed, while the soles are variegated.’ 

India has always been famous for its trees producing fragrant 
wood. Several varieties such as chandana , again and tagara are 
mentioned in the Pali canonical texts and the Jatakas 1 . Kau- 
tilya (ii. 11) mentions five kinds of fragrant wood, viz., chandana 
aguru , taila-parnika, bhadrasri , and kaleyaka. These are further 
distinguished according to their place of origin, colour, fragrance 
and so forth. To judge from the commentator’s identification, 
many of these varieties came from Kamarupa, while other kinds 
came from Ceylon, the Himalayan region and the like. 

The use of metals may be traced back to the Indus people of 
pre-historic times. The Vedic Indians were acquainted with 
a large variety of metals, viz . gold (chandra, jatarupa> hiranya , 
suvarm , harita ), silver ( rajata ), iron ( krishndyasa , syama) , copper 
(lohitayasa, loha ), lead (sisa) and tin ( trapu ). Mention is also made 
of gold and silver ornaments as well as ordinary metalware 2 . 
The Jatakas refer not only to numerous metals including brass 
and bronze, but also to the manufacture of ornaments from 
precious metals and that of domestic and agricultural implements 
from baser ones 3 . Kautilya (ii. 12) specifies the characteristics 
of various metallic ores including gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, 
iron and vaikrintaka (unidentified). What is more, he refers to 
technical sciences dealing with veins of ore and metals, to 
the art of smcltingmetals and so forth 4 . In this connection, refer- 
ence is made to the manufacture of copper, lead, tin, bronze, 


1. See P. T. S. Did ., s.v. 

2 . See Vedic Index, s.v., and ibid, English index, s.v. metals and ornaments 
for references. 

3. See J at. i. 351 : iv. 60, 85, 296 etc. 

4. Sul ba-dhdtusd stra-rasa-paka-ma nirdga in the original, rendered as above 
by Meyer. The translation of Shamasastry is inaccurate. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


267 


brass, iron and other wares. In the following chapters (ii. 13 
and 14), Kautilya deals with the characteristic qualities of 
several varieties of gold and silver together with the methods of 
their testing and purification, as well as the technical processes 
of their manufacture. These striking references may be taken 
effectually to dispose of the strange verdict of a Greek writer 
who, while describing the richness of the country in gold and 
silver mines, observes : ‘Nevertheless the Indians, inexperienced 
in the art of mining and smelting, do not even know their own 
resources, but set about their business in too primitive a 
way 1 2 3 * . 5 

As regards the period of the Nandas and the Mauryas, we 
have positive evidence testifying to the skill of the Indian metal 
worker. From this standpoint the bare observation of Dio- 
dorus (ii. 36) based no doubt on Megasthenes, viz* that the 
Indians employed their rich store of metals in manufacturing 
articles of use and ornaments is not of much moment. More 
significant is the fact that among the presents offered to 
Alexander by the Malavas and their allies were included a 
hundred talents of ‘white iron* (ferrum candidum). This has been 
generally taken to mean steel, although Cunningham 2 identified 
it with nickel. Of the copper work of the Maurya times, an 
excellent specimen has survived in the shape cf a solid copper 
bolt which was found in the Asokan pillar at Rampurva and was 
evidently used for fixing the colossal lion-capital to the pillar 
itself 8 . The Greek contemporary accounts also testify to the 
precious metal-work used in the royal court. In Strabo’s 
description (xv. 1.69) of the Indian festive processions to which 
we have referred above, we read how the great host of royal 
attendants carried ‘vessels of gold such as large basins and 
goblets six feet in breadth,’ as well as ‘drinking cups and la vers 
all made of Indian copper and set many of them with precious 
stones, — emeralds, beryls, and Indian garnets.’ Similarly 
Curtius, in describing the king’s public appearance, states how 
the royal attendants ‘carry in their hands silver censers’, while 

1. Strabo xv. 1.3 1. 

2. Num. Chron.y xiii (1873), pp. 188 ff. 

3. For a description of the copper-bolt with an accompanying photo- 

graph, see Panchanan Neogi, Copper in Ancient India . pp. 18-20. 



268 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the king himself ‘lolls in a golden palanquin furnished with 
pearls which dangle all around it. 5 

The use of jewellery may be traced back to the Indus peoples 
of prehistoric times. The profession of a jeweller ( manikara ) 
is referred to in the Vajasaneyi - Samhitd and the Taittirlya Brah - 
mana 1 . Coming to post-Vedic times, we find the Jdtakas refer- 
ring to pearls, crystals and jewels as well as the art of cutting 
and polishing gems for ornaments 2 . Kautilya (ii. 11) 
shows acquaintance with pearls ( muktika ), jewels ( mani ), 
diamonds ( vajra ) and corals (pravala) of Indian as well 
as foreign origin. What is more, he carefully notes the 
characteristics of good and bad pearls as w^ell as the different 
colours and qualities of rubies, beryls, sapphires, crystals, dia- 
monds and corals. The skill of the manufacturing jeweller 
is indicated by the fact that Kautilya mentions no less that five 
varieties of pearl necklaces (yashti) which are sub-divided into 
other classes. In a postscript, he adds that the same varieties 
apply to the ornaments for the head, arms, feet and waist. 
Coming definitely to the Nanda-Maurya times w^e find that 
the Indian love of ornaments is pointedly referred to by a 
Greek writer 3 . 

We have not space enough to describe the other industries 
to which the Jdtakas and other records of this period bear wit- 
ness, such as the manufacture of dyes, gums, drugs and perfumes, 
as well as that of pottery. But a word may be said about the 
manufacture of implements and weapons of war. Offensive 
and defensive weapons like the bow and the arrow r , the sword 
and the spear, the helmet and the coat of mail are known from 
Vedic times 4 . Later in the Arthasdstra (ii. 18), we find mention 
of bows and arrows made of different materials along with 
different kinds of swords, axes, spears and the like. The 
Arthasdstra also refers to two classes of war machines, viz. im- 
movable ( sthitayantrdni ) and movable (chala-yantrani ) , the first 
consisting of ten and the second of seventeen named varieties. 
The Greek accounts relating specifically to the Nanda-Maurya 

1. See Vedic Index . s.v. 

2. Cf. Jdt. i. 351, 479 : ii, 6 : iv. 6o, 85, 296 : vi. 117-20, 279. 

3. See Strabo xv, 1. 

4. See Vedic Index , English index, s.v. war for references. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


269 


times bear out these observations. According to Arrian ( Indica 
xvi), the Indian foot-soldiers were armed with bows and javelins 
as well as broad-bladed swords, while the horsemen carried two 
lances. In the list of presents offered by the Malavas and their 
allies to Alexander were included 1050 (or, according to another 
account, 500) four-horsed chariots and 1000 bucklers. 

Trade 

By the time of the early Buddhist literature the Indians had 
developed an extensive system of inland trade which was borne 
along well-known trade-routes. These routes were marked by 
convenient stages and served to link up the most distant parts 
of the country with one another. Among them we may mention 
specifically the following : — 

1. East to west. This most important route ran principally 
along the great rivers. From Champa boats plied up 
to Benares, the great industrial and trading centre of 
those times. From Benares they led up the Ganges as 
far as Sahajati and up the Jumna as far as Kausambl. 
Further west the route led by land-tracts to Sindhu, 
famous for its breed of horses and Sauvira (‘Sophir’ or 
‘Ophir’ of the Old Testament ?). 

2. North to south-west. This route extended from Sra- 
vasti, the famous capital of Kosala, to Pratishthana on 
the Godavari and the stations lying on it in the reverse 
direction included Ujjayini, Vidisa and Kausambl. 

3. North to south-east. Along this route which ran from 
SravastI to Rajagriha lay a number of stations including 
Kapilavastu, Vaisall, Pataliputra and Nalanda. 

4. North-west route, also referred to by Panini 1 . It 
stretched along the land of the Five Rivers to the great 
highways of Central and Western Asia. 

We also hear of merchants travelling from Kashmir and 
Gandhara to Videha, from Benares to Ujjayini, frem Magadha 
to Sauvira and so forth 2 . What vast wealth accrued from this 
system of inland trade is illustrated by references to merchant 


1. V. 1. 1 7 : — Uttar apathendhrtam ca. 

2. (X Jot. ii. 248 : iii. 365 : Vimdnavattku commentary 370 etc. 



270 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


princes like Anathapindika of Sravasti whose trading connec- 
tions extended to Rajagriha on the one side and Kasi on the 
other. Nevertheless, the path of the trader was anything but 
easy. Not only were the roads (specially through the forests) 
infested by robbers against whom the merchants protected 
themselves by hiring the services of forest-guards, but the 
deserts had to be crossed at night with the help of land-pilots 
(thala-niyamaka) guiding the caravan by the stars. Associated 
with the wilderness was a host of real and imaginary dangers 
viz., drought, famine, wild beasts, robbers and demons. Some 
of the roads were already distinguished as ‘royal’ or ‘great’ roads 
(rajapatha or mahdmagga) unlike the ordinary bye-paths (i upapatha ). 
But the rivers were not bridged and had to be crossed by ferries. 
The overland as well as oversea trade likewise attracted the 
attention of Indian merchants. The Pali canonical texts speak 
of voyages lasting six months in ships (nava) which could be drawn 
up oil shore in the winter 1 . The Jatakas , above all, have pre- 
served memories of voyages of daring Indian merchants beyond 
the seas and lands to distant countries of the east and west. 
References are made in these works to merchants voyaging from 
Champa or even Benares to the mysterious land ofSuvarnabhumi 
which has been proved to be a generic title in those days for 
Burma, the Malay Peninsula and the Malay Archipelago. We 
hear even of merchants voyaging from the great western sea- 
port Bharukachchha to the same destination, obviously via a 
Ceylonese port. Indeed, Ceylon (Tambapanni) at that time 
was ‘another bourne of oversea commerce’. We also learn 
how another body of merchants travelled from Benares to 
Baveru (Babylon) 2 . An interesting sidelight is thrown upon 
the methods of Indian navigation by the reference to the direc- 
tion-giving crows (< disa-kaka ) showing the navigators as they flew 
towards the land, in what direction lay the coast 3 . This practice, 
as has been remarked 4 , was also known to the sea-faring Baby- 
lonians and Phoenicians of early times. 

The references in Kautilya’s Arthasastra , scattered and inci- 
dental as they are, register some advance in the conditions of 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


271 


trade above described. Active encouragement of trade on the 
part of the State is proved by the care with which Kautilya 
provides for the construction and security of trade-routes and the 
foundations of market-towns in his scheme of State colonisation 
of the country-part. Elsewhere (ii. 4), the largest scale of width — 
eight dandas as compared with the usual four dandas — is 
prescribed for roads leading to the market- towns ( sarhyariiya 
patha ). Intelligent appreciation of the importance of trade- 
routes is shown by the discussion in Arthasastra circles (vii. 12) 
of the relative advantages of different types of trade-routes from 
the standpoint of their conduciveness to commerce. Such are 
the pairs: land and water-routes, water-routes along the coast 
and through mid-water, the Himalayan and the southern land- 
routes. In comparing the last pair, the Arthasastra authors 
give us a valuable, though far from exhaustive, list of the imports 
borne along both routes evidently to the Ganges valley. Accor- 
ding to an un-named teacher quoted by Kautilya, the costlier 
merchandise consisting of elephants, horses, fragrant products, 
tusks, skins, gold and silver were more plentiful in the Himalayas. 
In Kautilya’s opinion, on the other hand, the merchandise other 
than blankets, skins and horses, and consisting of conch-shells, 
diamonds, jewels, pearls and gold, was more plentiful in the 
South. For the rest, the remarkable lists of agricultural, manu- 
facturing and other products of different lands which Kautilya 
mentions (ii. 11-12) testify to the extent as well as the objects 
of India’s internal and foreign trade. Among these products 
are found textiles of Bengal, Assam, Benares, the Konkan and 
Pandya, the silks of China, the woollens of Nepal, the skins of 
the Himalayan regions, the fragrant wood of Assam, Ceylon 
(?) and the Himalayas, the gems of Ceylon (?), Alakanda and 
Vivarna (unidentified) and the like 1 . 

All indications point to the fact that the rise of the Nandas 
and the Mauryas helped greatly to improve India’s inland and 
foreign trade. The liberation of the Indus valley, and still more 
the repulse of Seleucus, gave Chandragupta Maurya complete 

i. It is interesting to recall Panini’s sutra vi. 2.13 referring to the practice 
merchants being named from the countries which they visited. The late 
Kasikd commentary gives the following illustrations of the above : — 

Madra-vdnija , Kahnvra-vdnija and Gandhara-vanija. 



272 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


control over the coveted north-western route to which we have 
referred above. With the conquest of the Deccan by Chandra- 
gupta Maurya or Bindusara, the possession of the equally, or 
still more, valuable western and southern routes was ensured to 
the Mauryas. The conquest of Kalinga by Asoka destroyed the 
only possible rival for the mastery of the eastern trade. While 
the Mauryas thus brought all the great inland trade-routes under 
the control of a highly centralised and efficient administration, 
their rule was helpful for the growth of trade in other ways. 
That the Mauryas had a special department for the construction 
of roads is proved by Megasthenes’ reference (quoted, Strabo 
xv. 1.50) to the duties of officers called Agoranomoi (^market com- 
missioners’). They had, among other duties, to ‘construct roads 
and at every ten stadia set up a pillar to show the bye-roads and 
distances.’ The most renowned of the imperial roads of these 
times was *the Royal Road’ connecting the North-West Frontier 
with Pataliputra and leading thence to the mouths of the Ganges. 
The stages of this first Indian Grand Trunk Road together with 
their distances have been recorded by the Roman writer Pliny in 
his encyclopaedic work called Natural History (vi. 21). His some- 
what confused account may be summed up in the following 
table 1 : — 

Roman miles 

From Peucelaotis (Pushkaravatl) to the Indus 60 

Thence to the Hydaspes (Jhelum) . . 60 

Thence to the Hyphas is (Beas) . . . . 270 

From the Hyphasis to the Hesidrus (Sutlej) 168 

From the Hesidrus to the Jomanes (Jumna) 168 {sic) 

From the Jomanes to the Ganges . . 112 

From the Ganges to Rhodopha (unidentified) 1 19 
From Rhodopha to Kalinipaxa (unidentified) 167 (or 265) 
From Kalinipaxa to the confluence of the 

Jomanes and the Ganges . . . . 625 (sic) 

i. For a useful summary of the discussion relating to Pliny’s account see 
McCrindle, Ancient India as described by Alegasthenes and Arrian, Calcutta ed., 
pp. 130-34. Arrian (Indica, ch. iii) quotes Eratosthenes to say that the Royal 
Road was measured by schoeni . According to Pliny, (Arrian’s Indica , E. J. 
Chinnock’s tr. p. 40m) the schoenus was reckoned by Erastothenes at 40 stadia 
(about five miles). Strabo ( Geography xv. 1.11) mentions measurement of the 
Royal Road ‘with necessary lines’, which by a slight emendation of the text 
may be taken to mean ‘in terms of the schoenus * (Loeb’s Classical Library ed., 
Vol. viii. p. 17 n). 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


273 


From the confluence to Palibothra . . 425 (sic) 

From Palibothra to the mouths of the Ganges 638 

We have reasons to believe that the ancient foreign trade of 
India, like its inland trade, benefited by the strong and efficient 
administration of the Mauryas. The wise policy of friendship 
with the Hellenistic powers started by Chandragupta Maurya 
after the repulse of Seleucus and maintained by his son and 
grandson, must have favoured the expansion of the Indian 
trade with West Asia and Egypt. It is interesting to learn from 
Greek classical sources that the main commerce between the early 
Seleucid Empire and India was borne partly by the land-route 
(the northern one passing through Bactria and the southern 
through Gedrosia and Carmania, Persis and Susiana) and 
partly by the sea-route (through Gerrha on the west coast of the 
Persian Gulf). Like the Indian route to Egypt stretching along 
the east shore of the Red Sea, the route through the Persian Gulf 
was controlled by powerful Arab tribes engaged in a highly 
developed trade 1 . How valuable was this western trade to 
India will appear from the list of her exports into Egypt, which, 
according to Greek classical sources, consisted of ivory, tortoise- 
shell, pearls, pigments and dyes (specially indigo), nard, costum, 
malabathron and rare woods 2 . It is probably in the light of this 
extensive commerce with western lands that we have to under- 
stand Asoka’s ambitious attempt to extend the benefits of his 
religious and humanitarian propaganda to the Hellenistic king- 
doms almost to their furthest limits. To the mutual knowledge 
and understanding derived from long-continued commercial 
intercourse, again, we may probably attribute the success which 


1. For references see Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic Histoty of the 
Hellenistic World , p. 457. 

2. Rostovtzeff, op. cit. f pp. 386-7. We have an interesting reminiscence 
of Indians sharing in this western trade in a story narrated by Posidonius 
and quoted by Strabo in his Geography (ii. 3.4). According to this story while 
Euergetes II (145-116 B.G.) was reigning in Egypt, an Indian being stranded 
on the shore of the Arabian Sea was brought to Alexandria and having learnt 
Greek gave the Court information of the sea-route to India. Then the king 
sent out an expedition under Eudoxus of Cyzicus. The expedition set out 
probably in the last years of Euergetes II and returned heavily laden with goods. 
Equal success attended a second expedition sent out under the same captain 
in the following reign. It has been recently suggested on good grounds that the 
discovery of the monsoon attributed to Hippalus in the literary records was 
made by Eudoxus himself who probably derived his information from the 
stranded Indian merchant and undertook his first expedition with his help. 
On the whole subject, see Rostovtzeff, op. cit. pp, 926, 927, 929. 



274 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


attended Asoka’s mission to Ceylon and, if this can be taken to be 
authentic, the mission of Sona and Uttara to Suvannabhumi 
(Further India). 

The Organisation of Industry and Trade 

The organisation of crafts and trades in some forms of asso- 
ciation was known from early times. In so far as the crafts are 
concerned, we find in the Jatakas that sons ordinarily, if not 
invariably, followed the occupations of their father, while the 
industries used to be localised in towns and villages, and the 
separate crafts had frequently a pamukha (president) or jettha 
(alderman) presiding over them. These three features, as 
Fick observed long ago 1 , point to an organisation similar 
to that of the craft-guilds in mediaeval Europe. The Jatakas 
in fact refer to eighteen senis (guilds), mentioning four by name, 
viz., those of woodcutters, smiths, leather dressers and painters 2 . 
As regards the organisation of trade, the Jatakas refer to sattha - 
vahas whose directions were obeyed by the caravans along the 
trade-routes as well as to pamukhas and jetthas of the separate 
trades. We also hear of disputes between guilds being decided 
by a mahasetthi who acted practically as ‘chief alderman over 
the aldermen of the guilds 3 .’ The early Dharmasastras and the 
Arthasdstra register a somewhat advanced stage of development. 
From an oft-quoted passage (xi 1) of Gautama’s Dharmasuira 
supposed to be the oldest of the existing Dharmasutras , we learn 
that traders and artisans along with others had the authority 
to lay down rules for their respective classes. Of the Sahghas 
(‘corporations’) described by Kautilya (xi. 1), who were ruled 
by mukhyas (‘executive officers’), one class consisted of certain 
specified and unspecified groups living by vdrta (agriculture, 
cattle-breeding and trade) as well as by sastra (fighting). Else- 
where (ii. 7, iii. 1 , viii. 4 etc.) Kautilya refers to srenis (guilds) 
organised under mukhyas , which were thought to be sufficiently 
important for their customs to be recorded in official registers 
and were otherwise a factor to be reckoned with in the working 
of the State administration. 

1. The Social Organisation in North-east India in Buddha 9 s time (Eng. tr. of 
Du Social Gliederung in Nordostlichen Indian zu Buddhas zeit ). pp. 1 77-18*3. 

2. Cf. Jdt. i. 267, 314 : iii. 281 : iv. 41 1 : vi 22 . 

3. Cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India , p. 97. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


275 


The industrial and commercial srenis and sahghas we have 
described above represent the type of guild organisation under 
which there could be little scope for a separate class of wage- 
earners as distinguished from producers. But already in these 
times we hear of another type of organisation involving the 
employment of hired] abourers by the capitalists. The Jatakas 
make frequent references to free labourers working for hire (, kam - 
makara and bhatakas) often along with slaves ( dasas ) ands ervants 
(pessas) 1 . Kautilya (iii. 13-14) not only refers to free labourers 
( karmakaras and bhri takas) along with slaves (dasas), but gives 
a whole body of laws for regulating their work and wages. 
That the free labourers along with slaves formed an important 
element of the population in Maurya times is proved by Aioka 
including the kind treatment of dasas and bhatakas among the 
constituent qualities of his dhamma (R. E. ix, xi etc.) 

State Industrial and Commercial Policy 

No account of the economic conditions of the Nanda-Maurya 
times will be complete without some reference to the policy 
pursued by the State in relation to industry and trade. We 
may begin by noticing seme features of the traditional policy 
in these respects as reflected in the Arthasdstra. That the active 
encouragement of industry and commerce was contemplated 
as a duty of the State is illustrated by the measures included in 
Kautilya’s scheme of State colonisation of rural areas (ii. 1) : 
they include the working of mines and forests, the construction 
and security of trade-routes and the foundation of market-towns. 

In this connection the king is enjoined to secure trade-routes 
from obstruction by his faveurities (vallabhas), officers (karmikas) 
and frontier guards (anta-pdlas) as well as by thieves and animal 
herds — a list sufficiently instructive as putting the danger from 
the King’s officers on a level with that caused by thieves and 
animals. How fully the industrial and commercial classes were 
associated with the royal court and capital is proved by the 
immediately following rules (ii. 4) relating to the planned settle- 
ment of the fortified capital (durga). According to this descrip- 
tion which, by the way, illustrates the relative social status of 


i. See P. T. S. Diet , s.v. Also cf. Fick, op. cit pp. 303*4* 



276 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


different groups of artisans and traders in the times concerned, 
the dealers in scents, garlands, paddy etc. and the chief artisans 
should live along with Kshatriyas to the east of the royal palace. 
The dealers in cooked food, liquors and flesh should live along 
with Vaisyas to the south. The manufacturers of woollen and 
cotton goods, the armour-makers etc. should live along with 
Sudras on the west. The manufacturers of base metals and 
precious stones should live along with Brahmanas on the north. 

Not only did the State associate itself closely with the trading 
and industrial classes, but it also undertook manufactures and 
trading on its own account 1 . What is more, the rules of the 
Arthasastra repeatedly show how thorouglily the agricultural, 
mineral and ether resources of the State were understood to be 
the sources of its strength. Thus among the qualities of a good 
country are included (vi. 1) the possession cf agricultural tracts, 
mines, forests of various kinds, land and waterways and the like. 
Very characteristic again, is the general rule of foreign policy 
(vii. 1) stating that the king should follow that one of the six-fold 
forms by which he can exploit his own mines and forests and 
obstruct those of his enemy. No wonder, then, that the nice 
balancing of the advantages of working tracts rich in mines and 
in food grains, of working mines yidding a precious but small 
output and those producing inferior but large output, of working 
trade-routes by land and water and so forth, formed the subject 
of keen discussion in Arthasastra circles dealing with questions of 
foreign policy (vii. 11-12). 

Another aspect of State industrial policy in these times is that 
relating to the strict control of artisans and traders. We have 
in the Arthasastra a whole Section (Section iv) significantly called 
Removal of Thorns (kantaka sodhanam ) , which describes successi- 
vely the measures to be taken by the king for securing the people 
against artisans and merchants, against natural calamities, 
against persons living by clandestine means and so forth. In 
thorough accord with this attitude is the fact that elsewhere 


i* For examples see Contributions to the History of the Hindu Revenue System , 
Sn 9 0 ' 1 ’ I0 y y* J 11 the chapter (v. 3) describing what maybe 

cahed^the expenses of the king’s establishment, we have the following rates of 

Carpenters — 2,000 panes. 

Skilled and unskilled craftsmen— 120 panes. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


277 


(iv. 1), Kautilya characterises merchants, artisans and some 
other specified classes as thieves in fact, though not in name. 
In the class of artisans just mentioned, are included weavers, 
washermen, goldsmiths, workers in copper and other metals, 
physicians, actors, minstrels and beggars. How drastically 
paternal the State regulations for protection of the public against 
these classes sometimes might be, is proved by a number of 
examples. Not only is a differential scale of wages fixed for 
weaving different kinds of cloth, but fines and other penalties 
are prescribed for reduction in their weight and measures. Fines 
are also prescribed for washermen washing clothes elsewhere 
than on wooden planks or on smooth stone, for wearing clothes 
other than those marked with a cudgel, for selling, mortgaging 
or hiring clothes of others, and even for delay in returning the 
clothes. Wages at varying rates are laid down for dyeing differ- 
ent qualities of cloth. A scale of penalties is laid down for 
physicians failing in or neglecting the treatment of diseases. 

The measures for public security (iv. 2) against traders par- 
take of the same character. We read that such old wares as 
are of proved ownership should be sold or mortgaged at the 
market-place ( panya-samstha ) under supervision of the market- 
superintendent (samsthddhyaksha ) . A graduated scale of fines 
is prescribed for deficiency in weights and measures. There is 
a similar scale of fines for exceeding the profit-limit of five 
per cent permitted on home-grown merchandise and of ten 
per cent allowed on foreign merchandise. In a later chapter 
of the same section (iv. 4) dealing with lost and stolen property, 
we are pointedly told that the sale or mortgage of old wares 
should not be carried out without informing the market- 
superintendent. It is characteristic of Kautilya’s attitude to- 
wards traders ( vaidehaka ) that unlike an unnamed Arthasdstra 
authority whom he quotes, he thinks (viii.4) the oppression from 
traders to be worse even than that caused by the Guardian of 
the Frontier ( ant ap ala ) . 

On the other hand it is only fair to add that the State in 
these times also took special steps to protect the artisans and 
merchants. For theft of small articles belonging to artisans 
and craftsmen, Kautilya prescribes (iv. 10) fines as high as 100 
panas. Elsewhere (iv. 13) he lays down elaborate rules for 


278 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


compensating merchants ( sdrthika) for theft or robbery of their 
merchandise during their journeys. 

The Mauryas followed the traditional State policy in relation 
to industry and trade at least in some important respects. We 
have already seen what care they bestowed upon the construc- 
tion of roads through a special class of officers called Agorancmoi 
by Megasthenes. That they established State manufactures 
on their own account is proved by Megasthenes’ reference to his 
fourth Indian caste, viz. that of artisans. Speakingof this class, 
Diodorus (ii. 41) says that they were not only exempted from 
paying taxes, but even received maintenance from the Royal 
exchequer. More guardedly Arrian ( Indica Ch. xii) states that 
while handicraftsmen and retail dealers pay tribute, an excep- 
tion is made in favour of makers of weapons of war, ship-builders 
and sailors, who even draw pay from the State. Evidently, 
the artisans maintained by the State were employed on govern- 
ment service. What strict control was maintained by the 
Maurya government over the artisans and merchants alike 
of the country-side and of the capital is proved by other state- 
ments of Megasthenes. We learn that the Agoranomoi had among 
other duties, to superintend crafts connected with land such as 
those of the wood-cutters, carpenters, blacksmiths and miners. 
Again, the officers known as Astynomoi (‘city commissioners’) 
were divided into six boards. Of these the fourth ‘is that which 
has to do with sales and barter, and these look after the measure, 
and the fruits of the season, that the latter may be sold by stamp’ : 
the fifth ‘is that of those who have charge of the works made by 
artisans and sell these by stamps, the new apart from the old’ 1 2 . 
We have elsewhere* given reasons for identifying Megasthenes’ 
officers in charge of measures with Kautilya’s pautavadhyaksha 
(‘superintendent of weights and measures’) and samsthadhyahsha 
(‘market superintendent’), while connecting ‘the stamp’ men- 
tioned by the Greek writer with the abkijnana-mudrd ', which 
according to Arthasastra (ii. 27) was given by the ontapala to 
incoming traders. We have finally to mention in the present 
place another reference suggesting that the person of the artisans 

1. Strabo, xv. 1.50-51, tr. the Loeb Classical Library, Vol. vii, pp. 83-4. 

2. Contributions to the History of the Hindu Revenue System, p. 1 17. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


279 


was protected by a special law unlike the general rule of law 
known to the Arthasastra . According to Strabo (xv. 1.54), if a 
person caused the loss of a hand or an eye to a craftsman, he 
was put to death. This is a severe departure from the milder 
rule of law in the Arthasastra (iii. 19) imposing fines alone for 
the same offences. 


Currency 

Long before the rise of the Nandas and the Mauryas India had 
evolved her own monetary system based on the indigenous stand- 
ards. The Vedic nishka , satamana and suvarna may have been ingots 
of gold of definite weights. But in later works such as the Jdtakas , 
the grammar of Panini and the Arthasastra of Kautilya, we have 
definite references to gold coins called nishka and suvarna , 
silver coins called karshapanas or dharanas and copper coins also 
called karshapanas , along with their multiples and sub-divisions. 
The Vedic satamana , as its name implies, was based on the mdna 
unit, a weight known to the Rigveda . In later times the mdna 
was changed for the lighter unit called krishnala or rati, the seed 
of the gunja- berry. The weight of the gold suvarna in the Artha - 
sastra as well as in Manu and Yajhavalkya is given as 80 gufijas 
or ratis , the copper karshapana according to Manu and Yajna- 
valkya also weighing 80 rails. The weight of the silver dharanas 
in the Arthasastra , however, amounts very nearly to 80 rails, 
while in Manu and Yajhavalkya it is only 32 ratis 1 . As Professor 
Rapson has well observed 2 , the silver and copper coinages in 
Ancient India were often independent of each other, with differ- 
ent areas of circulation. In the Arthasastra, however, the 
silver pana with its sub-divisions is evidently recognised as the 
standard coin, while the copper mdshaka with its divisions ranks 
as a token currency. Apparently copper was linked up with 
silver in such a way that the mdshaka was one-sixteenth in value 
of the silver pana, its weight varying with the ratio between the 
two metals 3 . 

1. On the antiquity of the Indian coinage and its evolution, see D. R. 
Bhandarkar, Ancient Indian Numismatics . Lecture ii : S. K. Chakravorty, Ancien 
Indian Numismatics , Chs. ii. and iv. On the origin of the 32 rati standard fo 
silver coins, sec Bhandarkar op. cit pp. 93 — 4 and specially Chakravorty 
op. cit., pp. 43 ff. 

2. Catalogue of Indian Coins in the British Museum, p. clxxix. 

3. Chakravorty, op. cit., 56-8. 



280 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


The punch-marked silver coins that have been found in large 
numbers all over India have been identified on all hands with 
the silver karshapanas, dharanas or puranas of the Smritis and the 
Arihasastra . Some classes of these coins have been traced back 
to pre-Mauryan times. Thus a distinctive class of such coins, 
which was found some years ago in a deposit at Paila in the 
Kheri district of the Uttar Pradesh, has been generally identi- 
fied as the local currency of the independent Kosala kingdom 
before its absorption by Magadha. These coins bear four obverse 
marks instead of the usual five, among which is included the 
four-spoked wheel in place of the usual five-spoked one. They 
are of the reduced standard of 24 to 30 ratis in place of the 
theoretical 32 ratis 1 . Of the punch-marked silver coins bearing 
the usual number of five obverse marks, two distinct classes 
assignable to as many distinct periods have been recovered from 
recent excavations on the site of Taxila. The Older Class is dated 
circa 317 B.C. by the presence in its midst of gold coins of 
Alexander and his half-brother Philip Arrhidaeus ‘in mint condi- 
tion, 5 while the date of the Later Class is fixed at circa 248 B.C. 
by the occurrence of a coin of Diodotus in the same deposit. 
The two classes are distinguished from each other by their fabric 
as well as symbols, though equally approximating to the standard 
of 32 ratis . The Older (pre-Maurya) Class consists of large 
thin pieces unlike the small thick coins of the Later (Maurya) 
Class. The obverse marks of the Older Class are conspicuously 
lacking in the distinctive Maurya symbols (‘hill and crescent 5 
as well as ‘peacock’). It seems to be generally agreed that some 
coins of the Older Class go back to the 4th or even the 5th 
century B.C 2 * * . On the other hand, it must be admitted that the 


r. On (he above see Durga Prasad, Mm. Supp . xlvii. p. 77 ; Walsh. 
jmi.. No. ii. p. 15-26 : JRAS. 1937, pp. 300-303. Walsh gives the 

average weight of the Paila hoard as 25 ratis , but see D. D. Kosambi, NIA. 
xv. p. 56. 

2. Thus Durga Prasad, Mm. Supp. xlv. PI. viii and ibid , xlvii, pp. 78 — 9, 

takes some early silver punch-marked coins to go back to the kingdom of 

Magadha shortly after Buddha's time. According to Walsh (JBORS. 1937, 

PP' 3 ° 3 _ 4 /h some very old coins of the Taxila Hoard which were re -stamped 
for circulation may go back to 200 years or more before the date of the deposit, 
viz., c. 317 B.C. More recently D. D. Kosambi (op. cit.. pp. 60*6) premising 
that the early coins of Taxila were imported from the east, assigns some select 
types on the basis of his interpretation of the obverse marks to £aisunaga and 
Nanda kings. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


281 


symbolism and metrology of the silver punch-marked coins are 
still an unsolved problem 1 . 

In circulation with the Older Class of silver coins just des- 
cribed, though probably dating from much earlier times, was a 
class of coins consisting of thick slightly bent bars of silver with 
‘the six-armed symbol’ on the obverse and a blank reverse. 
Weighing from 165.8 to 173 grains, these saldka. coins, as they 
have been called, have been sometimes identified 2 with the 
satamana of 1 00 ratis. Specimens of this coinage have been found 
in denominations of one-half, one-fourth, one-eighth and one- 
sixteenth pieces. Other classes of coins of the same early type 
comprising (as they have been called) single and double karsha- 
panas or only half kars hap anas have been found in deposits from 
western India and an unrecorded provenance in northern 
India 3 . 

To the same period as the Older Class of silver punch-marked 
coins as well as the bent bar coins belongs, if we are to judge 
from their simultaneous occurrence in the same Taxila deposit 
of c. 317 B.C., a group of minute silver coins with a single 
obverse mark and a blank reverse 4 . They have been found 
not only on the site of Taxila, but also at Thathari in the 
Madhya Pradesh 5 . 


1. On different interpretations of the obverse marks, see Durga Prasad, 
JASB., N. S. XXX(ig34), pp. 17 ff : Walsh, Punch-marked Coins from Taxila, 
pp. 18-25 : D.D. Kosambi, op. cit ., pp. 2 ff. Regarding metrology A. S. Hemmy 
(JRAS, 1937, pp. 1-26) concluded after an elaborate examination that the 
silver punch-marked coins conform to the weight-standard of 54 grains, which 
is exactly one-quarter of the principal weight of the revised Indus system of 
weights, and nominally represents Manu’s standard of 32 ratis (58.56 grains). 
Criticising this view, D. D. Kosambi concludes (op. cit. pp. 58-9) that the 
system of Mohenjodaro weights was applied for the earlier Taxilan hoard, 
while in the Maurya period although the average remained the same, the 
variance increased enormously thus pointing to a far cruder system than before. 

2. See Durga Prasad, JVum. Supp. xlvii, pp. 86-7. This view is con- 
tradicted by D. D. Kosambi, cp. cit p. 19. On the other hand, Mr. Charan 
Das Chatterji in his paper Numismatic data in Pali literature (Buddhistic Studies, 
p. 426 n ) suggests that the bent bar coins were struck on the karsha of 100 ratis 
known to Yajhavalkya unlike the usual karsha of 80 ratis. 

3* See Allan Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British Museum (Ancient 
India), pp. xvii — xix : clxi — clxii. 4-10. 

4. According to Walsh (Punch-marked coins from Taxila, pp. 3 " 4 b these 
coins weighing from 2.3 to 2.86 grains were the silver panas or mashas of two 
ratis. This view is criticised by D. D. Kosambi who provisionally calls them 
one-twentieth kdrashdpana (See Kosambi, op. cit., p. 1 9). 

5. See Allan, op. cit., pp. Ixix and PI. xlvi. 


282 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


We have an interesting glimpse of the condition of the 
currency in north-western India at the time of Alexander’s 
invasion in the casual observation of a classical writer. We are 
told by Quintus Curtius that among the presents offered by the 
king of Taxila to Alexander were included thirty talents of 
signatum argentum (‘coined silver’). We may identify these coins 
either with the Older Glass of punch-marked coins or with the 
class of bent bar coins above described. The reference to silver 
coins in tnis connection, as R. B. Whitehead 1 justly observes, 
probably signifies that silver was employed as the standard 
metal at that time. Of the currency conditions of the Maurya 
empire in Asoka’s last years, we have probably a valuable 
record in the shape of the Taxila hoard of punch-marked coins 
of the Later Class of circa 248 B.C. as above mentioned. 
These coins contain a considerable alloy of copper (75.3 p.c.) 
as compared with silver (40.3 p.c.) and in many cases are more 
than 54 grains in weight. 

Turning to the subsidiary copper coinage of these times, 
we may mention that the class of square or rectangular cast coins 
bearing the characteristic symbols of ‘the hill and crescent’, 
the hollow cross and the like has been held to have been issued 
by the Mauryas 2 . To the same period has probably to be 
assigned a class of punch-marked copper coins with Maurya 
obverse marks, of which a hoard was found at Bhagalpur in 
1925 3 . With the Mauryas again we may probably connect 
numerous specimens of the remarkable copper coinage of Taxila 
which extends over several centuries and is mostly uninscribed 
and die-struck 4 . In a fragmentary stone-plaque inscription 


1. The Pre- Mohammedan Coinage of North-Western India , p. 42. 

2. On a hoard of such coins, excavated at Bulandibagh (near Patna ) 
from the Mauryan level of 15 to 18 feet below ground-level and on two such 
pieces dug out from below the Asokan level near the Asokan monolith at 
Samath, see Durga Prasad, Aim?. SuppL, xlvii, pp. 62-6. Previously, Allan 
(op. at., p. Jxxvii) had cautiously suggested the 3rd-2nd century B. C. as the 
date of the cast copper coins. 

3. See Allan, op. cit., Ixxix. 

4 * According to Allan (op. cit., cxxxix) the copper coinage of Taxila 
began late in the 3rd < entury B.C. when Taxila was under Maurya governors 
and ended with the Greek conquest before the middle of the 2nd century B.C. 
On independent ground- Vincent Smith (Cat. of cions in the Ind . Mus., p. Hi) 
had previously held that the single die-struck pieces of Taxila began not later 
than 350 B. C., while the double-die coins were prior to the coins of Agathocles 
and Pantaleon, c. 190-180 B. C. 



INDUSTRY, TRADE, AND CURRENCY 


283 


of circa third century B.G., which was discovered some years ago 
at Mahasthan in the Bogra district of Bengal 1 , reference is made 
to c a coin of the value of four cowries’ called gandaka 2 . 

The downfall of the Maurya empire was not followed by the 
withdrawal of the imperial currency from circulation. From 
the finds of Indo-Greek coins in the same deposits at various 
sites, we may safely conclude that the punch-marked silver 
coins were in circulation down at least to the 2nd and 1st centu- 
ries B.C 3 . That their circulation was continued even down to 
the Kushan times is proved by a Mathura stone-pillar inscrip- 
tion of the twentieth year of Huvishka mentioning an endow- 
ment of 1 1 ,000 pur arms 4 . 


1. See Ep. Ind. xxi, pp. 83-91. 

2. It may be added that on a number of inscribed coins which had been 
read differently by previous scholars, K. P. Jayaswal ( JBORS . xx. PP* 279-308) 
claimed to have read the names of the Maurya kings Brhaspatimitra, Satadhar- 
man, Dasaratha, Samprati, Devadharman and Salisura. 

3. For references cf. theBajaur hoard of 1942 described by H. L. Haug- 
ton in JNSI , iv. part i, and the hoard at Bairat described by Daya Ram 
Sahni in Archaeological Remains and Excavations at Bairat (not dated.) 

4. Ep. Ind. xxi. pp. 60 ff. 


CHAPTER IX 


RELIGION 

Literary Background 

There are unfortunately no definitely dated literary records 
of the Nanda-Maurya period. The epigraphic records that 
only date from the time of Asoka give a one-sided picture of the 
religion of the people. The Srauta and Grhya Sutras which 
possibly belong to this period do not give a picture of the religion 
in practice but attempt at a systematisation of the orthodox 
Brahmanical traditions both social and ritualistic. They show 
Brahmanism on the defensive trying to safeguard its rights and 
privileges against the newly started religious movements such 
as Buddhism and Jainism. The now famous Arthasastra of 
Kautilya is of suspected authenticity and may be used only 
as a source of secondary importance. The Astddhydyi of 
Panini is a compilation of this period and contains some impor- 
tant references to the religious institutions of the times. What is 
more important, it mentions the Mahdbharata. But it is not 
known which Mahabharata it was. It was certainly not the epic 
in its present developed form. Supposing it was the old Pandu 
story, it does not throw any light on the age of the present epic. 
The epic therefore cannot be used as a source of information 
for the religious history of the Nanda-Maurya period. 

The early Buddhist texts, in spite of the ecclesiastical violence 
of different ages, seem to have preserved some authentic tradi- 
tions of the pre-Asokan times. They contain, to a limited extent, 
the picture of the religion as practised in those days and also of 
the struggle that was going on between Buddhism and the oppos- 
ing sects. But this does not mean that the entire Buddhist 
canon in its present form can be used as a source of information 
for the period in question. The Buddhist traditions would 
have us believe that the first two collections of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka namely the Sutrapitaka with its five nikayas and 
the Vinayapitaka were brought together in the council 
of Rajagrha, held immediately after the death of Buddha 
and that the third collection, the Abhidharmapitaka 



RELIGION 


285 


assumed its final form in the time of Asoka, in the third 
council held at Pataliputra. But this claim has been proved 
to be too exaggerated to be naively accepted. The Asokan 
edicts show that the Buddhist canon was then in the making and 
not a full-fledged Tripitaka. In the Bhabru edict, Asoka 
specially recommends to the Sahgha a number of religious 
texts with the following instruction : T desire that many groups 
of monks and nuns may repeatedly listen to these expositions of 
the Dharma ( dhamma-paliyayani ) and reflect on them. In the 
same way both laymen and laywomen (should act)’. 

The seven expositions of Dharma recommended by Asoka 
were the following : 

1. Vinaya-samukase (Vinaya-samutkarsa). 

2. Aliyavasani (Aryavamsani) 

3. Anagatabhayani 

4. Munigatha 

5. Moneyasute (Moneyyasutra) 

6. Upatisapasine (Upatissaprasna) 

7. Laghulovade (Rahulavada) 

It is generally assumed that these Sutras were selections from 
the extensive Buddhist canon, which according to the tradition, 
had been constituted already before the time of Asoka. Under 
this assumption, all the texts except the first have been identified. 
Accordingly Aliyavasani has been identified with Anguttara 
II, 27, Anagatabhayani with Anguttara III, 103, Munigatha 
with Munisutta of the Suttanipata, Moneyasute with Nalaka- 
sutta of the same text, Upatisa-pasine with the Rathavinlta- 
sutta of the Majjhima ( I, 146-51 ) and the Laghulovade 
with the Rahulavada-sutta of the Majjhima (I. 414). 

Asoka clearly says that these texts had been spoken by the 
Buddha himself ( bhagavata buddfiena bhdsite ). They are called 
Dhamma-paliyaya or Dharmaparyaya which regularly means 
a Buddhist religious text according to the old tradition 
of the north. But their identification is doubtful as there 
is no clue in the inscription to their contents excepting in 
the case of Laghulovade. It is said that this text concerned 
falsehood ( musavadam adhigicya ) and in fact the Rahulavada- 
sutra as preserved in the Pali Majjhimanikaya and the northern 
Madhyamagama contains a warning to Rahula against falsehood. 



286 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


But in which form was the text known to Aioka ? It was 
certainly not known in its present amplified form. It is probable 
that the ASokan text consisted of the gatha portions which 
contain the essentials of the Sutra. 

Then again the language in which they were known to Asoka 
was neither Sanskrit nor Pali. The titles of texts which Asoka 
mentions in his edict have marked MagadhI characteristics 
(cf. ally a for Pali ariya , Ldghulo for Rahula , the termination e as 
in -sute, samukase, for Pali o ) . Admitting that Asoka was quoting 
the exact titles of the texts known to him, the conclusion is inevi- 
table that the form in which he knew them was MagadhI. This 
pre-A£okan MagadhI canon was not yet a welhconstituted 
Tripitaka, as the Pali tradition would have us believe, but a 
literature still in the making. It should be remembered that 
although there was occasion for it, Asoka does not mention either 
the pitaka or the nikaya , words which occur on the Buddhist 
monuments within a century from Aioka’s time. It is therefore 
almost clear that the literature was not yet available in the time 
of Asoka in a tangible form and that the community was not yet 
much given to the scripture. But a lead had already been 
given in this direction either by Asoka on his own initiative or 
by Magadhan church and the <dd traditions had begun to be 
collected. Hence arose the necessity of encouraging the monks 
as well as the laymen to study them. Under these circumstances 
it is permitted to take some of the traditions embodied in the 
Buddhist canon as old and genuine. 

But the same thing cannot be said about the Jaina canon. 
The first systematic collection of the canon was made only in 
the 6th centuary A.D. apparently from old manuscripts but also 
from the mouths of the monks who could still recite them from 
memory. But the form in which the Ahgas have come down 
to us is admittedly later than that of the Pali canon which itself 
is post-Aiokan . Then again an important section of the Jaina 
community, the Digambaras, disown this canon and dispute its 
authenticity as true utterances of Mahavira. Under these 
circumstances, although the assumption that it contains some 
very old traditions of the Jaina church may not be wholly unjusti- 
fied, our scope of discrimination in using them is extremely 
limited. 



RELIGION 


287 


The contemporary Greek records, specially the fragments 
of the lost account of Megasthenes, contain some valuable refer- 
ences to the religious life of the Maurya age and confirm to some 
extent the information available from the Buddhist texts. 

A study of these sources shows that in the Nanda-Maurya 
period, Brahmanism was still mainly an aristocratic religion 
of which the principal supporters were the kings, the nobles, 
and the rich Brahmin householders. The real custodians of 
the religious lore were the priests who occupied the highest rank 
in the social hierarchy. There was also an a.scetic class among 
the Brahmins which consisted of teachers advocating somewhat 
new ways of religious thoughts and practices w r hich may be 
traced to Upanishadic origin. Those teachers had a more 
direct appeal to the common people and attracted people from 
other classes of society too to a life of renunciation. It was 
probably at the hands of this ascetic class that new theistic move- 
ments originated in the Maurya period. Closely allied to this 
ascetic class but with definitely distinctive features w r ere the two 
religious movements, Buddhism and Jainism, which began to 
play a very important part in the religious life cf the country 
from tire Maurya period. 

Brahmani sm 

The Vedic and domestic ritual certainly occupied the most 
important place in the Brahmanical religion of this period. The 
account of Megasthenes bears clear testimony to it. Megas- 
thenes tells us (Frag. I. B : Diod. Ill, 63) that the philosophers, 
by which he means the priestly class, although inferior in number, 
were prominent over all the classes in point of dignity and that 
they were engaged by private persons to offer sacrifices. Aioka’s 
reference to the Deva -worshippers relates to this class of priests 
who were engaged in sacrifices and not to the popular religious 
movements which do not seem to have as yet gained any consi- 
derable importance. 

The references to the Vedic lore and ritualism in the canoni- 
cal Buddhist texts clearly bring out their importance in the 
Nanda-Maurya period. The Vedic Rsis such as Atthaka, 
Vamaka, Vamadeva, Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bhara- 
dvaja, Vasettha, Kassapa and Bhagu were popularly claimed to 



288 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


be the ancestors of the Brahmins and the seers of the Vedic 
mantras ( montanam kattd). Some of these Rsis were actually 
composers of the hymns. Vamadeva was the composer of the 
hymns of the fourth Mandala of the Rgveda, Bharadvaja 
of the sixth mandala, and Vasettha (Vasistha) of the hymns 
of the seventh mandala. The sage Atthaka ( Astaka ) is 
mentioned in the Aitareya Brahmana ( VII, 17 ) and the 
Sankhayana Srauta Sutra ( XV 7 , 26 ) as one of the sons of 
Visvamitra. Vamaka and Bhagu (Bhrgu) appear as teachers 
and sages in the Satapatha Brahmana (X. 6. 5. 9 ; VII, 
2, 1, 11). Yamataggi (Jamadagni) was a rival of the famous 
sage Vasistha. Arigirasa is mentioned as a famous teacher 
in the Taittiriya-samhitd (III, 1. 7. 3 ; VII, 1.4.1). It is further 
said in the Buddhist texts that the Brahmins of the period not 
only claimed descent from those ancient teachers but also were 
capable of reciting the ancient mantras. They were serious 
students and teachers of the sacrificial literature and were profi- 
cient in the tliree Vedas. Those who were engaged for the per- 
formance of sacrifices were famous for their knowledge of the 
Vedic lore and purity oforigin. Purity implied purity in descent 
up to the seventh generation both on the father’s and the 
mother’s side, and proficiency in the Vedic lore not only meant 
proficiency in the three Vedas but also in the Nighandu 
(etymology), the Ketubha (ritual), Itihasa, Veyyakarana 
(grammar), Lokayata etc. ( Vedanam paragu sanighandu-fotu - 
bhdnam sdkkharappabhaddnam itihasa- pane amanam padako veyyakarano 
lokdyata-mahapurisalakkhanesu anavayo — Maiihima II, p. 210 ; 
Digha I, p. 128.) 

The Buddhist texts mention a class of Brahmins named 
Brahmana-mahasalas who used to receive revenues of lands 
granted to them by the king of the country. These Brahmins 
were rich and capable of undertaking for themselves the most 
expensive sacrifices. They also used to entertain a large number 
of students, sometimes 300 to 500, coming to them from different 
parts of the country and to impart to them the knowledge of 
the Vedic lore. These Brahmins were the most respected and 
are described as not only pure in descent but also as possessing 
a divine colour (brahmavanni) , a divine radiance ( brahmavac - 
casi) and of agreeable speech and language ( kalydnavdeo , 



RELIGION 


289 


kalydmvdkkarano) . The names of some of these Brahmins are 
given in the Buddhist texts : Canki, Tarukkha, Pokkharasati, 
Janussoni, Todeyya, Kutadanta etc. 

The Buddhist literature also knows the names of the various 
Vedas and the number of their sakhds. Thus in the Pali texts 
(Digha I, 237) there is mention of the Addhariya, the Tittiriya, 
the Chandoka and the Bavharija (Bahvrca). The Sanskrit 
Buddhist texts know more of the Vedic lore. In the Sardula- 
karnavadana (Divyava. xxxiii) there is a detailed description 
of the Vedic literature. Besides, it mentions the 21 sakhds 
of the Rigveda, 100 of the Yajurveda and 8000 (sic. 1000) of 
the Samaveda. The tradition is old as it is also recorded in the 
Mahabhasya of Patanjali (xv, 10, 11 : ekasatam cdhvaryusdkhdh 
sahasravartma samavedah ekavimsatidhah bahvfcyam) . The principal 
Vedic sakhds are also mentioned by names in the same 
text. 

The Pali canon mentions some of the Vedic sacrifices by 
names such as : Asvamedha, Naramedha, Sammapasa, Vaja- 
peyya and Niraggalam (Samyutta, p. 299). The same are 
mentioned in the Sanskrit Buddhist texts as Vajapeya, Asva- 
medha, Purusamedha, Samvaprasa, Nirargadam and Sama- 
prabharam. It is not clear which sacrifices were meant by the 
Samyaprasn, Nirargadam and Samaprabharam. They were no 
doubt Srauta rituals as there is question of gains by the priests 
from those sacrifices. No big gain could be expected from the 
Grhya rituals. As they are mentioned along with the important 
Soma sacrifices such as Asvamedha, Vajapeya and Purusamedha, 
they seem to have been also Soma sacrifices which entailed 
large expenditure. 

But this ritual had also a darker side. The huge gains offered 
hy them must have increased the greed of at least some of the 
priests. The large sacrifices required the immolation of a large 
number of animals of the herds and the felling of big trees 
possessed by the villagers. These meant a further taxation of 
the poor people by the nobles who were the real performers of 
the sacrifices. It is therefore impossible not to believe in some 
of the charges levelled against ritualism in the Buddhist texts. 
The Buddhist attitude is well presented in the Brahma na-dham- 
mikasutta (Sutta-nipata p. 50). 



290 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


‘The ancient Rsis were ascetics (tapassino) and practised 
self-control and avoided the five pleasures of the sense. Their 
riches consisted not of cattle, gold or grains but of learning 
and purity. They lived on food left at the door by the faithful 
and used the bed and clothes offered to them reverentially by 
the rich people. They were never harmed nor dominated, 
protected as they were by the dhamma, and their access to any 
house was never barred. They spent 48 years of their life as 
brahmacarins in quest of knowledge and good conduct. Even 
after their marriage they lived a life of restraint. They held 
austerity, rectitude, tenderness, love rnd forbearance in high 
esteem. They performed sacrifices with rice, beds, clothes, ghee 
or oil, which they could collect by begging and never killed cows 
in sacrifices. 

‘They possessed a noble stature and a tender and bright 
mien and remained always engaged in their own pursuits. In 
course of time, however, they began to covet a king’s riches and 
splendour and objects of pleasure such as women with ornaments, 
chariots yoked with stately horses. With an eye to these gains 
they approached king Okkaku (Iksvaku), persuaded him to 
celebrate aSvamedha, purusamedha, Samyaprasa and vajapeyya 
and received as fees from him wealth, women and chariots, 
horses and cows, beds and clothes. Coveting more and more 
they again persuaded him to celebrate sacrifices by the offering 
of cows, which they said, constituted also the wealth of men as 
are land, gold or grains, and such were equally fit objects for 
offering. The slaughter of cows enraged the gods Brahma, 
Indra and even the Asuras and Raksasas and multiplied the 
diseases which were originally three, viz. desires, hunger and 
decrepitude, to ninety-eight and further caused to appear dis- 
cord among the people and within the household, and acts 
improper and impious among the various classes of men. 9 

In the Majjhim a n ikdya (I, pp. 342-44) there is the true 
picture of how sacrifices used to be performed. It is in way 
of explaining that kind of puggala (individual) which practises 
self-mortification, and for self-chastisement sacrifices animals 
and causes sufferings to other beings. 'This kind of puggala’, 
the text says, ‘includes the king or the ksatriya noble whose head 
has been anointed (muddhavasitto) as well as the wealthy Brah- 



RELIGION 


291 


mins (Brahmano mahasalo). He gets a sacrificial shed (santha- 
gara) built outside the town, shaves his hair and beard, puts 
on deer skin, lubricates his body with mustard oil and enters the 
sacrificial shed, accompanied by his chief queen and his 
Brahmin priest, rubbing his body with an antelope horn. He 
then prepares his own bed on the bare ground and lives on cow’s 
milk. The queen and the priest also live on milk. A part of 
the milk goes to the sacrifici. 1 fire and the rest goes to the calves. 
He then orders : kill so many bulls for the sacrifice, kill so many 
he-calves, so many sh e-calves, so many goats, so many rams, 
all for the sacrifice ; fell so many trees for the yupa, pluck so much 
ku£a grass for the barhis. His servants, messengers, workers, 
all make the preparation either with tears in their eyes or weep- 
ing for fear of punishment or chastisement.’ The confirmation 
of this account is found in the Srauta manuals. They clearly 
show that the Pali description is a true and objective picture of 
the Srauta ritual as practised in those days. 

But this aspect of the Vedic religion was confined, as we 
have already said, to aristocratic classes, the nobles and the 
wealthy Brahmins. The intellectual aspect of the Vedic religion 
was also not without its force. The Upanishadic ideal of life 
still moved the hearts of many people and they lived up to it. 

The life of the forest- dwelling Brahmin philosophers has 
been described by the contemporary Greek writers. It was, 
we are told, a life of great simplicity and hardship. The philo- 
sophers had their cottages in front of the city within an enclosed 
space. They lived in simple style, used beds of rushes and deer 
skins and abstained from animal food and sexual pleasures. 
They passed their time in listening to serious discourses and in 
imparting their knowledge to those w T ho would follow them. 

In the story of Man danis, as told by Megasthenes, we get the true 
picture of a Brahmanical sage of those times. The story runs 
that Alexander while in India was attracted by the reputation 
of a sage named Mandanis and sent a messenger inviting him 
and promising him great reward. But Mandanis, although 
threatened with death, refused to accept his invitation and sen t 
the following reply : 

*God, the supreme king, is never the author of insolent 
wrong, but is the creator of light, of peace, of life, of water, of 



292 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


the body of man, and of souls and these he receives when death 
sets them free, being in no way subject to evil desire. He alone 
is the god of my homage, who abhors slaughters and instigates 
no wars.... Know this, however, that what Alexander offers 
me and the gifts he promises, are all things to me utterly useless ; 
but the things I prize, and of real use and worth, are these leaves 
which are my house, these blooming plants which supply me with 
dainty food, and the water which is my drink, while all other 
possessions and things which are amassed with anxious care, 
are wont to prove ruinous to those who amass them, and cause 
only sorrow and vexation, with which every poor mortal is fully 
fraught. But as for me, I lie upon the forest leaves, and having 
nothing which requires guarding, close my eyes in tranquil 
slumber ; whereas had I gold to guard, that would banish sleep 
. . . .Should Alexander cut off my head, he cannot also destroy 
my soul. My head alone, now silent, will remain but the soul 
will go away to its Master, leaving the body like a torn garment 
upon the earth, whence also it was taken. I then, becoming 
spirit, shall ascend to my God.’ (cf. Megasthenes, Frag. LV ; 
also Frags, xli, xliv, xlv.). 

The account doubtless had a real basis as we come across 
such types of Brahmanical sages not infrequently in the Bud- 
dhist texts. The true Brahmins are distinguished from the false 
ones by Buddha and are well spoken of by him. Such Brah- 
mins were expected to observe the five dhammas : truthfulness 
(saccam), austerity (tapam), continence (brahmacariyam), 
study (ajjhenam) and gifts (cagam) . These alone could conduce 
to the attainment of the Brahma- sahavyata or the attainment 
of the world of Brahman (Majjhima ii, 199 ; Sutta Nipata, 
p. 79). 

This makes it clear that in the Nanda-Maurya period both 
the Vedic ritual and Upanishadic thought were active forces in 
the religious life of the country. There were the kings, nobles 
and wealthy Brahmins who believed in the efficacy of sacrifices 
and used to perform them with the help of hired priests. These 
priests who formed a class by themselves were the custodians 
of the Vedic lore. Many of them were attracted by the fees 
for officiating at the sacrifices and had become almost profes- 
sional. But there were others too who saw no attractions in such 



RELIGION 


293 


gains and lived a simple life of austerities, far away from the 
inhabited localities, in the forests, striving hard to realise the 
Brahman through tapasya or asceticism. 

The ascetic movement 

The ascetics were known under the general name of Sramana. 
Although the Buddhists alone appropriated this title to them- 
selves in later times, the order of the Sramanas originated in the 
Brahmanical fold. It assumed a distinct shape in the Nanda- 
Maurya period. Already in the Upanishads there are references 
to the Brahmacarins and the Yatis besides the sacrificers and 
the hermits. For the first time in the law books there is mention 
of a full-fledged order called either Vaikhanasa or Vanaprastha 
(Gautama, III, 2 ; Apastamba, III, 9, 21, 1 ; Vasistha, VII, 2). 
This is the third among the four orders ( asrama ) in which a house- 
holder in his ripe old age is required to retire to the forest after 
leaving the family duties to his son. In this stage he lives like an 
anchorite, wears the bark of trees, eats fruits and passes his days 
in higher thoughts. The origin of the Sramanas goes back to 
this order of the Vaikhanasas. 

The Greek writers also give the same account of the Sramanas 
whom they call either Sarmanes or Sramnai. The most respected 
among them were the Hylobioi (rAoPto?), ‘the forest- 
dwellers 5 . It has been said about them : ‘They live in woods, 

where they subsist on leaves of trees and wild fruits, and wear 
garments made from the bark of trees’ (Megasthenes, Frag. 
XLI, 60). They observed the vow of chastity and abstained 
from drinking wine. They were so much esteemed that even 
the kings communicated with them through messengers in order 
to ascertain the causes of things and to get divine favour. 
These forest-dwellers were the same as those included in the 
Vaikhanasa order. 

Besides the Vanaprasthas, the Vasistha Dharmasutra (loc. 
cit.) mentions another order of ascetics called Parivrajaka. In 
the Buddhist texts they are depicted as wandering teachers who 
had specialised in ethics, philosophy, nature-lore and mysticism. 
Their only difference with other forest-dwellers probably con- 
sisted in their travelling from place to place and in enlightening 
the people on various matters concerning religion and philo- 



294 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sophy. In the early Buddhist texts there are frequent references 
to them and to special houses called paribbajaka-drama provided 
for them near the towns. The villagers and town-folk also 
provided them with meeting places called kotuhalasalas (Digha, 
III, pp. 36, ff., Divyavadana, p. 143). 

The Greek writers seem to have included them within the 
class of Sarmanes and philosophers. Speaking of some of 
the philosophers in one place Megastlu nes says : ‘To the people 
of India at large they render great benefits ; when gathered 
together at the beginning of the year, they forewarn the assem- 
bled multitudes about droughts and wet weather, and also about 
propitious winds, diseases, and other topics capable of profiting 
the hearers’ (Frag. I, 40) . The physicians also belonged to the 
Sramana class. Megasthenes tells us that they were engaged 
in the study of the nature of man and that they were simple 
in their habits. They had as their food either rice or barley 
meal which they would get either by begging or from those who 
entertained them as guests. They like other Sramanas practised 
asceticism. 

The Greek accounts as well as the Buddhist texts tell us that 
among the Sramanas there were also the diviners, sorcerers, and 
adepts in the rites and customs relating to the dead. They 
lived on begging in the villages and towns. Megasthenes informs 
us that there were also female ascetics in some classes of the 
Sramanas. Such female ascetics are mentioned in the Buddhist 
texts too. They are referred to as paribbajika and a special 
class of them as molibaddha paribbajika who used to go about 
in the company of male ascetics (Megasthenes Frag. XLI, 60; 
Majjhima, I, p. 305 ; Samyutta, III. pp. 238-240). 

There is no doubt that the order of the Sramanas and Pari- 
vrajakas was open to the people of all castes but there is no clear 
evidence as to whether they used to give up their caste distinc- 
tions and obligations after joining that order. Buddha is once 
decried by a Brahmin not so much for becoming a iSramana 
but for giving up his caste distinctions and thus becoming a 
vrsala (Vasalasutta, Sutta Nipata, p.21). In the Buddhist texts 
four kinds cf Sramanas are spoken of according to their religious 
conduct. They were : Maggajino — those who had reached 
the end of the way and attained Nirvana, Maggadcsako — 



RELIGION 


295 


those who show the way to the highest goal, Magge Jivati — 
those who live according to the way and MaggadusI — those who 
are vain, talkative, devoid of self-restraint and although wearing 
the dress of religious men destroy the good name of the line of 
their own teachers (Cundasutta, Sutta Nipata, p. 16). 

Closely allied to the general order of the Sramanas and 
Parivrajakas, there were some communities of religious men 
which claimed their origin from some well-known teachers 
contemporaneous with Buddha and followed some distinct 
religious beliefs. They were the sophists or Tirthikas (vadasila 
titthiya), the Ajivikas and the Niganthas (cf. Dhammikasutta, 
Sutta Nipata, v. 381). The famous Tirthika teachers in the 
time of Buddha were Purana Kassapa, Pakudha Kaccayana, 
Ajita Kesa-Kambala, Sanjaya Belatthiputta, Makkhali Gosala 
and Nigantha Nataputta. Of the religious orders founded by 
them only those of the last two teachers had lived up to the 
Nanda-Maurya period ; the followers of the first four teachers 
had probably merged into the general Sramana order 
for want of strong leaders. The religious order of Makkhali 
Gosala was the Ajivika and that of Nigantha Nataputta, the 
Nigantha (Nirgrantha). 

The Ajivika and Nirgrantha movements 

Although the origin of these two religious movements goes 
back to the times of Buddha, nothing precisely is known about 
their progress before the Maurya period. The word Makkhali 
which is used as a part of the name of Gosala, the founder of the 
Ajivika order, was probably the name of the order. It corres- 
ponds to the Sanskrit word Maskarin. Panini in one of his 
Sutras (VI, 1, 154) refers to the Maskarin as a class of parivra- 
jakas who carried a bamboo-staff (maskara) in their hands. 
They were also styled for this reason Ekadandin. While com- 
menting on the Sutra, Patanjali in his Mahabhdsya y refers 
to their fatalistic belief. The Buddhist and Jain texts too ascribe 
to them a fatalistic creed and say that they held that there is no 
cause either ultimate or remote, no reward or retribution, no 
such thing as power or energy and that all ‘are bent this way 
or that by their fate, by the necessary conditions of the class to 
which they belong, by their individual nature’ (Samarmaphala- 



296 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sutta, Dialogues of Buddha II, p. 71 where all the references to 
the principal Buddhist and Jaina texts have been collected). 

The Ajivikas appear to have attained seme importance in 
the time of Asoka as the latter mentions them side by side with 
the Buddhists and Nirgranthas and says that his Mahamatras 
had been asked to look after their welfare and progress as well 
(Pillar edict VII). In the 12th year of his reign, Asoka made 
gifts of two caves in the Barabar hills to the Ajivikas. The order 
seems to have maintained its importance throughout the 
Maurya period as one of the grandsons of Asoka, Dasaratha, is 
also known to have dedicated some caves in the Nagarj uni hills 
to the Ajivika order. 

The Ajivikas, as we have already seen, belonged to the 
Sramana class. Their order had assumed a distinct shape 
in later times but they must have inherited many of the Sramana 
traditions. As such they had among them both Brahmin and 
non-Brahmin recluses but there is no evidence of their having 
two different orders, Brahminical and non-Brohmanical. 

The Nirgrantha was also a Sramana order closely connected 
with the Ajivika. The later Jainism which claims descent 
from this ancient order has foisted many traditions on it but 
in spite of them, the ancient Nirgrantha order does not seem to 
have been a religious movement of any considerable importance 
in the Nanda-Maurya period. We learn from the Buddhist 
texts that the founder of the Nirgrantha order was Mahavira 
otherwise known as Nataputta (Jnatrkaputra) who was called a 
Nirgrantha because he belonged to that order of Sramanas. 
The name of the order meant ‘those who have destroyed the 
worldly ties’ and also ‘those who have given up their clothes.’ 
In the first sense they were pravrajita or the houseless ascetics 
and in the second sense, the naked ascetics. They were thus 
the same as the acelakas who are often mentioned in the Buddhist 
texts. In fact a slightly doubtful fragment of the account of 
Megasthenes, speaks of a sect of philosophers who used to go 
naked throughout their life and to say that the body had been 
given by God as a covering of the soul. They abstained from 
animal food and all food cooked by fire, being content to live on 
fruits picked up when they had dropped to the ground (Fragm* 
LI V) . These few points of their doctrines have a good deal of 


RELIGION 


297 


similarity with the doctrines ascribed to the Niganthas in the 
Buddhist texts. They believed in the existence of soul and 
desisted from killing animals and destroying even plants which 
according to them were endowed with life. They were besides 
naked ascetics. We may therefore consider the naked ascetics 
referred to in the account of Me gas then es as identical with the 
Nirgrantlias. Megasthenes, however, calls them Brahmin and 
notSramana. This might have been due to their standing near 
to the Brahmin philosophers in point of purity of conduct and 
religious beliefs and distinguishing themselves from the peripa- 
tetic monks who were also recruited from the lower classes. 

Except in the Buddhist texts there are not many references 
to the Nirgranthas in the contemporary literature. In the seventh 
pillar edict, Asoka mentions them along with the Ajivikas and 
the Buddhists to state that his Mahamatras were also occupied 
with their welfare. 

The tradition as embodied in the late Jain books, has, how- 
ever, a more connected history of the church to present. The 
Nirgrantha community was confined in the 4th century B. C. 
to Magadha and the heads of the church were in chronological 
order Sayambhava, Yaiobhadra, Sambhutivijaya and Bhadra- 
bahu. Bhadrabahu was a contemporary of Ghandragupta 
Maurya and had converted the latter to the Nirgrantha religion. 
While Bhadrabahu was the head of the church, a terrible famine 
broke out in Magadha and it became difficult for the monks to 
get alms. Bhadrabahu then decided to leave the country with 
a part of the community. Accordingly Sthulabhadra who was 
the son of Sakadala, the minister of the Nan da king, was 
appointed head of the Magadhan community. Bhadrabahu 
took a part of the community with him to the South w r here they 
settled down at Sravana Bcjgola in Mysore. It is further said 
that Ghandragupta also abdicated the throne at this time and 
followed his teacher to Sravana Be.lgola where he died of volun- 
tary starvation, as prescribed by the Nirgrantha religion. Sthula- 
bhadra for fear that the ancient traditions might be lost 
convoked a council of the monks at Pataliputra in which the 
sacred literature consisting of the 11 Angas and 14 Purvas was 
recited and fixed. Bhadrabahu returned to Magadha after 
twelve years, when the famine had passed away, with a section 



298 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of his followers. He found that the sacred texts collected in the 
Council of Pataliputra did not contain the authentic traditions 
of tke church and so he turned them down as spurious. The 
Magadhan monks had in the meantime begun to put on clothes 
and this practice was also declared by him as contrary to the 
original teachings of Mahavira. This denunciation however 
did not lead to an immediate schism in the church. The succes- 
sor of Sthulabhadra in the Magadhan church was Mahagiri. 
He remained in power till the end of the Maurya period. It 
was in his time that Samprati, the grandson and successor of 
Asoka, became a convert to the Nirgrantha faith and tried to 
imitate his grandfather in the matter of the propagation of the 
faith which he professed. 

The Kalpasutra (translation, S.B.E. XXII, pp. 288 ff.) gives 
a list of the Ganas and Sakhas that originated in the 4th and 3rd 
centuries B.C. within the Nirgrantha community. According 
to it, one of the disciples of Bhadrabahu, named Godasa founded 
the Godasa-gana which divided itself into four Sakhas namely : 
Tamraliptika, Kotivarslya, Pundravardhamya and Dasl- 
kharbatika. The first three are well known names of places 
in Bengal. The tradition would thus have us believe that the 
Nirgrantha religion, in the beginning of the 3rd century B.C., 
had spread to Bengal to such an extent as to lead to the formation 
of local subsects. The Kalpasutra further says that Mahagiri 
had eight disciples, two of whom, Uttara and Balissaha, founded a 
a Gana named Uttarabalissaha. This Gana also divided itself 
into four Sakhas namely : Kausamblka, Sautaptika, KautumbinI 
and Gandanagari. 

Another tradition recorded in the Niryukti of the Avasyaka - 
sutra speaks of a certain number of schisms in the Church. The 
leaders of the schismatic monks are said to have maintained 
philosophical views different from these taught by Mahavira. 
Three such schisms occurred in the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C. 
The first of these was led by one Asadhasena who, we are told, 
carried the doctrine of syadvada to an impossible extreme and also 
maintained that t icre was no difference between accomplished 
ascetics and gods. The second was led by Asvamitra who 
refused to admit the doctrine of ksanika, and the third by Ganga 
who admitted the perception of two sensations simultaneously. 



RELIGION 


299 


Confirmation of these traditions is however lacking. Two 
inscriptions of Sravana Belgoja, of course, refer to Bhadrababu 
and Chandragupta but they belong only to the 10th century 
A. D. Asoka docs not take any special interest in the religion 
of his grandfather except ordering his officials to look after them 
as after the Ajlvikas and other religious communities. It should 
also be remembered that although Asoka and his grandson make 
gifts of cave dwellings to the Ajivikas they do not do anything 
of the kind to the Nirgranthas. As to the spread of the Nir- 
grantha religion to Bengal, the Divyavadana speaks of their 
presence in Pundravardhana (North Bengal) in the time of 
Asoka but only as parivrajakas and not as members of an orga- 
nised church. As to the schisms, it may be noted that the esta- 
blished Jaina philosophy does not bear the stamp of the new 
philosophical doctrines which their leaders are said to have 
introduced. Besides the doctrine of ksanika , which Asvamitra is 
said to have opposed, was not a Jaina doctrine but belonged 
to Buddhism. Under these circumstances it is impossible to 
accept the traditional story as historical. 

It therefore appears that the two religious orders, the 
Ajlvika and Nirgrantha, were still small local communities of 
Magadha, not powerful enough to demand that protection 
from the state which Buddhism enjoyed. The Nirgrantha 
order was even less important than the Ajlvika but it managed 
to survive the latter up to later times and to rise into greater 
importance. 


Buddhism 

Although originally a Sramana movement, Buddhism had 
emerged out of it in the 4th century B.G. as a distinct and powerful 
religion endowed with great potentiality for expansion. 
But the extent of this expansion before the time of the Emperor 
Asoka is still a matter of conjecture. Its activity in pre-Aiokan 
times seems to have been confined to Kosala and Magadha but 
small communities of brethren had probably come into exis- 
tence in the west in Mathura and Ujjayinl. The traditional 
account of the second Buddhist council which is said to have 
taken place 100 years after the Nirvana of Buddha at Vaisali, 
refers to invitations sent to the patheyya monks and to the 



300 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


communitiesinsuch distant places as Avanti, KausambI, SankaSya 
and Kanauj. Patheyya meant the western monks including 
probably the community of Mathura. The Asokan legends 
attach great importance to the monastery of Natabhata on the 
Urumunda hill at Mathura, as Upagupta, the spiritual guide of 
the Emperor, and Sanavasa, the teacher of Upagupta, both 
belonged to that institution. The legends at least show that 
Mathura had attained some importance in the Buddhist church 
already before the time of Asoka. 

The most outstanding events in the history of the church 
in this period were the two councils, the second and the third. 
The second council was held, according to all traditions, one 
hundred years after the Nirvana, at Vaisall. It is said to 
haveoriginated on account ofsome difference in points of monastic 
discipline. The monks of Vaisall had declared as admissible 
ten new points viz. : 1. storing of salt in a horn, 2. the 

taking of the midday meal when the sun’s shadow shows two 
finger- breadths after noon, 3. the going to some village and there 
eating fresh food, 4. residing in the same parish and yet holding 
the uposatha separately, 5. sanction of a solemn act in an in- 
complete chapter, 6. (unconditional) following of a precedent, 
7. the partaking of unchurned milk, 8. the use of unfermen- 
ted toddy, 9. the use of a mat without fringes (not conforming 
with the model prescribed), 10. to accept gold and silver. 

This action was not however approved by other monks and 
hence a council was called at Vaisall. This council after a long 
deliberation appointed a committee cf eight elders, four of them 
hailed from the east and the other four from the west. Among 
the former was Sabbakami, thera of Vaisali who, it is said, had 
received his ordination 120 years earlier and among the latter 
was Sambhuta Sanavasa of Mathura who was probably the 
same as the teacher of Upagupta. The ten points of the monks 
of VaiSall were declared to be against the rules. In a plenary 
session of the council, the Vinaya was rehearsed. The Bhiksus 
who were excommunicated are also said to have convened 
another meeting which was a great council (Mahasangiti). 
Henceforth the followers of the wrong views who were then most 
probably more numerous came to be known as the Mahasan- 
ghika. 



RELIGION 


301 


So far, the story seems to be generally reliable but the diffi- 
culty arises when the question of chronology comes in. The 
tradition says that the council was held in the time of Asoka, 
or Kalasoka, the son of Sisunaga. But history does not know of 
any such king. Attempts have been made to identify Kalasoka 
with Kakavarna who is mentioned in the Puranic lists as the son 
of Sisunaga but the identification is based on unconvincing 
grounds. The Pali as well as Sanskrit Buddhist sources say that 
Asoka flourished one hundred years after the Nirvana and that 
until he embraced the Buddhist faith he was living a life of black 
and sinful deeds. He was then a Candasoka or a Kamasoka 
but after his conversion he became a Dharmasoka. It is this 
Asoka then who is contemplated in the traditional account of the 
second council. Some of the monks who took a leading part 
in the conference seem to have been contemporaneous with 
the Maurya emperor whereas others belonged to one generation 
earlier. 

Although the story of the second council in its present form is 
a garbled version and does not give a faithful picture of the 
event, it, however, seems that it had a historical basis. A 
Vinaya council had certainly been held at Vaisali and its ses- 
sion might have been necessitated by the arbitrary conduct of 
the local monks, but the time when it was held cannot be fixed 
with any amount of certainty. It is not impossible that it was 
held during the earlier part of the reign of Asoka. This council 
led to the first schism in the church and the foundation of the 
Mahasanghika school. 

The account of the third council which was held at Patali- 
putra is still more confused. It was not a general council but a 
party meeting of the Elders — the Theravadins. The Ceylonese 
tradition says that it was held 18 years after the coronation of 
Asoka but there is no confirmation of this fact in the edicts of the 
emperor. As it was a meeting of the Theravadins, the Mahasan- 
ghikas were excluded from it. The Ceylonese account of the 
council runs as follows : 

‘When 236 years had elapsed after Nirvana, sixty thousand 
monks dwelt in the Asokarama. Sectarians of different des- 
criptions, all of them w r earing the kasaya, ruined the Doctrine 
of the Jina. It was then that Tissa Moggaliputta convoked a 



302 age of the nandas and mauryas 

council, attended by 1000 monks. Having destroyed the false 
doctrines and subdued many shameless people, he restored the 
true faith, and propounded the Abhidhamma treatise Kathd- 
vatthu. It was from him that Maheudra, the future apostle of 
Buddha, learnt the 5 nikayas, the 7 books ol the Abhidhamma 
and the whole Vinaya.’ 

The account, as may be seen, has a pronounced sectarian 
tendency and tries to prove the originality and superiority of the 
Theravada or the Vibhajyavada school. r Ihis clearly shows 
that it was a party meeting of which the historicity may not be 
disputed, but the story of the compilation of the Kathdvatthu , 
which again presupposes the existence of the entire Pali canon 
consisting of the Vinaya, the 5 nikayas and six other Abhidhamma 
works must be made an exception. 

The history of the Buddhist church in this period was not 
in all appearance an undistrubed one. The church was gra- 
dually losing its unity on account of its expansion and for want 
of regular communication between the various distant commu- 
nities. Local influences were slowly affecting their conduct 
and shaping them in different ways. These tendencies ulti- 
mately gave rise to different Buddhist schools. The community 
of VaiSali, as we have alrea.dy seen, formed itself into a school 
either before the time of Asoka or in a period when Asoka had 
not yet taken up the cause of Buddhism. Under Asoka’s patro- 
nage, the Buddhist community of Pataliputra, which pretended 
to be more loyal tc the teachings of Buddha, reorganised itself 
and tried to check the schismatic tendency in the church . It 
is probably under their influence that Asoka advised his officials 
to see that nobody might destroy the unity of the Sahgha. The 
Sarnath Pillar edict contains the follow ing order of the emperor 
to his officers at Pataliputra : 

‘....the Sahgha cannot be divided by any one. But 
indeed the monk or nun who shall break up the Sahgha should 
be caused to put cn white robes and to reside in non- 
residence.’ 

The same instruction w T as also issued by the emperor to the 
Mahamatras of Kausambl. In the Sanchi version of the edict, 
the instruction is given in a slightly different form : ‘The Sahgha 
of both monks and nuns is made united as long as (my) sons 



RELIGION 


302 


and great-grandsons (shall reign) and as long as the moon ?nd 
the sun (shall shine).* 

The compelling of a monk or a nun to put on white robes 
and to reside in non-residence meant expulsion from the com- 
munity, a punishment prescribed in the Vinayas for the offence 
of Sarighabheda. Asoka certainly did not issue the edict to 
give publicity to the already existing Vinaya rule concerning 
Sahghabheda. The church must have shown serious symp- 
toms of disintegration and this was a special measure to safeguard 
its unity. The tradition confirms that Asoka’s fears were justi- 
fied. It is said that during the third century of the Nirvana, 
a number of schools such as Sarvastivada, Mahisasaka, Dharma- 
guptaka etc. made their appearance within the orthodox section 
of the church (Theravada). The Mahasarighika school which 
had long separated from it was zrlso split up into a number of 
schools. 

The greatest event in the history of Buddhism in this period 
was the conversion of Asoka. The legendary accounts, although 
marred by many exaggerated claims of the community, enable 
us to give a connected picture of Asoka as a Buddhist. The 
traditions are confirmed by the inscriptions and both have 
been reviewed in the account of the reign of Asoka given 
above. 

Asoka’s patronage must have contributed to the spread ©f 
Buddhism not only within the empire but also to distant lands 
even in his lifetime. We learn from the edicts that he himself 
had given a lead in this direction. Throughout his empire he 
had circulated instructions on the Dhamma, and caused them 
to be inscribed on rocks and pillars overlooking the highroads 
so that they could attract the notice cf his subjects. We have 
seen that he had specially advised his officials to afford facilities 
to his subjects and to encourage them so that they might follow 
the Dhamma. When he says that he had achieved the conquest 
by law (dhamma-vijaya) both within bis empire and outside, 
he probably means tnat he had entrusted his officers with this 
mission within his own empire and deputed missionaries to the 
foreign countries. 

The credit of the initiative in this direction is attributed by 
the Ceylcness chronicles to Tissa Moggaliputta. In the inscrip- 



304 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


tions Asoka speaks of the missions as his own. To whomsoever 
the initiative might have been due, either to Tissa Moggali- 
putta, as the tradition claims, or to Asoka himself under the 
inspiration of the Sarigha, it is quite conceivable that after the 
reorganisation of the Magadhan church in the third council 
and with the co-operation of the emperor himself, efforts were 
made to carry Buddhism to distant countries. The success 
of the first missionary activity might not have been very large so 
far as the foreign countries were concerned but within the Maurya 
empire they must have been crowned with immense success. 
The epigraphic records and Buddhist monuments of the post- 
Asokan times bear clear testimony to it. 

Theistic Movements 

The rise of some of the new theistic movements which later 
on became the religion of the people may be placed in this period. 
The absence of any noteworthy references to such movements in 
the early Buddhist texts probably shows that they were far from 
being established religions in this age. The Brahmanism repre- 
sented in the texts was a Vedic cult. Hence it seems probable 
that the theistic movements were started only when Buddhism 
had become an established religion of the country. Buddhism 
was on the way to becoming a religion of Bhakti. Buddha 
had been made the object cf profound devotion and his relics 
and symbols had begun to be worshipped. In this form the 
Buddhist faith had a direct appeal to the common people who 
had so long been only the uninterested spectators of the occa- 
sional sacrifices performed by the nobles and the unwilling 
workers for them. 

The first trace of the existence of such a movement is found 
in the grammar of Panini. In his Sutra iv. 3. 98 Panini states 
that ‘The affix vun is affixed to the name of Vasudeva and 
Arjuna in the sense of the worshipful one’ ( Vasudevarjunabhyam 
vun). Thus the derivative forms, Vasudevaka and Arjunaka 
mean respectively : The devotee of Vasudeva’ and The devotee 
of Arjuna’. While commenting on this aphorism patanjali 
points out that in this case the names are probably not to be 
taken as the names of the Kshatriya heroes but as the designation 
of the tatrabhavat — The adorable one.’ 



RELIGION 


305 


It is therefore almost certain that the cult of Vasudeva and 
Arjuna were current at least in the Punjab in the age of Panini. 
It is now recognised that Panini was acquainted with the Maha- 
bharata story, as he refers not only to the heroes depicted in the 
story but also to the epic itself. This epic was the Pandu story. 
The two heroes, Vasudeva and Arjuna, must have been deified 
in it. 

Vasudeva or Krishna is mentioned by the Greek writers 
under the name Heracles. Megasthenes (Frag. XLI) tells us : 
‘Heracles was worshipped by the inhabitants of the plains, 
especially by the Sourasenai, an Indian tribe possessed of two 
cities, Methora (Mathura) and Kleisobora (Krishnapura ?) 
and who had a large navigable river, the Jobares (Jumna) 
flowing through their territories.’ Gurtius informs us that 
‘an image of Heracles was carried in front of the enemy of Porus 
as he advanced against Alexander.’ 

The epigraphic records of the second century B.C. amply 
confirm that the cult of Vasudeva was being widely followed 
not only by the people of the country but also by some foreign 
settlers. The famous Besnagar inscription records that Helio- 
dorus, the ambassador of a Greek king named Antialcidas, 
was raising a Garuda pillar at Vidisa in honour of Vasudeva, 
‘the god of gods’. Almost in the same period and in the same 
place, another devotee of Vasudeva named Gautamiputra 
erected a Garuda column in front of the temple of the Bhagvat. 
The Ghasundi inscription speaks cf a puja stone wall for 
the worship of Bhagavat Samkarsana and Vasudeva. 
Samkarsana and Vasudeva are also mentioned in the Nanaghat 
cave inscription among the objects of adoration. 

It is therefore permissible to think that the cult of Vasudeva 
must have originated at least a century earlier in order to enable 
its followers to carry the faith to distant parts of the country. 
Vasudeva was no longer a hero-god like Arjuna, as he seems 
to have been in the time of Panini, but the greatest god, the god 
of gods, as Heliodorus would have us believe. This evolution 
m the conception of the god must have taken a fairly long time. 

As to the cult of Samkarsana, it is difficult to say whether it 
had originated in the earlier period along with the cult of Vasu- 
deva. Samkarsana was the elder brother of Vasudeva and a 


306 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


member of the Vrshni race. But he does not play the same impor- 
tant role in the Great Epic as his younger brother. He appears 
as a hero, endowed with great power which he seldom exercises, 
his sole concern being wine. In the Arthasastra there is men- 
tion of the votaries of Samkarsana. It is said : ‘Spies disguised 
as ascetics with shaved head or braided hair and pretending 
to be worshippers of god Samkarsana, may mix their sacrificial 
beverage with the juice oimadana plant (and give to the cowherds) 
and carry off the cattle 5 (translation, p. 485). This might 
arouse a suspicion that the cult of Samkarsana was in vogue 
among the cowherds or the Abhiras but the inscriptions of the 
second century B.C. already referred tc do not allow any such 
suspicion as Samkarsana is ranked there with Vasudeva and 
is an object of adoration even with the higher classes. 

The contemporary Greek writers speak of a god named 
Dionysus along with Heracles. Megasthenes tells us that the 
Oxydrakai claimed descent from Dionysus, ‘because the vine 
grew in their country, and their processions were conducted 
with great pomp, and their kings on going forth to war and 
on other occasions marched in Bacchic fashion with drums 
beating 5 (Frag, XLVI). Megasthenes also informs us that the 
worshippers of Dionysus lived on mountains and observed cer- 
tain customs which were Bacchanalian. They dressed in muslin, 
wore turbans, used perfumes and arrayed themselves in gar- 
ments dyed of bright colours (Frag. XLI). The cult of Dio- 
nysus with its Bacchanalian features reminds us of the cult 
of Samkarsana. 

Asoka refers to pashamdas in the sense of religious sects. They 
include the Brahmanas, Sramanas as well as other sects but 
it is not clear if they included the followers of these new cults 
as well. In the ninth pillar edict, Asoka speaks of the various 
mamgalas or auspicious rites performed by the people in sick- 
ness, marriage, birth of offspring and at the time of undertaking 
a journey. These mamgalas were evidently domestic rites 
and no religious cults are meant by them. Asoka, we have seen, 
had introduced certain edifying shows for the instruction of the 
people in the Buddhist law. It is probable that similar other 
shows for the edification of the non-Buddhist popular cults were 
also known in the country. We have already discussed the 



RELIGION 


307 


reference made by Curtius to the image of Heracles being carried 
in the front of the army of Porus. A curious passage of the 
Mahabhasya of Patahjali mentions the images of gods ( arced ) 
set up by the Mauryas to obtain gold. All this shows that 
images of gods and their cults were known in the country in the 
Maurya period but on a very limited scale and among the com- 
mon people. They were still looked down on by the aristocratic 
followers of the Vedic cult. 



CHAPTER XI 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

LANGUAGE 

By 600 B.C., a little before Buddha, the Aryan speech would 
appear to have spread from Gandhara to Videha and Campa 
in Eastern India, and to have been the common language of 
Indian Aryandom of the times that embraced the Mahajana- 
padas. The hill and forest tracts of Central India just to the 
south of the tracts watered by the Ganges were unquestionably 
Austric and Dravidian in speech ; also Bengiil and Assam and 
Orissa ; and within the Ar yandom of the upper Gangetic area 
and the Punjab, particularly within the former, there were 
still large areas, or small pockets, of non-aryan speech which 
were fast becoming smaller and smaller. In the Jatakas for 
instance, we read of Candala villages where they spoke the 
the Candala speech, and we are told of an incident in which 
a Candala masquerading as a Brahmin was discovered when he 
unconsciously cried out giligili in the Candala language when 
he put some very hot rice-milk within his mouth in a Brahman 
feast which he had joined. 

For the linguistic situation in India during the Nanda and 
Mauryan periods, we have literary evidence only for the Nanda 
period, and both literary and epigraphical for the Mauryan 
period. The Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads, the 
dates of which cannot be satisfactorily determined, cover at least 
600 years, from 800 B.C. to 200 B C. ;and the Buddhist and Jaina 
canonical literatures also, in their substance, refer to the period 
immediately before the Nandas ] and conditions during the Nanda 
age not being very different from those obtaining a few 
centuries earlier, the evidence from the Brahmanas and other 
works mentioned above can be regarded as equally applicable 
to it. The Brahmanical Sutras, Yaska, Panini, Katyayana, 
Patafijali, Kautilya, Vatsyayana, probably Bharata, and above 
all, the Mahdbhdrata and the Rdmdyaiia — all these belong 
either wholly or partly (as in the case of the two epics) to the 
Nanda and Mauryan periods. On the epigraphic side, we have 



LANGUAGE 


309 


to take note of the earliest Brahml inscriptions which are few 
and very small, and Brahml legends on the early coins and seals, 
some of which may be pre-Maurya ; and the inscriptions of 
Asoka and his successors. Post-Maurya inscriptions for a couple 
of centuries after the extinction of the Maurya dynasty also 
have some value for these periods. 

The Aryan speech during the Nanda and Maurya periods 
would appear to have been current, in its various local or dia- 
lectal forms, as the language of the land, from the Punjab to the 
eastern boundary of Bihar, which thus became the true home of 
the Aryan speech in India, the land of thegreat Aryan states : and 
from this area, where Brahmanism was developing as the result 
of a synthesis of the worlds of the Aryan and the non-Aryan, 
the Aryan speech was spreading south, mainly along the west, 
through Rajputana and Malwa and Sindh ; and it had already 
been established in Gujarat ; and colonies of Aryan speakers 
would seem to have been formed in what is now northern Maha- 
rashtra, as far down as the Godavari. The belt of forest land 
in the east, corresponding to present day Eastern Madhya Pra- 
desh and Chota Nagpur, harboured rather backward groups 
of Non-Arvan tribes, the ancestors of the present day Kol 
(Munda) peoples and of Dra.vidian tribes like the Gonds, the 
Oraons and the Maler, and effectively checked, though only for 
a time, the penetration of the Aryan language into these tracts. 
Although the conquest of Kalinga (corresponding to Orissa of 
the present day) by Asoka in the third century B.C. opened up 
this area to the Aryan language, it was some time before the 
latter could establish itself in Eastern India — in Bengal proper, 
and then (by a double current from Bengal and from Kosala 
or Eastern U. P. through Mahakosala or Eastern Madhya Pra- 
desh) into Orissa. The main line of North Indian Aryan 
linguistic expansion into South India thus from the second half 
of the first millennium B.C. has always been along the west — 
from the Midland through Rajputana and Malwa ; and 
subsequently North Indian Muslim expansion into the Deccan 
carrying with it the Hindi speech followed the same route, in 
both pre-Mogul and Mogul times. 

From the Rrahmanas we find that probably a century 
or two before Buddha, North Indian Aryandom included the 



310 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


following ten states— Gandhara, Kekaya, Madra, Usinara, 
Matsya, Kuru, Pancala, Kasi, Kosala and Videha. These 
included practically the entire Aryan-speaking world of say 
700 B.C., and these states fell under three groups — Udlcya or 
Northern (including Gandhara or the northern part of the present 
N. W. Frontier province and probably also the continuous parts 
of Eastern Afghanistan, Kekaya or North-Western Punjab east 
of the Gandhara country including part of the Sind Sagar Doab, 
and the Jeep and Rechna Doabs and Madra in two groups— the 
Uttara or Northern Madras probably in Kashmir and the 
Dakshina or Southern Madras in North Central Punjab consi- 
sting of part of the Rechna and Bari Doabs), Madhyadesiya or 
the Midland (comprising Usinara in the west and north, corres- 
ponding to N. E. Punjab and N. W. Uttar Pradesh, Matsya 
orN. E. Rajputana, and Kuru and Pancala or Western U. P.) 
and Pracya or the Eastern (Kosala or Oudh, Kasi or Eastern 
U. P., and Videha or Northern Bihar). Other States within 
this Aryan tract also came to be established quickly enough, 
Salva, connected with Matsya, and Magadha and Anga in 
Bihar to the South of the Ganges. It would appear that the 
division of Aryan India into these three tracts, Udlcya , Madhya - 
desa and Pracya , had some basis in dialectal differences. They 
correspond roughly to the three-fold division of the Indus valley 
and the upper Gangetic valley which is still prevalent — 
Punjab , Packaha, and Purab , corresponding roughly to the 
Hindki or Lahnda or Western Punjabi and Eastern Punjabi 
tracts, to the Western Hindi area, and to the tract of the country 
in the east where Kosali or Eastern Hindi and the Bihari 
speeches are spoken. Northern, or North-Western, Midland 
or Central, and Eastern — these formed the three dialect areas 
of the Aryan tract by 500 B. C., and to these three we shall have 
probably to add a fourth — the Dakshinatya or Southern, which 
at this ancient period was probably not much different from 
the dialect area of the Midland from where the Aryan language 
was spreading through Rajputana and Malwa into Gujarat 
and the trans-Vindhyan tracts. 

About the speech of the Udlcya tract, the popular opinion 
in the Midland in the age of Brahmanas has been thus expressed 
in the Kaushitaki Brdhmana ( vii 6) : tasmad udicyam prajna- 


LANGUAGE 


311 


tatard vag udyaie : udahcau eva yanti vac am sikshitum ; yo vd tata 
agacchatiy tasya vd susrus haute ‘ therefore speech is uttered in 
the North with mere discernment ; they go to the northern 
lands to learn speech ; and people like to listen to him who comes 
from there.’ Thus the people of the other tracts acknowledged 
the Aryan language as spoken in the north-west as being the best 
and purest form of it. About Pracya or the east some stray and 
rather obscure references in the Brahmanas would suggest that 
the Aryan speech was becoming altered or debased there : it was 
the land inhabited by the Vratyas, who did not follow the Vedic 
religion — they were adikshitas or uninitiated people, but spoke 
the language of those who were dikshitas or followers of Vedic 
rites and customs, and at the same time declared words or 
sentences not articulated with difficulty as being articulated 
with difficulty (a.durukta-vdkyam duruktam ahuh , a-dikshitd 

dikshita-vacam vadanti ). This statement about the speech of the 
Vratyas of the East would appear to suggest the presence 
already of Middle Indo-Aryan or Prakritic habits of speech, 
which found the characteristic consonant combinations of the 
old Aryan speech difficult, and brought in consonant assimilation 
and cerebralisation on a large scale. In the Brahmanas there 
is no hint about a Dakshinatya or southern land as being 
largely inhabited by Aryan speakers, and nothing about any 
dialectal or linguistic speciality there. 

The assumption is quite allowable that by the time of 
the Buddha, the spoken Aryan language had deviated con- 
siderably from the Old Indo-Aryan norm as presented by 
the speech of the Rigveda, and had developed at least three 
distinct dialects — a Northern or North-Western, a Central, 
and an Eastern. This last was already fairly in the Middle 
Indo-Aryan or Prakrit stage ; but the North-Western was 
conservative, and was regarded as the purest form of the 
Aryan speech, the well of Aryan undefiled and it was ex- 
ceedingly likely that in the Udlcya as the nidus of the 
Aryan people in India there was the largest settled Aryan 
population, and consequently the language was better preser- 
ved ; the more Aryan speakers were penetrating further into 
the East, among masses of non-Aryans, the more they were 
getting to be smaller in numbers compared with the surround- 



312 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


in g non-Aryans, and the Aryan language, in a non-Aryan en- 
vironment that was growing stronger and stronger, was sus- 
ceptible to a more rapid change and to change along new lines 
than in the North-west. 

Epigraphical records of the 4th-3rd centuries B.C. bear 
out the occurrence of the situation as deduced from literary 
references — only some new developments had in the meanwhile 
taken place. The oldest Brahmi inscriptions including of 
course those of Asoka give us a sufficiently clear idea as to the 
linguistic conditions for Aryan India ; Asoka’s inscrip- 
tions, giving the same texts in as many as three distinct local 
dialects have been aptly described as the first ‘Linguistic Survey 
of India’. In the Asokan documents, we have : (i) a Prakrit or 
Aryan speech of the North-West, as in the edicts at Mansehra 
and Shahbazgarhi. This is based on the Udicya dialect of 
the earlier period, and its phonetics even in the 3rd century 
B.C. shows that it had deviated the least from the Old Indo- 
Aryan norm, and it thus bears out the encomium of the earlier 
author of the Brahmanas that speech here was prajndta-tcrd , 
more discerning. Northern and North-Western Punjab thus 
showed a great deal of conservatism in its language, even as late 
as the 3rd century B.C. We may even say that it was still in 
the Old Aryan stage (at least in its phonetics, retaining as it did 
a good many conjunct consonants, and the three sibilants 
f, s , s), while the speech of the East had deviated most, (ii) 
There is a Prakrit of the East, found in Eastern ins- 
criptions of ASoka and elsewhere. This form of Indo-Aryan 
speech has deviated exceedingly from Old Indo-Aryan 
norm, and besides it shows phonetic peculiarities (e.g. use 
of only l and no r) and some forms (e.g. - e from - ah 
rather than - o in the case of masculine nouns ending in - a ) 
which are not found in the other dialectal areas. It is exceed- 
ingly likely that this Prakrit of the East was the language 
of Asoka’s court at Pataliputra, and the edicts of Asoka 
were first written at Pataliputra in this dialect, and sent 
to the provinces for publication by being engraved on stone at 
prominent places. Where the local dialect differed so appre- 
ciably from this court speech as to make the latter not easy to 
follow locally, as for example in the North-West (Mansehra and 



LANGUAGE 


313 


Shahbazgarhi) and in the South-West (Girnar), the edicts were 
rendered in the local dialect ; but this rendering was not very 
careful, but rather haphazard as a good many forms and expres- 
sions from the court dialect were allowed to find a place in the 
versions in the North-western and South-western dialects. 
Where the local dialect did not differ so much as to make the 
Pracya court dialect unintelligible, it would appear that the 
latter was employed, as much as in the home districts in Eastern 
India. Thus in Rajputana, in Western U. P., in North-western 
U. P. (Kalsi), and in Central U. P. (Allahabad), the Eastern 
dialect is employed as much as in Eastern U. P., Benares (Sar- 
nath) and Bihar (Lauriya, Rummindei, Barabar caves). A few 
special characteristics may occasionally be noted, e.g., at 
Kalsi ; the exact reason for this is not known. It would appear 
that the use of Eastern Prakrit, the Com t dialect of Bihar and 
Benares, was like that of the use of Hindi (a form of Western 
Hindi of Western U. P.) in Eastern U. P. and Bihar. 
Generally it has been the language of the Midland that has 
prevailed in the East, but in the Asoka inscriptions, 
owing to the political importance of Magadha as the home 
province of the empire, for the first and last time we have 
an Eastern speech established as the official language in the 
Midland. 

In tracts far away from Arya-land, where Dravidian and also 
probably Kol (Munda) languages were spoken, the edicts were 
published in this Eastern official speech, e.g. at Dhauli and 
Jaugada in the Kalinga country, which was both Dravidian 
(old Telugu, old Kannada) and Kol in speech, and at Siddhapur, 
Maski and Yerragudi where the language was equally Dravidian 
(Old Kannada). 

This Eastern speech was unquestionably the same for the 
upper classes in Kosala, Kasi, Videha and Magadha ; it was the 
language of the Buddha, who called himself a Kshatriyaof Kosala 
(Kosala Khattiya), and of Mahavlra also ; it was the language 
of Asoka and also of Chandragupta and the Nandas. The 
oldest Buddhist canon, as Sylvain Levi and Heinrich Luders 
amply demonstrated, was composed in this Eastern Prakrit, and 
notin Pali. The Pali canon appears not yet to have been 
known- — at least, sufficiently known, in Magadha. Asoka, when 



314 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


he quoted from the Buddhist texts, quotes from a version in 
this Eastern dialect, and not from the Pali. 

Epigraphical evidence from the 4th century B.G. shows 
that in Magadha had appeared a local form of this Eastern 
Prakrit which deviated in two of its sounds from what may be 
called the standard Pracya or Eastern Prakrit ; it had palatal 
s for the dental of the latter (<i, sh , s of old Indo- Aryan), 
and probably it had developed a palatalised ky from k after a 
palatal vowel. This specialised Magadhan form of Pracya was 
in all likelihood current among the masses of the people, of less 
exalted ranks, and the s pronounciation was evidently looked 
upon as something vulgar and uneducated, judging from the fact 
than in later times in the Sanskrit drama the s dialect was rele- 
gated to the least exalted characters. 

(iii) The third dialect of Asoka is that of the South-west 
as in Surashtra or peninsular Gujarat (Girnar). This is well- 
established there, and if the Gujarat speech of the 3rd century 
B.C. is derived from that of the Midland, then in Asoka’s Girnar 
edict we can see a form of the Midland speech, slightly modified 
perhaps from the genuine Midland dialect of the Mathura area, 
given a recognition far away from its own home district — for, 
as we have just seen, in the Midland proper the Eastern official 
language was used in inscriptions. 

This roughly is the situation for the spoken dialects of Aryan 
India during the Nanda and Maurya periods. Asoka employed 
them in his inscriptions as already the Eastern speech appears 
to have attained a certain literary position through the Buddhist 
and Jaina canons being redacted in it ; and the use of the North- 
Western and South-Western speeches was just a concession to 
two distant and important dialects the speakers of which would 
find difficulty in following the Pataliputra court speech. We 
know that the Greeks when they first came to India were con- 
fined to the area of the Udlcya or North-Western dialect, a dia- 
lect which Asoka’s officials employed in the inscriptions at 
Mansehra and Shahbazgarhi. That this North-Western 
dialect retained seme archaic or old Indo-Aryan characters is 
borne out not only by the evidence from the Brahmanas and from 
the inscriptions of Asoka, but also from the Greek transcriptions 
of Indian names heard from speakers of this dialect. Thus 



LANGUAGE 


315 


names like Sandrakottos, Sandraphagos, Prasioi, Eronnaboas, 
Brachmanes, Ottorakorrhas, Amitrokhates or Amitrokhades and 
Palibothra are Greek renderings of * Chandrakupta (a genuine 
North-Western form for Gandragupta, with - k - for -g- charac- 
terising the Darada or Pisaca Prakiit of the North-West), 
Candrabhaga, Pracya, Hiranyavaha, Brahmana, Uttarakuru, 
Amitraghata and * Pallibutra for *Pad s liputra= Pataliputra as 
heard in the north-west, where, as partially indicated by the 
Mansehra and Shahbazgarhi and later North-western inscrip- 
tions, groups like/>r, tr , kr , br , Jr, gr , did not assimilate the r. 

The relationship between the Asokan dialects and the later 
forms of Indo-Aryan can be tentatively indicated as follows : 

1 . The Ncrth-Western dialect — from this originated Hindi, 
Lahnda, or Western Punjabi, Eastern Punjabi (the latter strongly 
influenced by the Midlands peech) and Sindhi. This N. W. 
dialect was taken by Indian settlers to Chinese Turkistan 
where it was in use for some centuries as an official speech, in the 
southern part of the country. 

2. The Midland dialect : Not represented in the Asoka 
inscriptions, buttheGirnar dialect is probably a form of Midland. 
From this originated the Western Hindi dialect (partially influ- 
enced by the North-Western dialect), and Rajasthani-Gujarati. 

We do not know anything about an Aryan speech being 
current in the Deccan, but evidently from Malava and Gujarat 
and Varad (h)a-tata (Varhad or Berar) Aryan dialects, mostly 
from the Sauraseni area, were spreading into Maharashtra. 

3. The Eastern dialect. The standard form of it, at first 
current all over Eastern U. P. (Oudh etc.) and Bihar, differen- 
tiated into Eastern Pracya (Magadhi) and Western Pracya 
(Ardha-Magadhi). The latter came strongly under Midland 
influence, and became finally transformed into the Kosali or 
Eastern Hindi dialects (Awadhi, Bagheli, Chattisgarhi) . The 
former, Magadhi, spread into Bengal and Assam and Orissa, 
and it is the source of Bhojpuri, Magahi-Maithili, Bengali- 
Assamese and Oriya. 

There is no evidence from the Nan da and Maurya documents 
about the spread of the Aryan tongue into the Himalayan regions. 
Probably the Dardic speaking Aryans (Khasas and other tribes) 
were penetrating into the Central Himalayan areas (the present 



316 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Western Pahari and Eastern Pahari regions), and their Dardic 
Khasa speech was later overlaid by Indo-Aryan from the Mid- 
land. 

As for literary Indo-Aryan of the Nanda and Maurya periods 
we have to reckon first with classical Sanskrit, which became 
fully established as the language of Brahmanism and Brahman 
organisation before the Nanda regime. It was at first confined 
to the Brahman schools, and as a language, in the 5th century 
B. C. w'hen Panini flourished in the Udieya region , it was suffi- 
ciently near to the spoken dialect of Panini’s home districts as 
to merit from him the name Laukika i.e. ‘popular or current’ 
as differentiated from the elder Vedic dialect which he called 
Chandasa or Chandas i.e., ‘poetic speech ’ which was tanta- 
mount to ‘archaic speech’. Classical Sanskrit was not the 
creation of the Udieya people only ; just as the modern literary 
forms of the Hindi or Hindustani language of Delhi, viz. High 
Hindi and Urdu, are the creation not only of High Hindi and 
Urdu writers of Delhi and Agra an d Meerut, but also of Lahore 
and Lucknow and Haidarabad and Mathura and Allahabad 
and Benares. The sishtas or learned men, i.e. Brahmans, in the 
Midland, in the Pracya, and also in the Dakffiinatya, also helped 
to build it up ; and it came to be closely connected with the Mid- 
land as here the Brahman synthesis of Aryan and non -Aryan 
cultures into Hindu culture and religion seems to have started. 
Because of its archaic character and the clarity of its forms, 
it obtained the homage of the Buddhists and the Jains as well, 
just from the end of the Maurya period. 

The Eastern Prakrit became an important vehicle cf reli- 
gious culture when the message of Buddha and Mahavira was 
delivered in it in the 6th-5th centuries B.C. and although it 
was a very much advanced or degenerate speech from Old Indo- 
Aryan standards, it obtained some pre-eminence in the Nanda 
Maurya periods both as the language of the Buddhist and Jaina 
faiths and official language of the court or of the empire. But 
this pre-eminence seems to have died out with the passing away 
of the Mauryan empire. 

Pali as a literary language associated with the Theravada 
school of Hinayana Buddhism appears not to have been pro- 
minent during the Nanda and Maurya periods, if it had come 



LANGUAGE 


317 


into existence at all. Buddha gave a great charter to all the 
languages of mankind when he declared that people were to study 
his message in their own languages : and we may presume that 
as a result of this great pronouncement, translations into different 
dialects were encouraged. There is evidence that the teachings 
of Buddha were first written in the Eastern Prakrit. But this 
form of Aryan speech, in spite of its being the official language 
of the empire was not a central dialect, but belonged to the 
easternmost extremity of the empire, and it was most deviated 
from the norm of the rest of Aryandom. As such it was 
not much intelligible to the rest of India. The Midland 
forming the real heart of Aryavarta, had a dialect which could 
be understood by the Udicya people, as well as by the Pracyas 
and the Dakshinatyas. It was the precursor of the Sauraseni 
apabrahmsa of late medieaval times (c. 600-1200 A.D.) and of 
Brajbhakha (c. 1500-1700) and the Khariboli Hindi or Hindus- 
tani of the present day. Buddha’s discourses were rendered into 
the Midland dialect, as current in Mathura (and extended from 
Mathura into Ujjain and Malwa) : after the death of the 
master, some of his disciples who were from Mathura had a hand 
in redacting the canon — at least one version of it ; just as they 
were rendered into the North-western Prakrit, as fragments 
in this dialect recovered from Central Asia show. The same 
process was repeated in later times : Kabir (15th century A.D.) 
spoke and composed in the Bhojpuri dialect current in his native 
city of Benares, and yet his writings are found in a mixed 
variety of Western Hindi, Brajbhakha and Khariboli of Delhi 
with plenty of Awadhi (Eastern Hindi) forms and a few 
Bhojpuri forms occurring as palimpsests. Mahendra, the son of 
A£oka born and brought up in his mother’s city of Ujjain, 
according to the Ceylonese tradition, took the Pali canon to 
Ceylon. It is likely that Mahendra studied his Buddhist 
texts not in the Eastern version as his father evidently did, 
but in the Midland one (which was Pali) as it was current 
in Ujjain. 

Pali does not at all agree with the Magadhi and Ardha- 
Magadhi dialects, later variants of the Pracya speech it agrees 
rather with Sauraseni, which is the Midland speech as we find 
it in its later Prakrit form. Pali can only be looked upon 



318 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


linguistically as a literary form cf the Midland speech as it was 
current in the centuries immediately before Christ. The Mid- 
land speech in its literary form thus was taken to Ceylon by 
Mahendra from Ujjain via Pataliputra and Tamralipti and from 
there brought back again into North India with the Theravada 
doctrine by Buddhaghosha. In the meanwhile, it was coming 
into prominence from about the time of Christ, as an important 
and the best cultured form of a Middle Indo-Aryan speech, as 
Sauraseni Prakrit, the earliest use of which we find in the drama 
fragment from Asvaghosha discovered in Central Asia, and pos- 
sibly also in Sudraka’s Mriecchakatika , a Prakrit which Bharata 
noted some time during the early cert turies after Christ and which 
Rajasekhara lauded as the most elegant form of speech in the 
8th century A.D. 

The Aryan speech was taken out of India by Indian mis- 
sionaries or military adventurers who went out of India during 
the time of the Nandas and Mauryas. In Sin-Kiang, the city 
of Khotan ( Ku-stana in Sanskrit) was colonised by Indians from 
Taxila in the 3rd century R.C., and the Indian community in 
the Khotan territory became quite numerous and strong, and 
although they lost their separate existence among the surround- 
ing Iranian and Tibeto-Burmese speaking peoples, the Indian 
North-Western Prakrit taken by them continued to be used 
(in a form much influenced by the local languages) as an official 
language in all state documents. Indian troops were found in 
the armies of the Achaemenian emperors and in Xerxes’ army 
there were Indian troops. At the battle of Gaugamela or 
Arbela where Alexander finally overthrew Darius, the last 
Achaemenian emperor, Indian troops fought very stubbornly. 
The Indians came in touch with the Greeks through the Persian 
empire, and this must have taken place by 500 B.C., when the 
old form of the word Iones (Ionians, the Greeks of Asia Minor 
who came to be best known in the East) viz., lawones or lavones 
came to India as Yavana. Indian elephants with Indian mahouts 
w r ere in the army of Pyrrhus when he fought the Romans in the 
3rd century B.C. and in the Carthagenian army led by Has- 
drubal and Hannibal in Italy, Indian elephant drivers also came 
into prominence. Indian philosophers and learned men, and 
later Buddhist missionaries sent by Asoka, found their way 



LANGUAGE 


319 


into Greece, and we have mention in Greek records of at least 
one Indian philosopher who came to Athens and with whom 
Socrates had a conversation (before 400 B.C.). There was a 
good deal of intellectual and cultural intermixture both through 
the Achaemenian empire and the Greek empire of Alexander 
and his successors, and the Indian languages (including the 
newly formed literary speech, classical Sanskrit) came to acquire 
a number of Iranian (Persian) and Greek words (e.g. mudra , 
dipi or lipi, nipista. ‘written’, asavari, kshatrapa , karsha in karsha 
pana 3 tashta-tast , pusta etc., and dramma from Greek drakhme , 
suranga from surinks or syrinx , samida from semidalis, khalina , 
and astronomical terms which came in later). The languages 
of the West, Greek specially, similarly obtained a number of 
Indian words. Connection with China though commerce may 
have commenced from the 4th century B.G. by way of Assam 
and South-West China (Yun-nan), and probably before Christ 
a few Chinese words came to be admitted into Indian languages 
(e. g. the name China — -China, kichaka — c a kind cf bamboo’, 
musdra — f a kind of precious stone’.) There were persons in 
India speaking Iranian dialects and Greek, and the Persian 
official language as in the cuneiform inscriptions appears to have 
exerted some influence on the style of the inscriptions of Asoka. 
The presence of different languages side by side in India, Indo- 
Aryan, Dra vidian, Austric and the foreign Persian and Greek, 
gave rise to what I have called ‘Translation compounds’ in 
Indo-Aryan, in which words of same or similar meaning from two 
languages are combined to give a single word in Indo-Aryan 
(e.g. Iranian Karsa ‘a monetary unit’ and Indo-Aryan pana 
of non -Aryan Austric origin-‘computation on the basis of four’ 
gave kdrshdpana in Sanskrit, kahdpana in Pali, meaning ‘a coin’; 
Austric sat a , sddad>sdli ‘horse’ and non -Aryan of unknown 
origin *ghutra,*hotra whence we have ghota ‘horse’ gave Sanskrit 
sdli-hotra ‘horse’ etc.) 

The rapprochement between the Indo-Aryan and the Dravi- 
dian and Austric speeches was going on intensely during this 
period when the fusion of the diverse elements of the popula- 
tion into a common Hindu people under the intellectual domina- 
tion of the Brahmans was in full swing. The Aryan language 
was being transformed from its purer Indo-European character 



320 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


into something different under the impact on Non-Aryan, 
through a larger and larger number of non-Aryan speakers 
turning into speakers of Indo -Aryan. In Middle Indo-Aryan, 
the Old Indo-Aryan accent had changed from a free pitch to a 
fixed stress. Vowel length became dependent more on speech 
rhythm than on etymology, a tendency towards an open rather 
than closed pronunciation of syllables became established (this led 
to widespread assimilation of conjunct consonants ’ushering in 
the Middle Indo-Aryan stage e.g. dhar-ma , sah-ya , bhak-ta , of 
earlier Old Indo-Aryan became dha-rma> sa-hya , bha-kta , etc. 
which were soon assimilated to dhamma , sajjha , bhatta ), and there 
was an increase in the cerebralisation of t 9 th> d , dh , n, to t, th , d> 
dh y n and of / to l ; also the voicing of the intervocal unvoiced 
stops and aspirates started by which loka became loga , atavl 
became adavi and alavl etc., and in morphology we note a ten- 
dency towards reducing all declensions and conjugations of Old 
Indo-Aryan to a single type, and the commencement of the use 
of post-positional help words after case inflexions of the noun ; 
besides, the inflected tenses and moods of the verb were reduced, 
and there was a larger use of participial adjectives, present, past 
and future, to express the time idea of the finite verb ; further, 
the conjunctive participle or gerund in the -tvd (- tvi ) and -ya 
became an exceedingly popular form. The vocabulary changed 
its character : a great many Old Aryans words were dropped, 
and their places were taken either by new Indo-Aryan formations, 
or by borrowings from the non- Aryan languages which entered 
the Aryan language through the back-door (i.e. without scholars 
admitting that they were non-Aryan words) and by the score. 
The entire spirit of Indo-Aryan was during the second half of 
the first millennium B. C. being changed fundamentally, and 
Aryan was more and more approximating the spirit of Dravi- 
diaa and Kol (Austric) . 

Probably a good deal of the masses, in the Northern Indian 
plains, particularly among the lower classes, were bilingual, 
but the f ist disappearing non-Aryan was not getting anybody s 
sympathy. The situation is like what one still sees in certain 
parts of India like Ghota Nagpur and Assam, wdiere 
the non-Aryan speeches are being steadily pushed out by 
Aryan. 



LANGUAGE 


321 


In the Deccan and South India, except possibly in the 
Western Deccan right down to the early course of Godavari 
where Aryan settlements were taking place, the non-Aryan 
languages were reigning supreme. Vidarbha or Varad(h)a- 
tata (present day Var had or Berar), and Asmaka on the Goda- 
vari, were Aryan states in the Deccan prior to 400 B.G. The 
Aitareya Brahmana> anterior to Buddha, mentions the Andhras, 
the Savaras, the Pulindas and the Mutibas as dasyu or non-Aryan 
(probably Dravidian) tribes in the Deccan (of these the Savaras, 
probably also the Pulindas were Kol tribes), and North Indian 
Aryans before the Buddha do not seem to have known much 
about the Southern Dravidian states. Sindh, from the evidence 
of the Baudhdyana Dharma-sutra , was, like Bengal, still outside the 
Aryan pale during the closing centuries before the Christian era; 
Sindh was probably still Dravidian, a language allied to Brahui 
being current in it : and the Greeks say that a tribe named 
Arabitai lived in south Sindh. But there cannot be any doubt 
that throughout the whole of southern and eastern Deccan 
and South India, the ancestors of the Telugus, the Kannadas 
and the Tamil-Malayalis were flourishing as independent states 
with their distinctive South Indian or Dravidian culture which is 
best represented in the ancient Tamil literature ascribed to the 
centuries immeaiateiy after Christ. But unfortunately no 
authentic specimen of a Dravidian language is available before 
the early centuries of the Christian era. 

The Dravidian language-family is now confined to India: 
but if the original Dravidian speakers were a Mediterranean 
people, then Dravidian must be relegated to a common stock 
with the language of the ancient Aegean and Asia Minor peoples 
who were living in Greece and the Islands and Asia Minor before 
the Indo-European Hellenes came to Greece. I have suggested 
that a tribal name of this people was * Dr (a) mil- or *Dr(a)miZ , 
which is found in one branch of them in the Island of Crete in 
the Hellenised spelling as Termilai , and in another branch of it 
in Lycia in Southern Asia minor as Trmmili . Various tribes 
with their different names naturally made up these Mediterranean 
invaders of India, and *Dramiz was evidently one of 
them. This name was Aryanised as Dramida or Dramila and then 
as Dravida , certainly earlier than the Christian era. Round 



322 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


about the time of Christ, the name became *Damizin the mouth 
of the people who bore the name, and they had by this time been 
fully settled and had built their culture and founded their states 
in the extreme south of India. The ancient Sinhalese Aryan- 
speaking settlers from Gujarat and Sindh, heard this name and 
wrote it in Pali and Sinhalese asDamila ;and Greek and Egyptian 
traders similarly heard the name as * Damir and called 
the country the native name of which was obviously * Damizakam 
Damirike in Greek. Then certain wide-spread phonetic changes 
swept the language of the * Dr amiz-Damiz (and probably also 
of the Kannadiga) people, among which was the unvoicing of the 
voiced stops gj ddb to kcttp ; and in a few centuries after 
Christ, the language entered a phase which we find in the 
oldest Tamil texts now found (the Sangam texts), and the 
name became Tamiz or Tamil which is the form still obtaining 
in the Tamil language. 

Although both Dravidian and Kol influenced the evolution 
of the Aryan language in the North — this influencing was at 
its height during the second half of the first millennium B.C. 
during the Nanda-Maurya period — and although culturally 
and politically highly advanced Dravidian states were flourish- 
ing in South India, states which had relations with Asoka 
Maurya, it is carious and almost inexplicable why any of the 
Dravidian speeches did not manifest a literary life during the 
period under review. The finished character cf the old Tamil 
porul or artha i.e. matter of poetry, and of cld Tamil literary 
ideas and ideals (dividing, for instance, poetic subjects into 
two categories of aham and pur am, roughly corresponding to 
love and war, subjective and objective), took some centuries to 
develop, and it can be reasonably expected that during the 
Nanda and Maurya periods, the cultivated South Indian 
languages, particularly old Tamil and old Kannada w ere essay- 
ing their first footsteps in the direction of sophisticated or ad- 
vanced poetic composition, as opposed to purely popular poetry 
about love and w r ar which we find orally among all peoples in 
the earlier stages of their history. 

The advancement of a language is not possible without 
writing, and the Aryan speech came to be written down in all 
likelihood at a time when it made it possible for the Veda books 



LANGUAGE 


323 


to be compiled ; and this may well have taken place during the 
10th century B.C., which is the date of the Mahabharata battle 
and of Vyasa, according to F. E. Pargiter and Hemchandra 
Raychaudhuri. The discovery of the Mohen-jo-Daro and 
Harappa script, with characters seemingly the pictorial proto- 
types of the Brahml letters of the 4th-3rd centuries B.C., now 
enables us to discard the theory of the Phoenician origin of the 
ancient Indian alphabet. The Brahml script in its oldest form — 
the proto-Brahmi of the 10th century B.C. showing but an 
intermediate stage between the Mohen-jo-Daro script of c 2500 
B. G. and the finished Brahml of 300 B.C. — could not be, as is 
natural in a similar situation, the finished alphabet with a scienti- 
fic and etymologically sound orthography which we see in the 
Maurya and post-Maurya times. It wr.s at the best a make- 
shift script, acting rather as a mnemonical writing than a proper 
and a complete alphabet. The orthography of Brahml as used 
for Prakrit in the 3rd century B.C. is not yet complete ; thus, 
e.g. certain consonant combinations are cumbrously made, 
and double consonants are not indicated at all ( vassa being 
written as vasa or as vasa ). It was still a rather stumbling 
medium for the Prakrit dialects ; it was much more so for 
Sanskrit. The Kharoshthi script current in the Udicya country 
during the period 400 B.C. — A.D.400 is admittedly of Semitic 
origin, a legacy of the Syrian scribes in the employment of the 
Achaemenian sirkar in India ; and its existence in India was an 
isolated episode, as isolated as the phenomenon of Gandhara 
art. The name would appear to be a folk-etymology in India 
(whether khara-\-oshtha or c ass-lip’ character as advocated by 
Sten Konow, or Khara-ushtra or 6 ass-and-camel country* 
character, as sought to be established by Sylvain Levi, it is 
net necessary to take sides) of a Semitic word for Svriting’ which 
we find in Hebrew as XaroscG (Kharosheth) . The discovery 
of an inscription of the 4th-3rd century B.C. in Aramaic (Syriac) 
at Taxila, w hich has been read by Herzfeld, giving the name of 
‘our Lord Priyadarsi’ ( mr'nprydrs ) is a direct proof of the contact 
of India with Aramaic writing, and helps us to envisage the 
origin of Kharoshthi. 

The Indian Brahml alphabet is in all likelihood a derivative 
of the Mohen-jo-Daro script. But it is strange that a know ledge 



324 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

of writing should have been obtained by the later Dravidians 
from the North Indian Aryan speakers round about the time of 
Christ, if the Mohen-jo-Daro people were really the ancestors 
of the Dravidians. It is likely that the Mohen-jo-Daro script 
of c. 2500 and later was a very complicated thing, and when 
the Aryan alphabet was evolved out of it as a simpler system 
of writing after the Mohen-jo-Daro civilization had become 
mori blind through Aryan impact as well as internal decay, and 
the people probably scattered, the simpler alphabet associated 
with a new and a vigorous people of a composite origin such 
as the ancient Hindus, descendants of both Aryans and non- 
Aryans, won the day.— making the more complicated, syllabic 
script of early Mohen-jo-Daro obsolete ; and this alphabet, 
as well as the Aryan language of which it was the vehicle, be- 
came a conquering force in the South — the old script being no 
longer current among a probably dispersed people — during the 
closing centuries of the first millennium B.C. 

II. LEARNING, LITERATURE AND POPULAR LIFE 
Brahmanical Learning 

Though Buddhism gained the support of royalty and cap- 
tured the hearts of sections of the people, Brahmanism conti- 
nued in this period to be a great force in society. Neither the 
output of Brahmanical literature nor the patronage of Brahma- 
nical scholars was impaired in any great degree. It is signi- 
ficant that the notices of the Greek writers of the times contain 
no mention of the Buddha or the popularity of his new faith, 
except the solitary reference of Clemens of Alexandria to philo- 
sophers who followed the precepts of Boutta 1 . Even the edicts 
of Asoka call upon people to honour Brahmans. The Ary a - 
mahjusrimulakalpa records that Nanda was a great patron of 
Brahman Tarkikas, proud of their learning, to whom he gave 
large sums of money 2 ; the tirade of the same text against 
Chanakya shows the extensive patronage enjoyed by Brahmanism 
and Brahmanic learning under Chandragupta and Bindusara, 
and Kautilya on his part does not conceal his animosity towards 
Buddhism and Jainism and levies a fine of a hundred pieces on 


1. McCrindle-^/io/n* India as described in classical liter attar*, p. 67 n. 

2. K. P. Jaya5wai — Imperial History of India , p. 31, Sanskrit text. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


325 


one who deceitfully brings to a dinner in honour of the gods and 
manes any of the sudra ascetics of the Sakya or Ajivaka sects 1 . 
In fact every page of Kautilya’s work confirms the thoroughly 
Brahmanical mode of life dominating these times ; Kautilya 
speaks of the minister as one qualified in the Vedas and their 
six angas (auxiliaries), mentions the Vedic sacraments and 
sacrifices, and prescribes Vedic rites and rituals to ward off every 
kindof evil and to procure success and prosperity to thepeople and 
the king ; he refers to free Brahmadeya lands given to Ritvigs, 
Acaryas, Purohitas and Srotriyas (II, i; III, 10) ; the work is 
also replete with references to tapasas and tapovanas ; so much 
so that it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that, far from 
affecting adversely the hold of the Vedic way of life, the rise of 
Buddhism and Jainism had given only a fillip to Brahmanical 
activity in the various departments of life and literature. 

Sanskrit Language 

Though the nascent faiths of the Buddha and Mahavira had 
attempted to by-pass the Sanskrit language and contact the 
masses through the vernacular tongues, Sanskrit did not lose 
the position as a spoken language or the medium in which sub- 
jects of theoretical and practical value were cultivated by the 
Brahmanas in the several centres of learning. Among such 
centres Taxila in the north-west and the Mauryan capital 
Pataliputra itself in the east were the most renowned. The 
Brhatkathd and the Buddhistic tradition make Panini, connected 
with Salatura in the north-west, a friend of a Magadhan Nanda, 
and bring Chanakya of the Taxila college to Pataliputra in quest 
of a scholarly disputation ; and Brahmanical tradition recorded 
by RajaSekhara speaks of a court of learning at Pataliputra 
where Upavarsha and Varsha, Panini and Pingala, Vyadi, 
Vararuchi and Patanjali attained fame by passing their tests 
in Sastras. 

The appellation Bhasha which Panini gives to his language 
and many of the rules laid down by him are not intelligible 
except as having reference to a spoken language. Such 
evidences of Sanskrit being a spoken tongue do not grow less 


i. III. 20 



326 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


in Katyayana or Patanjali, both of whom mention local and 
other variations and popular corruptions. That Katyayana 
was a southerner, that southerners delighted in using derivative 
forms (Taddhita) and that in the South, a big lake or saras was 
referred tc as sarasi are statements of Patahjali showing the 
inclusion of the southern regions in the provenance of Sanskrit 
speech. The well-known dialogue in Patanjali (under Panini 
II. 4. 56) between the grammarian and the charioteer, suta, 
involving a grammatical subtlety bears out the fact that Sans- 
krit speech was not confined to either the academic circles or the 
learned classes of society. The use of Sanskrit in literature 
was so securely established that even Buddhism and Jainism 
which began with using the Prakrits had to line up early with 
Sanskrit literary tradition. 

In this period the abundant variety of the Vedic morphology 
had got simplified considerably on both the declensional and 
conjugational sides and this process of simplification could be 
seen in progress through the Brahmanas and the older Upani- 
shads. It is such a Bhasha which Panini codified in order to 
render it more handy. Even after him a certain amount of 
fluidity persisted, as evidenced by the necessity for the work 
of the many Varttikakaras, but at the close of the period of our 
study, Patanjali’s work finally fixed the language as the unchang- 
ing Samskrta. The language had become sufficiently distant 
from that of the Vedas to be characterised as classic Sanskrit, 
through its employment all this time in a growing body of epic 
and poetic literature. The Vedic accent had changed and the 
free use of verbal forms had given place tc what may be called 
the nominal style characterised by participles; a small loss of 
vocabulary is to be seen, as also some amount of semantic change ; 
a few new word forms were also added to the language in this 
period. 


Sanskrit Grammar 

The legends in the Sanskrit versions of the Brhatkatha intro- 
duce Panini and Vararuchi as contemporaries of the Nandas; 
the Aryamanjusrimulakalpa also refers to Panini as a friend of 
the Nanda. On the basis of the Brhatkatha legends it was held 
by Max Muller, Weber and others that Panini flourished about 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


327 


315 B.G.; but as has been proved by several writers from Gold- 
stiicker onwards, Panini and Katyayana could not have been 
contemporaries in view of the changes that the language had 
undergone in the days of the latter, and Panini could at the latest 
be assigned only to 500 B.C., and in this respect, Taranath whose 
account puts Panini a generation earlier than Katyayana is less 
faulty. In the period of the Nandas and Mauryas, there was 
indeed a great deal of grammatical activity. The Pratisakhyas 
are to be referred to the post-Paninian age, and between Panini 
and Patanjali, there appeared a number of Varttikakaras who 
appended their vartiikas or addenda et corrigenda ( uktd-nukta - 
durukta-chintana) to Panini’s aphorisms. 

The foremost of the post-Paninian grammarians is Vyadi, a 
descendant of Panini himself removed from him by at least 
two generations, as we learn from his matronymic Dakshayana 
derived from Dakshi, the gotronymic of Panini’s own mother. 
Vyadi followed his ancestor’s system and produced the grand 
work ( sobhana as Patanjali describes it) called Samgraha in 
100,000 verses. Patanjali held Vyadi in as much respect as 
Panini himself. In fact, Bhartrhari says at the end of the second 
book of his Vakyapadiya that the Mahdbhdshya is based on the 
Samgraha. Vyadi’s view that vyakti or dravya constituted 
paddrtha , as expounded in his Samgraha is cited by Katyayana, 
Patanjali (I, ii. 64), Bhartrhari and others. A grammatical 
tradition noted in the Laghu-paribhdshdvrtti ascribes the 
Paribhashas or the rules for interpreting Panini’s Sutras to 
Vyadi, and some manuscripts, Vyadiparibhdshd and Vyddipari - 
bhdshavrtti 1 , support the tradition. Besides these a lexicon named 
Utpalinl, containing a reference to Buddhism, is also remembered 
as a work of Vyadi. As other grammarians of this time like 
Katya and Katyayana Vararuchi are also quoted in the lexi- 
cons, we have to suppose that besides writing grammatical 
treatises, the authors compiled, somewhat after the manner of 
the older Nighantu, lists of words as accessories to their gram- 
matical treatises. The story in the initial book of the several 
versions of the Brhatkathd would make Vyadi and Vararuchi 
class-fellows and friends ; Vyadi is however, as we have 


i. Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogarum I. p. 6 1 8b. 



328 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


seen, one of the authorities quoted by Katyayana 
(I. ii.64). 

The mention in these Brhatkaihd legends of an Indradatta 
In a group of which the two others, Vyadi and Vararuchi, are 
grammarians may lead us to surmise that he too might have 
been a grammarian, not necessarily a contemporary, and though 
there is no evidence, it may be suggested that the Aindra gram- 
mar mentioned in the traditional accounts as having been super- 
seded by the Paninian and as being the basis of the Tamil system 
of the Tolkappiyam and of the Sanskrit Kalapa , may in reality 
be a work of this Indradatta. 

The Varttikakaras of grammar belonging to this age are 
headed by one whom Patanjali refers to with reverence as 
Bhagavan Katya (III. ii. 3) and correspondingly his varttikas 
are known as Mahavarttikas in contrast not only to the other 
miscellaneous varttikas but to those of Katyayana Vararuchi 
himself. In his Bhashya (IV. ii. 65), Patanjali gives the illustra- 
tion ‘Mahavarttika’ meaning ‘one who has studied the Maha- 
varttika’ and in the encyclopaedic Srngara Prakasa of king 
Bhoja we actually get quotations of two varttikas from the Maha- 
varttikas under Panini II. i. 51 and I. iv. 21. Katya like Vyadi 
added a lexicon to his grammatical contribution. 

As distinct as the Mahavarttikas, are the metrical dicta of a 
Varttika character quoted by Patanjali, which, as can be made 
out from Bhartrhari, Kaiyata and Nagoji, formed part of a work 
called the Slokavarttika. Coming chronologically after Vyadi 
were the followers of the grammar of Gautama (VI. 2. 36) . The 
other Varttikas referred to by Patanjali are Bharadvajiya, 
Saunaga, Kroshtlya, Saura Bhagavad and those of Kuni Vadava 
or Kunaravadava, all of these being later than the varttikas of 
Katyayana on which they have bearing. It is not known if the 
Mdthuri Vrtti mentioned by Patanjali under IV. iii 101 is 
another Varttika. 

The most important of these Varttikakaras is the one known 
generally as the Varttikakara of grammar, viz., Katyayana 
alias Vararuchi. , From the literary traditions referred to, 
we may take him to be a contemporary of the Nandas. He 
is also the author of the Vdjasaneyiprdtisdkhya , where he deals with 
the language and the gramm ar ofthe Vdjasaneyisamhita, and the 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


329 


Kathasaritsagara story too makes mention of his proficiency 
in the Pratisakhya taught by Vyadi (I. 2. 38). In this Prati- 
iakhya, Katyayana gives a number of criticisms of the relevant 
sutras of Panini. In his Varttikas which number about 4,000, 
he subjects about 1,500 sutras of Panini to his critical obser- 
vations, these comprehending on the whole about 10,000 
grammatical points. Katyayana was neither hostile to Panini 
nor rash in his criticism as one might be led to believe from 
the way Patanjali handles him ; the natural phenomena of 
linguistic change necessitated the compilation of Katyayana’s 
corrections and additions. Besides the dicta, Katyayana some- 
times made his grammatical observations in verses which 
Patanjali quotes as bhrajdh slokah and Kaiyata identifies as 
Katyayana’s. As noticed already Patanjali speaks of him as a 
southerner fond of Taddhita forms, while the Brhaikathd 
story makes him a native of Kausambi, an all-round scholar, 
sometime minister of Nanda at Pataliputra and an incarnation 
of a Sivagana known as Pushpadanta. The Buddhistic Man - 
jusrimulakalpa too mentions him as a minister under Nanda. 

The Pratisakhyas are a class of works designed to preserve 
Vedic texts correctly, as handed down in their several fakhas 
or groups of sdkhds (Prati-sakha) ; and these treatises may 
generally be assigned to the period between Panini and Patanjali 
according to Goldstlicker, say between 600 B.C. and 200 B.G. 
Mention has already been made of the Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya 
of the Varttikakara Katyayana. As Vyadi is several times 
quoted in the Rigveda PraiUdkhya ascribed to Saunaka, we may 
assign that Pratisakhya too to our period. To Vyadi himself 
is ascribed a treatise on Veda lakshana 1 . 

Classical Sanskrit Literature and Fine Arts 

The Sanskrit versions of the Brhatkaiha, the Jaina Brhat- 
kathd Kosa of Harishena and the Buddhistic Manjusrmtilakalpa 
speak of a Subandhu as a Brahman minister of Nanda, Chandra - 
gupta and Bindusara. In Abhinavagupta’s commentary on the 
Natya Sastra, Abhinavabharatl , there is more than one reference 
to a Subandhu as a Mahakavi who composed a unique variety 


i. Aufrecht, CaUdogus Catalogorum III part. 



330 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


of dramatic composition, emboxing one act within another, 
and making the characters of each preceding act the spectators 
of its successor ; the work was called the Vasavadatta JVatya - 
dhard or the dramatic series of Vasavadatta 1 . This Vasavadatta 
is the Ujjain princess figuring in Udayana’s story 2 , with which 
Subandhu wove one of Bindusara himself. It is this drama of 
Subandhu that Vamana quotes in his KavydlankarasutravrUi , 
where we have the suggestion of Chandragupta’s son having 
difficulties and being helped by wise ministers like Subandhu, 
a circumstance which is confirmed by the Manjusrimulakalpa 
referring to Bindusara succeeding to the throne as a boy. A 
verse on poet Subandhu and his composition featuring 
Bindusara and Vatsaraja, found in a manuscript of the Avanti- 
sundari has reference only to this Subandhu whom we may take 
as the minister under the last Nanda and the first two Mauryan 
emperors. 

The Jain Brhatkathakosa while mentioning Subandhu along 
with Chanakya (story 143), refers to a third minister Kavi, 
which too may be a reminiscence of a literary figure of these 
times. Of the literary activities of Katyayana Vararuchi, we 
can say something definite. Patanjali’s Mahabhashya opens 
our eyes to the rich crop of classical literature produced in these 
times. Among literary productions mentioned by Patanjali 
with the author’s name is a poem by Vararuchi, Vararucham 
Kavyam (IV. iii. 101). In Bhoja’s Srngara Prakasa, a half 
verse in the Vasantatilaka metre from a poetic composition of 
Katyayana is quoted 3 . 

The other Kavyas presupposed by Patanjali must have all 
been produced in this period : we have thus a good number of 
Akhyanas and Akhyayikas on the stories of Yayati, Yavakrita, 
Priyangu, Sumanottara, Bhimaratha, Vasavadatta and the 

1. See IHQ. XIX, 1943, pp. 69-71, 

2. Kautilya’s Arihasdstra has two references to Udayana’s story; one 
in IX. 7, his return to power after a flight and another in XIII. 2. where the 
ruse of capturing one fond of hunt with the aid of an alluring elephant in the 
ndgavana reminds us of UJayana’s capture by Pradyota. 

3. Madras Ms. Vo]. I Ch. I p. 45 tatha ca Katyayanah : ‘ uttdrand} ’<* 
jagatah prapitamahena tasmdt padat tvamasi rajjuriva pravritta. This is 
evidently a praise of the Ganges, the celestial river that descended from 
the heavens, and we know from the Brhatkatha versions that Vararuchi was 
a great devotee of Gahga whom he propitiated and who appeared before 
Vararuchi every day to make him a present of gold. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


331 


Daivasura and Rakshosura on the wars of the Devas and the 
Asuras (IV. ii. 60 ; IV. iii. 87-8). 

Perhaps more value is to be attached to the many citations 
of verses and parts of verses embodying a highly evolved poetic 
expression and metrical finish which Patanjali makes in his 
Mahabhashya , and which should clearly convince us of the high 
development of Kavya in this period. We have specimens 
here of verses of erotic, lyric, panegyric and gnomic poetry ; 
of lines belonging to a poem on the Mahabharata theme and of 
metrical varieties likeAnushtubh, Upajati,Praharshini, Pramita- 
kshara and Vasantatilaka ; the grammatical karikas disclose 
even greater metrical advancement, these employing even rarer 
metres, Vaktra, Salim, Vamsastha, SamanI,Vidyunmala, Totaka 
and Dodhaka. This metrical material surely points to the exis- 
tence of prosodial treatises in these times, and we may not be 
wrong in assigning Pingala’s Chhandas- sutras to this period. 
In a verse in Rajasekhara’s Kdvyamimdmsd enumerating the 
Sastrakaras examined at Pataliputra, Pihgala figures between 
Panini and Vyadi 1 , and Haraprasad Sastri has drawn attention 
to a tradition recorded in the Divyavadana that Bindusara put 
his son Asoka to school under Pingala Naga 2 . In the Abhina- 
vabharatl of Abhinavagupta we have quotations from an anu- 
shtubh treatise of Katyayana on metres, in which Katyayana 
examines the emotional and thematic appropriateness of parti- 
cular metres. 3 

Whatever the date of the present text of the Katya £astra 
of Bharata, we know that his text incorporates within itself and 
cites passages and verses handed down to him fiom the past, 
dnuvamsya. That the histrionic art was not in a crude stage at 
this time, but was highly developed can be gathered not only 
from the Vdsavadatid Ndiyadhard of Subandhu, but also from 
the sure evidence of Panini’s sutras (IV. iii. 110-1) which say 
that even so early, the actors 5 art had been codified into two 
texts of aphorisms (Natasutras) by two different authors Silalin 
and Krsasva. More important than Patanjali’s reference to 
Sobhanikas who show Kamsavadha and Balibandhana is his 

1. Kdvyamimdmsd, GOS, p. 55. 

2. Maeadhan Literature ; p. 36. 

3. Journal of Oriental Research , Madras vi pp. 222-3. 



332 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


reference to the actor who feels the rasa which he acts rasiko 
natah (V. ii. 59). The repeated mention in the Arthasastra of 
accomplished courtezans, natas and nar takas, supports the 
view that dance and drama prevailed as popular and evolved 
forms of art at this time. The ancillary art of music too is spoken 
of by Kautilya both in its vocal and instrumental form. Gita , 
vddya, kusllava ,, silpakarikah , silpavatyah striyah (I. 12 ), 
dtodya (I. 21), natas, nar takas, gay anas, vadana (II. i), pdthya, 
nrtta , natya, vina, venu, mridafiga, rarigopajivinis (II- 27 ) 
and the specific mention of preksha or dramatic show seen 
by the king (XIII. 2) — these in Kautilya picture a time and 
society which delighted in the arts of music, dance and drama. 
The fine art of painting occurs in chitralekhya, (I. 16) ; and the 
numerous references to the images of gods (devapratimas) give 
a glimpse into sculptural art of these times. 

The dramatic variety called VithI as described by Bharata 
involves a good deal of verbal ingenuity, wit and foiling of one 
another in repartees. That such an art of verbal skill was culti- 
vated in these times is shown by the frequent mention by Kautilya 
of a social entertainer called vagjivana (II- 1 ; II. 27 ; 
III. 14). 

Not only had much poetry been produced by this time, 
but factors of poetic appeal and appreciation had also come to 
be analysed ; already in Yaska we find several classes of simile 
or upama and several words expressive of similarity (upama- 
vachakas) ; in Panini, in addition to several rules involving simile, 
we have the actual mention of Upama and Samanya-Sabda. 

In the chapter on the writing of Sasana or a royal document, 
Kautilya enumerates and defines in his Arthasastra excellences 
or gunas pertaining to calligraphy and literary composition ; 
arthakrama or the proper order of ideas, sambandha or cogent 
development of the theme, paripurnata or fulness in respect 
of idea, expression, arguments and illustrations, these being 
adequate and at the same time not superfluous, madhurya or 
sweetness and charm of words and ideas, audarya or dignified 
utterance and spashtatva or the use of well-known words ; in 
the same context, Kautilya speaks of doshas or defects of writing 
and composing, vyaghata or mutual contradiction, punarukta 
(redundance) and apaiabda (grammatical flaw). 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


333 


Religious literature , Parana , Dharma, Srauta and Gfhya Sutras 
Kautilya defines Veda as Trayl but immediately adds that 
Atharvan and the Itihasas also are Vedas (1.3) ; in the subsequent 
chapters very large use is made of the Artharvanic practices of 
Santi, Pushti andAhhichara ;the separate mention andjuxtapcsi- 
tion with Itihasa shows however that the Artharvan had not 
yet become completely canonised and that this was the time 
when it was coming into increasing prominenceand acceptance. 
Confirmation of this may be had from the Apastamba Dharma 
Sutra which defines Veda primarily as the three Vedas but says 
at the end that all the popular arts and lores which are current 
among women andsudrasare to be brought under the Atharvan. 
(II. 1 1.29.11-12.) The six Vedangas ( Arthasastra I.3., 1.9) and 
Itihasa-Purana («£.1.5, V.6) are mentioned. That some Puranas 
had already come into being is proved also by the Apastamba 
Dharma Sutra which besides referring to Puranas quotes verses 
from Puranas(I.6.19.13 and II.9. 23.3), the metrical imperfection 
of a few lines here indicating their antiquity. A Bhavishyat 
Parana is expressly mentioned by Apastamba II. 9. 24. 6. Kau- 
tilya refers to Itivrtta and Purana (I. 5.) and to Dharma Sastra 
(1.5 and III. 1) ; he speaks of Arthasastra (1.5) and Airama- 
dharma (I. 12). These as well as the numberless references to 
Yajana, Prayascitta, Santi, Homa etc., in the Arthasastra show 
that by this time the Dharma, Srauta and Grhya Sutras had 
come into being and were in full force. The Varttikakara 
Katyayana also knows Dharma£astra (I. 12. 64). According 

to MM. Kane, to the Nanda-Maurya age could be assigned the 
Dharma-sutras of Gautama, Baudhayana, Apastamba, Vasish- 
tha, Vishnu in part, Harita and Sahkha-Likhita. Biihler also 
considers the Apastamba Dharma Sutra to have been produced 
in the five centuries before Christ 1 , and that both Gautama and 
Baudhayana were earlier than Apastamba. These Dharma 
sutras form one part of the Kalpa sutras and deal with the duties 
of varnas and airamas. The other two parts of the Kalpa 
sutras are the Srauta and Grhya sutras, and we may take it 
that where we have Srauta, Grhya and Dharma sutras by the 
same author, as for instance Apastamba, they were all of identical 
authorship and formed part of one integral kalpa or manual of 
i. Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 2, Introduction. 



334 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


ritual and conduct of that school. According to the ideology 
of these sutras, life is not something to be lived as the body and 
mind please, but a disciplined activity towards sublimation 
through a series of sacramental acts, Vedic and domestic rites, 
and personal samskaras from the time of conception to death. 
Human nature is here smelted and purified in these acts of 
Karman and Dharma, or as Kalidasa puts it, the raw stone of 
man is ground, polished, and cut into a gem of a Dvija by these 
processes ( Raghuvamsa III. 18). 

Philosophy 

The Dharma sutras speak of four stations of life (asramas), 
student, householder, ascetic and forest- dwelling hermit. The 
last two stages were devoted to a life which stood in contrast 
to that of the first two. While the former emphasised a life of 
Karma or ordained acts, the latter showed the path of content- 
ment, renunciation and the seeking of the knowledge of the soul 
or atman as the means to the supreme welfare. The older 
Upanishads must have certainly come into being by this time 
and the path of atmajnana declared by them greatly prized. 
We know from Panini that there were already in his days codi- 
fied Sutras bearing on the life and conduct of Bhikshus or mendi- 
cants by two different authors Parasarya and Karmanda (IV. 
iii. 110-1). These Bhikshus were also known as Parivrajakas 
and Maunins as the Dharma Sutras show (Apast. II. 9.21 ; Baudh. 
II. vi. 14;Gaut. III. 2). Gautama (III. 10. 11) refers to Upani- 
shads and Vedanta and in the Adhyatmapatala (I. 8. 22*23) 
of the Apastamba Dharma Sutra we have an epitome of the 
doctrine of Atmajnana as taught in the Upanishads. However 
the general teaching of the Dharma Sutras was in favour of combi- 
ning an observance of Dharma with Jnana as can be seen in 
Apastamba (II. 9. 21) who refutes the doctrine of Jnana as the 
sole means of welfare. The Vanaprastha of these texts is identi- 
cal with Strabo’s Hylobioi cr forest dwellers, a subdivision 
of the Sramanas (Greek sarmanes) ; their mode of life was 
regulated by the institutes of their school, and Baudhayana 
(II. 6. 14) defines Vanaprastha as one who follows the institutes 
of the Vaikhanasa Sastra which was thus a text in existence at 
that time. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


335 


These evidences show that when Buddhism arose and even 
earlier still, Brahmanism had within its fold its own class of 
mendicants and ascetics, and that the term Sramana need not 
refer exclusively to the Buddhist ascetics. In Kautilya’s Artha - 
sastra too, references are only to these Brahmanical ascetics. 
Kautilya mentions Parivrajaka, Tapasa, Munda and Jatila 
(I. 10, 11, 12), Sramanas (I. 12), Vanaprastha and Yati (III. 16), 
Tapasas,Tapovanas, Tapasvins, and Asramas (11.2,11.35,36, 
III. 9 and IV. 3), and Mundas and Jatilas with pupils inhabiting 
mountain caves (XIII. 2). Kautilya imposes punishment on 
those renouncing life without making proper provision for their 
family (II. 1, 28) which is understandable as a stricture passed 
on the easy increase in the Buddhistic ascetic fold. 

It is remarkable that Kautilya refers more than once to 
female ascetics (I 12 ; III. 3, 4). That Brahmavadinls were 
not taboo within the Brahmanical fold is proved not only by 
the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad but by an illustration of Patanjali 
as well. Patanjali speaks of women studying the Mlmamsa of 
Kasakrtsna (IV. i. 14), and as Kasakrtsna is an author cited 
by Badarayana in his Vedanta Sutras , we may take it that the 
Mlmamsa of Kasakrtsna referred to by Patanjali was an Uttara- 
mlmamsa text current in that time. But such women ascetics 
or students of philosophy must have been few. 

A certain amount of metaphysical discussion on even such 
topics as the exact nature and identity of the import of a word 
(padartha) is seen from Katyayana’s reference to Vyadi holding 
vyakti or dravya to be padartha. Apastamba twice refers to 
Vedic interpretation as being decided by principles of Nyaya, 
and as Biihler has pointed out, we have here nearly the Purva 
Mlmamsa Sastra. Upavarsha, whom the legends in the Brhat- 
katha assign to Pataliputra of this period and whom Rajasekhara’s 
verse also connects with Pataliputra, is knowm from later refe- 
rences as an old author on Purva and Uttara Mimamsas. More 
definite is Kautilya’s reference to philosophical branches of 
learning and study, Anvlkshiki (I* 2) which, according to him, 
comprised Saiikhya, Yoga and Lokayata. The last is a school 
of material philosophy ; Saiikhya is to be taken as knowledge 
in general, and Yoga as observance of ordained Dharma, or 
other purificatory practices or Hetuvidya. In Baudhavana 



336 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


(II. vi. 30) there is an interesting discussion on airamas ; it is 
said that the fourfold classification of asramas is not authorita- 
tive, that the householder’s is the only asrama and that one 
Kapila, an Asura, son of Prahlada, devised this fourfold divi- 
sion. It can be seen that the four asramas fall into two groups 
of two, Brahmacharin and Grhastha observing the ordained 
Dharmas ; and the Vanaprastha, who retired from home to 
forest, and Bhikshu who was not particular about a life cf Karma. 
The Dharmasutrakaras as believers in Karma are, it is to be 
expected, always for upholding the Grhastha, while the philo- 
sopher will denounce the Grhastha’s futile routine and hold up 
the latter asramas as capable of bringing real solace to the soul 
and'reedom from the threefold distress. Now Kapila, author 
of the Sahkhya, is one of our earliest philosophers who belittled 
Karma and advocated Jnana or Viveka. As this path of know- 
ledge gained greater popularity, its adherents had to be 
approved of and assigned a place in the accepted scheme of 
things, and thus probably did the asramas amplify themselves. 

That philosophical debate and systematic investigation of 
subjects had advanced in this period is borne out by the thirty- 
two topics of methodology in the exposition of a system cf thought, 
called Tantrayuktis, which Kautilya enumerates, defines and 
illustrates at the end of his work, and most of which became 
later part of the Nyaya system of Akshapada. 

Arthasdstra 

The entire Mauryan age is dominated by two remarkable 
records, one of literature and the other of epigraphy, viz. the 
Arthasdstra of Kautilya and the edicts of Asoka. It is needless 
to add anything here on the Arthasdstra which has received full 
treatment in the historical sections. It is enough to point out 
that Kautilya refers to his own work as a critical compendium 
based on the Arthasastras, prevalent at his time, and that he 
refers to works of nearly a dozen writers, Bharadvaja (Kaninka), 
Visalaksha (Siva), Parasara, Pisuna (Narada), Kaunapadanta 
(Bhlshma), Vatavyadhi (Uddhava), Bahudantiputra (Indra), 
the Manavas, the Barhaspatyas, Ausanasas and Ambhlyas. 
This active exercise of thought on polity, echoes of which are 
to be heard in the epic Makdbhdrata , might well have been 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


337 


occasioned by the intense political activity of the times which 
were full of Sanghas of different description and numerous small 
monarchies. That leaders of thought such as the Brahmans 
took a leading part in the political life of the country is shown 
by the evidence of Greek writers like Plutarch who say that the 
philosophers gave Alexander no less trouble than the mercena- 
ries by reviling the princes who declared for him and encouraged 
the free states to revolt from his authority. The mercenaries 
referred to by the Greek writers were the Ayudhajivi Kshatriya 
Sanghas, just as the robbers referred to by them were the Arattas 
(Arashtras) or republicans. The genius of Chandragupta and 
Chanakya saw the danger of these numerous small free states, 
communities and kingships, and. not only consolidated an empire 
and a centralised power but also set forth the scheme of the 
detailed working of such a huge centralised authority in a new 
Arthasdstra . 


Kama-Sdstra 

While the Dharma, Srauta and Grhya Sutras are concerned 
with one side of life as a round of sacramental rites, performance 
of rituals and sacrifices, and observance of social, religious and 
spiritual codes of conduct, quite another side of it, the gaiety 
and joy of life, is represented by the numerous references to the 
courtezan and her milieu in the Arthasdstra . The courtezans 
were so popular that they could be effectively employed in the 
machinery of state. Silpakarikas and silpavatyah striyah 
(I. 12), veiyas (II. 6), ganikas who served the king with their 
kusilavakarman, singing, (II, 27); rangopajivinls (II. 27), kau^i- 
kastriyah, gayanas, and nartakis (XI. 1) — all formed such a vital 
part of the polity that a special superintendent was appointed 
to look after their organized management (Gamkadhyaksha) . 
Not only was their life regulated by a government department, 
but the art of love was also codified by an eminent authority 
on erotics. The Mauryan capital, Pataliputra, was renowned for 
its courtezans and Vatsyayana tells us in his Kama Sutra (II. 
i. 1 1) that at the request of the courtezans of Pataliputra, Dattaka 
who must have lived at this time codified the courtezan’s art, 
Vaisika. Kautilya also mentions the Vaisikakala (11.27). The 
gay side of life is to be seen also in the dictum of Kautilya that 



338 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


one ought not to deny oneself pleasures (na nissukhah syat, I. 7) 
and by his allotment to the king of the sixth part of the day for 
enjoyment (svaira-vihara, I. 19). The cities had halls and 
gardens intended for recreation (vihararthah salah aramah, 
II. 1) ; gambling was in vogue especially in the republican com- 
munities to a dangerous extent (VIII. 3) ; gambling and drink- 
ing halls were provided for (II. 26, 36) ; people went to the 
festivals and gatherings for entertainment, utsavas, samajas 
and yatras (II, 26. XIII. 2. 3), and water-sports and sylvan 
games were also indulged in (XIII. 2, V. 2). 

Popular Worship 

There were temples where people worshipped images, and 
Kautilya names a number of popular deities in worship in his 
time. The temples (koshthas) were in the north-west part of 
the city for gods and goddesses like Aparajita, Apratihata, 
Jayanta, Vaijayanta, Siva, Vaisravana (Kubera), Alvins and 
Sri (Lakshmi) (II. 4) . Deities of Vastu (site) and Dik (quarters) 
were adored (II. 4), and to ward off natural calamities or to 
invite natural benefits, people made offerings and oblations 
and incantations of peace, worshipping Fire. Rivers, Indra, 
Gariga, Seashore, Forests (Vanayaga), Mountains, and 
Caityas of Rakshasas (IV. 3). People went on pilgrimages to 
holy places, Punyasthanas (II. 35-36, III. 9-10) and Tlrtha- 
yatanas (II. 35). Naga-pratimas or Snake-images and Dhvaja- 
pratimas or flag-staffs standing for some deities were objects of 
worship. Persons who practised inferior magical arts invoked 
Bali, Sambara, Vairocana, presiding deities of several Narakas, 
sages like Narada, Devala, Savarni and Galava, Manu, Devas 
and Devalokas, Vedic scholars, Sidahas, Tapasas, Brahma, 
Brahmani, PaulomI, Tantukaccha a great Asura, and others 
of his class (XIV. 1). 


Popular lores 

A notice of works of literature, grammar or philosophy does 
not exhaust the branches of knowledge and lore which pre- 
vailed at this time and played an important part in popular life. 
Other arts and lores are reflected in the Arthasastra. Kautilya 
speaks of astrologers and experts in omens, mauhuitikas and 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


339 


naimittikas (I. 9, 12 ; IV. 4 ; V. 3.), readers of fortune from 
physical features, Lakshana (I. 12) and Arigavidya (XIII. 1), 
magicians and sorcerers (Jambhaka-vidya, Maya and Maya* 
yoga, I. 12 and IV. 3), snake charmers (Jangallvids), adepts 
in black magic (krtyabhicarasilas IV. 4, XIV), minstrels (sutas^ 
and magadhas), oracles (prasna-vidya), and readers of dreams- 
and birds’ voices (svapna-pakshi-vyahara, XXIII. 1). The lore* 
of the serpent, (IV. iii. 13) mentioned even in the Upanishacfe, 
is noticed by Arrian too. 

Of more important subjects, Kautilya speaks of a highly 
developed art of healing, producing and counteracting diseases 
poisons, etc. (XII), maternity and care of the child (I. 17, 
kumarabhrtya and garbhabharman) and of the profession of 
the doctor, cikitsaka (I. 18). He refers to the lapidary art 

(II. 2), to the science of agriculture (krshitantra, II. 25) and the 
science of plant-life (vrkshayurveda) and to the astronomical 
factors favourable for cultivation. He speaks of reading others* 
minds, perfumer’s art, garlanding and shampoo (II. 27). 
There was an advanced veterinary science pertaining to the 
elephant and horse (II. 30, 31). Mineral science, dhatu- 
$astra, is also mentioned in Kautilya (II. 12). 

Architecture 

The development of architecture is seen in Kautilya’ s elabo* 
rate description of the fort and the palace and their various 
parts including mechanical manipulations (yantras). Secret 
passages within walls (gudha-bhitti-sancara) and underground 
ways (surangas) were devised (I. 20). In the same place fire- 
proofing is also mentioned. Sulbasastra is referred to expressly 
(II. 12 and 25). Special buildings with suitable features are 
described fer elephants and horses ; pleasure-halls (viharaSalas 
II. 1), drinking halls with rooms, seats, couches, garden etc. 
(panagara II. 26, III. 8), gambling halls (dyutavasa II. 36) and 
hospitals (II. 6) are other special types of buildings mentioned 
by Kautilya. The architectural magnificence of the Mauryan 
capital is borne out by the testimony of the Greek writers and 
by excavations. It has already been pointed out that the Artha - 
sastra contains numerous references to temples and images 
(I. 6. 18, II. 1.4. II. 6, 33, 36, III. 9, 10, 16, IV. 10, V. 2 



-340 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

XIII. 1, 3.), Idols for worship were highly popular and Deva- 
danas and Deva-dravyas were guarded by village elders (I. 18, 
II. 1 ), a superintendent looking after all temples (II. 6), andfrom 
•a reference in Patanjali we know that the Mauryas probably 
augmented their revenues by a share in the fees forthcoming in 
the popular worship of images. 

Prakrit, Buddhistic and Jain literature 

The earliest literature of Buddhism and Jainism which arose 
and grew in Kosala and Magadha adopted the Prakrit as its 
vehicle of expression. Tradition which is late and which receives 
support from some citations in works like the gloss of Malayagiri 
on a Jain work and from a reference in Bhoja’s Srngara Prakdsa y 
ascribes a Prakrit grammar to Panini himself, but this is only 
a late attempt to invest Prakrit with a status equal to that of 
Sanskrit. Equally undependable is the ascription of the Prd- 
krtaprakasa on the Maharashtrl and other dialects to Vararuchi, 
the Varttikakara, for the languages dealt with here are of later 
form. The early Ardhamagadhi originals of the Jain canon 
have not survived, what we now have being later redactions. 

The Buddhistic canon was in Pali which had close affinities 
with Paisaci. Pali-Paisaci, and in fact all the later Prakrits, 
owe their origin, according to Hoernle 1 to the ways in which 
the non-Sanskritic populations of the different localities spoke 
the Sanskrit tongue. Konow 2 draws attention to the fact that 
according to a Tibetan tradition the Sthaviras or Theras had 
their books in PaiSacI, and that according to Pischel these 
Paisaci books may be the Pali canon. Pali-Paisaci dialects 
with slight local variations were current in wide parts of India 
from the north-west to the Deccan, and it is this language 
which influenced or bore affinities to the Dravidian. 3 

Any considerable or authentic Prakrit material of this time 
that we possess is confined to the edicts of Asoka. The language 
of these edicts is in three dialects, closely related to one another 
and exhibiting only slight differences, one of these the eastern, 
prevalent in Magadha and the language of the capital, gave 

1. ZDMG. 64 (1910) pp, 103-4, 1 18. 

2. Ibid. p. 103, 

3. Ibid. pp. 107-118. 



LEARNING AND LITERATURE 


341 


rise to the later Magadhi Prakrit ; the other two wer^ of the west 
and north-west, the latter being the earliest of the three. That 
Asoka adopted this language for the propagation of Dharma 
proves that it was widely prevalent among the people. 

These edicts are valuable in another direction too. For, 
whether one believes or not in the traditions about the Buddhistic 
councils and the compilation of the Pali canon soon after the 
Nirvana of the Buddha or in the time of Aioka, we have the 
irrefutable evidence of these edicts of Asoka to show that some 
Buddhistic texts were in existence at this time. The Calcutta- 
Bairat edict names seven texts which have been traced in the 
canon. Of equal value are the inscriptions on the Bharhut and 
Sanchi stupas of the second and first centuries B.C. ; while their 
carvings presuppose Buddhajataka legends, the inscriptions 
there mention actually reciter (bhanaka), Sutta reciter (Suttan- 
tika), one versed in the five Nikayas (Pancanekayika), one 
versed in the Pi takas (Petakin) and preacher of Dhamma 
(Dhammakathika) . These epigraphical references are some 
indication that at the time of Aioka there was a Buddhistic 
canonical literature to which the available Pali canon bears 
general resemblance. 

Jainism does not lag behind in recording legends of the 
constitution of the Ardhamagadh! canon at Pataliputra in the 
time of Chandragupta, and of the Jain affiliations of the Nanda 
and Maurya kings and ministers. To Badrabahu, whom Jain 
legend brings to Karnataka along with king Chandragupta who 
too became a Jain, are ascribed the ten Niryuktis and the Kalpa - 
sutra. While it may be true that the Jain Angas have in them 
portions going to the Mauryan times in antiquity, it is well 
understood that their bulk represents very late work. 



CHAPTER XI 


MAURYAN ART 
I 

Introduction 

It is indeed curious that the first organised art activity in 
India in large scale and durable material of which datable 
examples have come down to us in any recognisable number 
belongs to the period of the Mauryas. The Chaleo lithic civilisa- 
tion of the Indus valley has left behind relics, few in number 
but varied in subject and treatment, that may safely be said to 
belong to the domain of high art with a long artistic tradition 
and experience behind it. Indeed, the art represented by the 
reliefs on the seals and figure sculptures in the round found at 
Harappa, Mohen-jo-Daro and other sites in the Punjab, Sind, 
Baluchistan, and further north and east, is already highly deve- 
loped, sophisticated and conscious, and expresses most fully and 
significantly the culture-ideology of a people urban in upbring- 
ing, highly sophisticated in the luxury of living, and probably 
industrial and feudal in socio-economic organisation. Like 
the civilisation itself its art also had already reached the creative 
climax of a tradition. Into the relation of this art with the art 
of the contemporary civilised world it is not the place to enter ; 
but it must needs be told that this art in spite of its affinities with 
contemporary Mediterranean art has its own essential qualities 
and its own character cf form that link it with the art of India 
of the historical period 1 . Yet the fact remains that the art of the 
Indus valley is still largely an unknown factor in so far as it 
remains chronologically unexplained, and we hardly know 
anything definite of what happened along the arrow of time 
between the final phase of the Indus valley civilisation and the 
civilisation that flourished in the Ganges valley more than two 
thousand years later. 


I. St. Kramrisch, Indian Sculpture , pp. 3 — 7. 



MAURYAN ART 


343 


The earliest that the Ganges valley is alleged to have offered 
to us in the shape and form of what may be called an art object is 
a small gold tablet representing a naked woman standing on her 
legs in symmetrical rigidity, with exaggerated hips and sexual 
organs, heavy and clumsy ornaments and rigidly angular com- 
position. It was dug out of a tomb near Lauriya, was identified 
by Bloch, the explorer, as the iconic representation of the Earth 
goddess, and was ascribed by him to about the eighth and 
seventh centuries B.G. There can hardly be any doubt that such 
images in metal as well as in clay served as fetish symbols ; there 
are passages in the Rig Veda and later also in the Grihya sulras 
which can be interpreted to suggest that figures of gods and 
animals were fashioned in metal and clay for such purposes 1 . 
A small gold tablet similar to that found at Lauriya and a small 
gold figure, forming part of the relics from the ruins of the 
Piprahva stupa, evidently Buddhistic, and belonging to a period 
not earlier than that of the Mauryas 2 3 , reveals the same motive 
and treatment as those of the Lauriya tablet, so that the latter 
can hardly be ascribed to so early a period as Bloch does. Some 
of the oldest terracotta pieces recovered by Marshall from the 
ruins of Bhita seem also to belongmore or less to this category*; 
their motive, if not their treatment, is the same, so that all these 
objects may be taken to be typical representations of a primitive 
phase of imagination centering round fetishistic beliefs. They 
are not definitely the products of any organised and conscious 
art movement in any considerable scale, though primitive faiths 
and beliefs may have helped and favoured the development of 
sculptural and architectural art in India at a later stage of history. 

That this was indeed the case is fully borne out by early 
Buddhist and Jaina texts and supported by early Buddhist 
reliefs that reveal the flourishing existence, particularly in 
eastern India, of a primitive religion that indulged in the worship 
of such symbols as the Chaitya which was either a holy tree or 


1. Th. Bloch, * Excavations at Lauriya, A.S . R., 1906 — 7, pp. 122 ff ; A. B. 
Keith, C. H . I. I, p. 97 ; E. W. Hopkins, C. H. I. I, p. 232 l fonkhyayana Grfrya 
Sutra, IV. 19 ; L. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture , pp. 2 — 3, 14 — 15. 

2. W. C. Pepp£, The Piprahva Stupa J. R. A. S., 1898, pp. 573 ff. 

V. A. Smith, note, pp. 579 ff., figs. 1 1 and 15 ; J. Marshall, C. H. L p. 623. 

3. J. Marshall, ‘Excavations at Bhita’, A . S. R., 1911 — 12, p. 4, pi. 23* 



344 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


groves of trees ( rukkhacetiya , vanacetiya , aramaeetiya etc.), and 
not infrequently these trees were the abodes of gods or spirits 
known as Vriksadevatas , Yakshas etc. Another important symbol 
that received worship was the stupa, a hemispherical tumulus, 
either votive or dedicatory or commemorative. All such objects 
and places of primitive worship were enclosed for protection 
with railings which must have given the people some scope for 
the play of their artistic and decorative instincts . 1 A third object 
that also seems to have been an important element in the primi- 
tive religion of middle and eastern India was the animal standard 
— the dhvajastambha of later Indian literature, — i.e. posts or 
pillars crowned by animals considered sacred and worshipped by 
primitive peoples. This trait of primitive religion was net 
particularly characteristic of India, but was equally potent in 
Babylonia and Assyria as well as in ancient Greece. Later 
Brahman ical mythology knows of such standards or stambhas 
of at least three different animal gods, namely the Garuda, 
the Vrisha and the Makara, the vahanas of Vishnu, Siva and 
Gariga (also Kandarpa) respectively. Sometimes the animal 
was replaced by certain trees considered sacred, the Kalpadruma 
or the wishing tree and the palm-tree represented by its crowning 
cluster of leaves. It was evidently from such early specimens 
of primitive animal standards made of impermanent materials 
like wood and bamboo that Asoka derived the inspiration of 
erecting monumental pillars crowned by sacred animals 2 . 

But of such objects of worship before the days of Asoka- 
Maurya we have no remains extant, nor of the Yaksha-devatds 
or spirits referred to in a general way or specifically by name in 
early Buddhist and Jaina texts. Attempts have been made on 
epigraphic reasons to identify the two round standing male 
figures from Patna in reddish-grey sandstone of the Chunar 
region and bearing chauris as those of Yakshas ; indeed behind 
the shoulder of one of these statues, on the scarf, is a short inscrip- 
tion paleographically assignable to about the first century A.D. — 
that may be read as : Yakh(o) sa (?) Vaianamdi . That they are 

i. R. P. Chanda, The beginnings of art in Eastern India, M. A, S. 30, pp. 

3 — 8, 31 — 33. 

a. Ibid ; Mitra, A. K. ‘Origin of the bell -capital/ I. H. Q- VII, pp. 224 — 

* 5 , *38—44. 



MAURYAN ART 


345 


monumental sculptural representations of Takshas there can 
hardly be any doubt, though persistent attempts were once made 
to identify them as statues of two kings of the Saisunaga dynasty 
of Magadha 1 . This latter theory is no longer seriously pressed ; 
but it is still generally held that they belong stylistically to the 
later phase of Mauryan art. I shall try to show later on that 
the so-called Mauryan polish which is the rock-argument on 
which the assumption is based can hardly be considered suffi- 
cient for their being labelled as Mauryan, and that not only 
paleographically but stylistically as well, they cannot belong to 
a period of art earlier them that represented at Sanchl and in the 
early primitives of Mathura. 

The fact remains therefore that we have no examples extant 
of either sculpture or architecture that can definitely be labelled 
chronologically as pre-Mauryan or perhaps even as pre-Asokam 
Indeed, all evidences suggest that whatever specimens of these 
two branches of visual art we know of are directly the products 
of the Maurya court and the initiative came definitely from the 
all powerful King himself. Except one or two pillars that stylis- 
tically may be ascribed to a date anterior to that of Asoka, all 
the rest belong definitely to the latter's reign along with the 
animal figures that crown them or exist independently. The 
description of the city of Pataliputra and of the royal palace we 
read of in the accounts of classical writers like Megasthenes, 
Arrian, and Strabo, and the excavations at the site of the old 
city by Waddel and Spooner 2 to which we shall turn at a later 
stage, may be taken to suggest that Chandragupta, the first 
Maurya, may have been responsible for the original planning 
and execution of the building of the city as well as of the royal 

l. K. P. Jayaswal, 'Statues of two Saisunaka Emperors’, J. B. 0. R. S. f 
V. pp, 88 — 106. The discussion continued through vols. V and VI of the 

same journal and a number of scholars including R. D. Baneijb V, A. Smith, 

L. D. Barnett and H. P. Sastri joined. It was further taken up by R. P. Chanda, 
'Four ancient Yaksha statues’, J. D . £., Cal . Univ.> IV, pp. 47 — 84 ; ‘Inscrip- 
tions on two Patna Statues in the Indian Museum*, Ind. Ant , XLVIII, pp. 

25 — 28 ; R. C. Majumdar, ‘Alleged Saisunaga Statues* Ibid., pp. 419 — 
424 ; O. C. Gangoiy, ‘A note on Mr. Jayaswal’s discovery of two Saisunaga 
statues’, Modem Review, 1919, October, pp. 419 — 24 and A. K. Coomaraswamy, 
Catalogue of the Indian Collection in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 1923, Pt. II, 
p. 4 ; History of Indian and Indonesi an Art, pp. 16 — 17. 

2. Waddell, Report on excavations at Pataliputra , Calcutta, 1903. pp. 22 — 26; 
Spooner, A . 5, R. 9 1912 — 13, pp. 73 fit. A. S. R, E . C. 1915 — 16, pp. 27 — 28 \ 
McCrindle, Ancient India, 1901, p. 42. 



346 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


palace ; but there can be little doubt that Bindusara and Asoka, 
particularly the latter, added considerably to the original lay 
out and the buildings. The Maurya Pillared Hall and the 
stupendous buildings remains of which were laid bare by Spooner 
may have been built by Asoka himself, since their essential 
ideology and conception agree so remarkably well with all that 
we already know of the aims, ideals, motives and general ideolo- 
gical mental design of that great benevolent autocrat. Such 
large designs executed with almost imperial thoroughness can 
for all that we know only be associated with his name. Of other 
architectural remains that can definitely be associated with the 
Maurya dynasty are a few cave-dwellings dedicated by Asoka 
and his grandson Dasaratha for the use of the monks of the 
Ajivika sect. The sum total of the Mauryan treasury of art 
may thus on proven grounds, be said to include (1) the remains 
of the royal palace and city of Pataliputra; (2) a monolithic rail 
at Sarnath; (3) the Bodhimanda or the altar resting on four 
pilasters at Bodhgaya ; (4) the excavated chaitya - halls or cave 
dwellings in the Bara bar and NagarjunI hills of Gaya including 
the Sudama cave dated in the twelfth year of Asoka’s reign; (5) 
the non-edict bearing and edict-bearing pillars; (6) the animal 
sculptures crowning the pillars with animal and vegetal reliefs 
decorating the abaci of the capitals; and (7) the front half of the 
representation of an elephant carved out in the round from a 
live rock at Dhauli in Orissa 1 . 


i. Other architectural and sculptural remains that are generally ascribed 
to the Maurya period, on either stylistic or traditional grounds, include (i) A 
railing (?) pillar with inscription from the Arjunapura site, Mathura, now 
lost ; (2) the oldest parts, subsequently enclosed by later additions, of stupas : 
(3) foundations of chaitya-halls at Sanchi and Sonari : (4) two Patna Yaksha 
statues, now in the Indian museum ; (5) a few fragmentsof grey polished stone- 
sculptures from Sarnath ; (6) a few fragments of sculptures in red spotted sand 
stone from Mathura ; (7) a fragmentary relief from Bhita ; (8) fragments of a 
ribbed polished stone umbrella from Sanchi ; (9) two carved perforated circular 
stone plaques from the Bhlr mound site, Taxila ; (10) a considerable number 
of terracottas from such widely separated sites as Samath, Basarh, Bulandi- 
bagh, Kumrahar and other places round about the old site of Pataliputra, 
Bhita, Nagari, Mathura, Kosam. Sankis^d and Taxila ; (11) a chauri-bearing 
Yaksha statue from Didarganj ; (12) a more than life size Yaksha statue from 
Parkham ; (13) torso of a Yaksha or king from Baroda, Mathura ; (14) a 
image now worshipped as Manasa from near Parkham ; (15) two polished 

stone images with legs and heads broken oiT of Jaina TTrthankaras from Loham- 
pur, near Patna, and now in the Patna Museum ; and (16) a hooded serpent 
canopy from Rajgir. About nos. 1, 2 and 3 we are not in a position to make 
any definite assertion ; the only argument that labels No. 8 as Mauryan is the 
glossy polish of the stone ; it is difficult to say anything about the date of No. 9 > 



MAURYAN ART 


347 


A few characteristics are common to all these sculptural 
and architectural remains. They are all monumental in con- 
ception and design, and inordinately fine, orderly, thorough 
and precise in execution. Moreover, with the exception of the 
remains of the royal palace and city-buildings of Pataliputra, 
all of them were executed in hard grey sandstone of more or less 
big dimensions, always very finely chiselled and very highly 
polished to a glossiness that has hardly any parallel in India of 
later ages and in the world except in ancient Iran. And thirdly, 
all of them were reared up directly under the shadow of the royal 
throne of the Mauryas, Asoka and his grandson fixing their 
stamp on the majority of them. We are thus confronted with 
an historical phenomenon that calls for an explanation. Here 
we are face to face with a period in ancient Indian history 
when a royal dynasty with imperial ambition and outlook suddenly 
discards wood and bamboo, perhaps also brick and clay, 
and takes to the employment of stone as the material par 
excellence for monumental sculpture and architecture, and this 
new material is handled with such perfect ease and mastery as to 
suggest that the art of hard and large size stone-cutting was as 
it were already long in practice. Except those carved out of 
live rock, all removable pieces were worked out of grey sand- 
stone quarried at Chunar ; the Maury an columns are all carved 
out of this material, and it should be remembered that these 
huge columns are distributed over a very wide area, between 
Delhi in the west, Basarh in the east and Sanchi in the south. 
Most certainly the huge resources of the state made available 
to the artists rendered possible the conception, planning and 
execution in such large and gigantic proportions. But royal will 
and state resources alone cannot explain the sudden transforma- 
tion from wood, sun-dried brick, clay, ivory end metal to stone 
or from the fine workmanship and exquisite finish of ivory and 
metal work to bold and rounded work in stone of huge dimen- 
sions. It is possible to postulate that similar bold and large 
scale work was long in practice in wood in pre-Maurya days, 

here too the main argument rests on the glossy polish of the stone. To try 
to date terracottas on stylistic grounds alone is often dangerous as has so con- 
vincingly been shown by Kramrisch and Gordon ; the items under No. xo and 
Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, ii, 12, 13, 14, and 15, I shall have occasion to refer to and 
discuss at a later stage. 



348 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


and what the Maurya emperors did was only to initiate the 
artists and art-guilds into the use of stone and make them trans- 
late their traditional skill in terms of a new material. Such an 
explanation is certainly admissible ; one has only to read through 
the description of the city and royal palace of Pataliputra left 
by classical writers 1 , and examine the design and execution of 
many an architectural element of the Maurya, Suriga and other 
early Indian monuments, e.g. the pillars, the railings, the gates, 
the Ghaitya facades, etc. and be convinced of the force of the 
argument 2 . But the very fact that stone henceforward became 
the material par excellence for Indian plastic art is by itself signi- 
ficant ; equally significant is it that stone sculpture when it first 
comes to view in India during the Maurya period is already 
the expression of a civilised and sophisticated and fully developed 
art that had generations of artistic effort, experience and tradi- 
tion behind it ; that it is a work in the round, it exists by itself 
and is borne by its own volume and strength, and that it has an 
inherent technical and psychological character that the jeweller’s 
or carpenter’s art fails to explain and account for. Indeed, past 
artistic tradition and the art of the wood, clay, ivory, mineral, 
stone and metal worker in howsoever large a scale and with what- 
ever technical skill and efficiency cannot fully explain the art 
tradition Mauryan sculptures represent, the technical skill and 
efficiency of the Mauryan sculptor who worked in stone of huge 
and heavy proportions, and the atmosphere the sculptures them- 
selves breathe. 


II 

Socio-historical Background 

Any attempt at an explanation of the phenomenon referred 
to above must take into account the state of artistic effort and 
activities in India itself during the centuries immediately pre- 
ceding that of the Maurya s, i.e. during the period of the Haryanka, 
the Saisunaga and the Nanda domination. Storeyed 
buildings presumably of wood and brick, were already widely 
known, and mention is made of round and square huts perhaps 

1. See McCrindle, cited above. 

2. Smith, A history of Fine Art in India & Ceylon, Chap. Ill ; Brown, 
Indian Architecture : Buddhist & Hindu r Chaps. II — VI. 



MAURYAN ART 


349 


of wood and bamboo. An advanced knowledge of the use of 
metals like tin, lead, silver, copper and iron shaped and formed 
into objects meant for various domestic and other purposes is 
already attested by the later Vedic texts ; and the jdtakas reveal 
that there were eighteen different kinds of silpas or arts and crafts 
including carpentry, smithery, leather-dressing and painting. 
Metal workers in general were probably known by the word 
kamara ( Skt . karmakara) , and there are definite evidences to sug- 
gest that these artists and craftsmen were organised into senis 
or guilds. Localisation of certain industrial crafts also took 
place to the extent that an entire village or a particular locality 
in the town came to be designated according to the craft prac- 
tised in the locality. The jdtakas also afford a more or less vivid 
picture of contemporary city and village life, villages with scat- 
tered huts made of wood and bamboo and reed, cities with 
roads and lanes lined with buildings of brick and wood, all set 
off against the background of an agricultural, industrial and 
commercial life in small scale and within narrow proportions 1 . 
If we set aside certain stories of the Mahabhdrata , there is nothing 
else to suggest that the canvas of contemporary life was large and 
that it was conceived in any magnificent and monumental scale. 
Tribal and primitive was indeed the character of the social 
psychology of Northern India during all these centuries. This 
tribal and primitive outlook is also fully in evidence in the 
remains of the old city of Rajagriha with its walls and remains of 
dwellings built of rough cyclopean masonry 2 , which is the one 
definite architectural example that can be said to belong to 
pre-Maury an times. 

But a slow and steady widening of the tribal and primitive 
outlook was being effected in the political sphere. Already in 
the Aitareya Brahma na we hear of such sacrifices as the Rdjasuya 
and the Aindramahdbhisheka, of sdrvabhauma kings, of paramount 
rule and of all-encompassing sovereignty. The same political 
conception of raja sdrvabhauma is repeated in Baudhaycna Srcuta- 

1. C. H. /., I. p. 206. 

2. Fergusson, History of Indian & Eastern Architecture. 2nd Edn. I- pp. 75 
— 76. For alleged pre-Mauryan antiquities see Coomaraswamy, History of Indian 
and Indonesian Art , p. 10 and notes, Lauriya-Nandangarh gold-plaque of a 
nude female, fig. 105. 



350 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


sutra , and that of raja chakkavatti in early Buddhist and Jaina 
texts 1 . In reality however the normal political condition of 
northern India till the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. was not 
that of an empire of any considerable extent under a sarvabhauma 
monarch but it was that of separate small and independent 
states and kingdoms each under a king or tribal leader. It was only 
towards the third quarter of the fourth century B.C. that the ideal 
was partially achieved in the person of Mahapadmananda who 
has been referred to in the Puranas as sarvarajocchetta , sarvaksha - 
trdntakanrpah and ekarat , the supreme monarch, and one of his 
sons, the last of the dynasty, as the powerful monarch of the 
Prasioi and the Gangaridai, in the accounts of classical writers. 

It is difficult to say whether the evolution of the wider poli- 
tical outlook was the outcome of natural historical process or 
was directly or indirectly conditioned by India’s contact with 
the contemporary west-Asiatic world. In any case the chrono- 
logical and historical background is significant and is worth 
consideration. Already in prehistoric times, the Indus valley 
civilisation formed a part of the civilisation that extended to 
ancient Sumer ; much later, the civilisation represented by the 
Rigveda was but a cognate of that represented by the Avesta . There 
is no reason to assume that this intimate relation of India with 
Iran and the ancient Asiatic west lapsed at any time during the 
centuries that followed. Indeed, from about 800 B.C. almost 
continuous contact of Aryanised India with Iran can either be 
inferred from actual remains of art objects, fiom lithic records, 
and from cognate political and cultural ideas and ideologies. 

In the sixth century B.C. part of northern India went under the 
political domination of Iran, and gradually the Indus came to 
form the eastern boundary of the wide Iranian empire of Darius ; 
indeed this part of India came to be politically organised into 
the 20th satrapy of that empire 2 . Darius describes himself in 
his inscriptions as Kshayathiyanam Kshayathiya , the King of kings, 
the great King 3 ; he was in reality a sarvabhauma monarch of the 

i* Keith, Rigieda Brahmanas , 1920, p. 331 ; Sutta-nipdta , p. 99 , Rhys 
Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha , part 2, p. 13 etc ; Chanda cities authorities in 
Beginnings of Art in Eastern India , pp. 13 ff. 

2 • Ray Chaudhuri, PHAI 4th edn. pp. 193-6. 

3. A Suez Inscription oi Darius in Tolman, Ancient Persian Lexicon Texts, 
New York, 1906, p. 50. 



MAURY AN ART 


351 


old Indian conception, an ekaraf like Mahapadmananda. In- 
deed the Achaemenid dynasty was the first to evolve and give 
reality to the idea of imperial suzerainty which a century later 
was partially achieved by the Nandas, and fully by the Mauryas 1 . 
Certainly no contemporary bon owing can at once be postulated 
but it is likely that both India and Iran participated in a com- 
mon politico- historical process. 

This is more evident in the domain of art and general culture. 
Indeed early Indian art can be viewed and understood fully 
only against the background of age-old but very potent and 
effective Indo-Sumerian and Indo-Iranian contacts maintained 
through long centuries. In Maurya, Sunga, Andhra and 
Kushana art, there is a rich treasure of art and decorative mctifs , 
ornamentations, devices and patterns that we meet with for the 
first time and that suggest ‘parallels in Sumerian, Hittite, Assy- 
rian, Mycenaean, Cretan, Trojan, Lycian, Phoenician, Achae- 
menid and Scythian cultures*. Coomaraswamy gives a long 
list of such common elements and technical analogies* and finally 
argues that ‘so far as its constituent elements are concerned, and 
apart from any question of style, there is comparatively little in 
Indian decorative art that is peculiar to India, and much that 
India shares with Western Asia.’ It is difficult to disagree with 
Coomara s wamy when further he says : 

‘All this amounts to proof that the themesand motifs of pre- 
Maurya art cannot have differed very greatly from those of 
Maurya and Sunga ; fantastic animals, palmettes, rosettes, and 
bell-capitals must have been common elements of the craftsman’* 
repertory under the Nandas as in the time of ASoka. India, in 
centuries and perhaps millenniums B.C., was an integral part of 
an ‘Ancient East* that extended from the Mediterranean to the 
Ganges Valley* 2 . 

1. In West Asia the idea of the conquest of the Tour regions’ or ‘four 

quarters’ originated with the Kings of Babylonia and Assyria. But it was 
actually realised later by the Achaemenian monarchs, notably Cyrus, his son 
Cambyses, and Darius, son of Hystaspes. In a Suez Incription commemorating 
the completion of the canal from the Nile to the Red Sea Danus proudly 
records : ‘I (am) Darius, the great King, King of kings, king of countries posses- 
sing all people, (king) of this great earth far and wide.* The phrases are almost 
exactly such as we find in the Aitareya Brdhmana and Bawihdyana Srauta Sutra. 
Also see Chanda, Beginnings of Art pp. 17 — 20. 

2. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian and Indonesian Art , pp. 
where the whole aspect is fully discussed. Also Combaz — VInde et L orient 
Classique (Paris, 1937). 



352 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Apart from India forming an integral part of an ‘Ancient 
East’ and sharing in a common cultural heritage from very 
early times, there is more or less definite evidence of intimate 
cultural contact of India with Iran in particular from about the 
eighth and seventh centuries B.G. The North-west and the 
Indus valley forming a part of Darius’s empire made contacts 
with Iran easier still. This intimate contact must have been 
responsible for certain elements in Buddhist and later Brahma- 
nical mythology, tradition, worship and iconography, especially 
those connected with the cults of the Sun and Fire 1 . It was also 
responsible for the origin and evolution of the KharoshthI script 
in about the fifth or fourth century B.G. An Aramaic inscrip- 
tion belonging to about the fourth century B.C. has 
actually been found at Taxila 2 . The Haryankas, the Saisunagas 
and the Nandas must have more or less felt the pressure of this 
contact, but since their dominions lay far away from the regions 
where presumably the effects of the impact of the two civilisa- 
tions were directly felt, Eastern India was perhaps only indirectly 
touched by Iranian contacts. 

With the coming of the Mauryas to power on the throne of 
Pataliputra, with the building up of an all-India empire by 
Chandragupta extending up to modern Afghanistan and there- 
fore touching almost what had once been the heart of Achae- 
menid power and culture, with the establishment of intimate 
friendly relations with contemporary Hellenistic powers, and 
friendly contact of Maurya kings and court with Greek political 
and cultural representatives from Graeco-Bactrian courts and 
kingdoms, the situation took a new turn. The Achaemenid 
empire had long gone to dust and India had ceased to form a 
part of that empire. In 330 B. C. Alexander the Great over- 
threw the once mighty Persian Empire, but in the process of con- 
solidating his conquest the Greek conqueror came under the 
overpowering influence of Achaemenian imperialism and Achae- 
menian art and culture. Plutarch has a long and vivid descrip- 
tion of how Alexander behaved himself at Persepolis and how he 
worked for a fusion of the cultures of Greece and of Iran of the 


1. Coomaraswamy, p. 22. 

2. Marshall, A Guide to Taxila , pp. 9, 77 — 78. 



MAURYAN ART 


35S 

Achaemenid monarchs. Donned in the robes of Iranian monarch?-, 
he used to sit on the throne of Darius under a golden canopy.. 
He himself married Darius’s daughter Statira, and married his. 
Greek friends to Iranian ladies ; one of these friends was Seleuctsy 
later known as Seleucus Nicator, who married Apama, the 
daughter of Spitamenes. Not satisfied with having simply 
adopted somewhat the Persian mode of dress, Alexander, says 
Plutarch, ‘accommodated himself more than ever to the manner 
of the Asiatics, and at the same time persuaded them to adopt 
some of the Macedonian fashions ; for by a mixture of both he 
thought an union might be promoted much better than by force, 
and his authority maintained even when he w^as at a distance. 
For the same reason he selected thirty thousand ( Persian) boys 
and gave them masters to instruct them in Grecian literature 
as well as train them to arms in the Macedonian manner ’. 1 

The same process seems to have been fully at work in the 
realm of art. Colonial Hellenistic art was slowly coming under 
the influence of Persian art, specially of Persian motifs , patterns 
and designs on the one hand, wdiile Persian art itself began to 
feel the pressure of Ionian and Hellenistic influences onwards 
from the fifth century B.C . 2 This pressure became active during 
and after the Achaemenid period, so that when the Mauryas 
came into intimate contact with the colonial Greeks of Western 
Asia, both Achaemenid and Hellenistic art-traditions had largely 
influenced each other. 

After the withdrawal of the Macedonian army of Alexander 
and the establishment of an alliance of Chandragupta Maurya 
with Seleucus, the Mauryas came into very intimate friendly 
relations with the Seleucid Greek houses, ?„nd this relation 
continued from generation to generation. Besides contracting a 
matrimonial alliance Chandra.gupta repeatedly received 
Megasthenes as an ambassador from Seleucus, is repoited 
to have sent Seleucus some strange Indian drugs presumably 
through his owm envoy, and is further said to have been used to 
offer sacrifices in Hellenic manner to Alexander’s altars on the 
Hvphases. The ceremonial at the court of this king described 

1. Plutarch quoted by Chanda, Beginnings p. 18. 

2. Sarre, Die Kunst des Alien Pernens , pp. 20 — 25 ; Carotti, A History of 
Art, I, pp. 93 — 794 ; Bell, Early Architecture in Western Asia, p. 231. 



354 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


by classical writers also reveals Achaemenian influence 3 * . His 
son Bindusara had also in his court a Greek envoy, Deimachus 
of Plataea, sent by Antiochus I, son of Seleucus. Bindusara 
also, like his father seems to have been a Hellenophil ; he wrote 
back to Antiochus requesting him to buy and send on to him 
Sweet wine, dried figs and a Greek sophist. From Antiochus 
came the reply : ‘We shall send you dried figs and sweet wine, 
but it is not lawful in Greece to sell a sophist . 5 Diodorus 
speaks of a Greek author Iamboulus by name who found his 
way to the king of Palibothra, and this king of Palibothra, pre- 
sumably Bindusara or at least one of the first three Maurya 
monarchs, ‘had a great love for the Grecians . 5 Asoka’s friendly 
relations with the Tavanas or the Greek states of Western Asia 
and Egypt are well-known ; the w r orld that he claims to have 
conquered by his policy of Dhammavijaya was preeminently this 
Hellenistic world ; he arranged for the medical treatment of men 
and cattle, among others, in the dominions of Antiochus Theos 
and his neighbours ; and it is not unlikely that his description of 
himself as devanampiya Pijadasi is an echo of the deification of 
kings cmrent among Alexander’s successors in Hellenistic Orient. 
Both Megasthenes and Kautilya refer to a State department 
run and maintained specifically for the purpose of looking after 
foreigne1 rs 2 who evidently were quite numerous not only in the 
capital city of Pataliputra but in other provincial capitals 2nd 
trade centres. There can hardly be any doubt that these foreign- 
ers were mostly colonial Greeks and a very large majority of 
them were merchants and businessmen. Indeed in the third 
century B.C. a caravan highway ran from TaxilA 
via Kandahar, Persepolis and Susa to Seleuceia on the Tigris, 
while another old main road ran via Kandahar, Herat, Hecato- 
mpylos, Ecbatana and Seleuceia and was joined by the Taxila- 
Kabul-Bactria route 3 . Taxila, it is well known, was the seat of 
an important Maurya province, and from here a great higb- 

1. Hultzsch, C.LL I, pp. xxxiv-xxxv, xlii,; CJH.L I, P* 433 J ® cva ^o^p 
House of Seleucus, Lond., 1902, 1, p. 297 ; Smith, Early History of India, PP* 

‘Persian Influence on Mauryan India’, I. A. 1905. pp* 201-3* t 

2 . McCrindle, Ancient India , p. 54 ; Kautilya Arihasdstra, Shamaaa5try 
edn. p. 144 (II 36). 

3. Tam, W. W., Hellenistic Civilisation , Chap. VII, pp. 1 99—214 5 J ougu H 

P., Macedonian Imperialism, pp. 93 — 107, 353 > 35^* 



MAURYAN ART 


355 


way ran direct to connect Pataliputra with the Hellenic east. 
Besides, there was also a coastal sea-borne trade route to Seleuceia 
along the Persian Gulf and up the Tigris, and to Egypt following 
the coastline. It is this trade route that explains the Aramaic 
inscription referred to above and datable in the fourth century 
B. C. It was along this route also that foreigners including 
envoys, Greek traders, travellers, artists and craftsmen must 
have flocked to Mauryan India in such numbers as to oblige 
the State to maintain a department to look after their comfort 
and well-being. This intimate contact indeed explains such 
finds as the fragmentary handle of a terracotta vase showing- 
Alexander’s head in lion’s skin and recovered from Taxila 1 , 
or random finds from Sarnath, Basarh and the Patna region of 
terracotta pieces of distinctive Hellenistic appearance or with 
definite Hellenistic motifs and design 2 . That they belong pro- 
bably to a later date does not minimise the importance of the 
very intimate relations the Maurya court maintained with the 
Hellenic east ; rather they point out that even after the decline 
and downfall of the Mauryas parts of India continued to remain 
in touch with the Hellenistic world. Within a century after the 
death of Asoka a Greek army penetrated as far east as Madhya - 
mika near Ghitor and Saketa near Ayodhya. 

The Maurya kings and the Maurya court were indeed Helle- 
nophils, but it was evidently their Hellenophilism that also 
brought them into an indirect contact with the art and culture 
of the Achaemenids. The grandiose and magnificent monu- 
ments of the Achaemenid monarchs were still standing when the 
Mauryas came to exercise all India suzerainty and Maurya art 
was making its appearance. Certain Achaemenian forms and 
motifs had presumably already migrated to the Punjab and the 
Indus valley during the Achaemenian occupation of the region. 
Exacavations at the Bhir mound at Taxila yielded from the pre- 
Hellenistic strata a scaraboid of steatite exhibiting a winged 

i. A. S. R. Pt. I, 1920 — 21, p. 20, PI. XVI, Fig. 2. 

2- Bachhofer, op. cit. p. 12, Pi. 13 ; A. S. R. Pt. I., 1917 — 18, p. 27 
PI. XVI, Fig. 2 ; ibid, 1913 — 14, p. 182, No. 791, Pi. xliii, fig. (h). Read 
with this Nearchus’s statement to the effect that ‘the Indians quickly learnt to 
make Greek articles such as the scrapers and oilflasks used by athletes’. CM. I. 

I, p. 418. For the Hellenophilism of the Mauryas see also Ray Chaudhuri, 

P. H. A. /. 4th edn,, p. 245. 



356 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURVAS 


stag which is reminiscent of similar objects of Achaemenian 
origin 1 . ‘The Indian punch-marked silver coinage struck 
on the Persian standard perhaps represented the Achaeme- 
nian coinage for India’ 2 . But even after the extinction 
of Achaemenian power importation of Achaemenian art 
objects to India seems to have continued. Curtins, Diodorus, 
and Arrian state that Alexander presented to the king of Taxila 
among other things a large number of gold and silver vessels 
and an enormous quantity of Babylonian and Persian embroi- 
deries from the treasury of old Persian monarchs 3 . It has also 
been pointed out that a few minor antiquities found in the upper 
strata of the Bhir mound excavations ‘reflect the influence of 
Achaemenian art.’ Among these, four bangles of thin beaten 
gold terminating in lion’s heads, and a fragment of pottery from 
the side of a vase decorated with the conventional leaf design 
and reminiscent of the capitals of well-known Asoka pillars, 
are particularly noteworthy. Moreover a polished sandstone 
head from Sarnath wearing a crenellated crown, the method 
of wearing the waist cloth without the Kaccha as we find in the 
two Patna Yaksha statues in the Indian Museum, and the 
coiled armlets decorated spirally and terminating in a Dragon’s 
head, of the same statues, inevitably recall Achaemenian parall- 
els 4 . It is evident that the trade routes referred to above opened up 
avenues through which Maurya India came to acquire more 
direct and intimate contact with Medo-Achaemenian art and 
culture, perhaps through Greek intermediaries. 

But more important evidence cf Achaemenian cultural 
influence on the Maurya court and Maurya cultural ideology 
is afforded by the accounts of the city and royal palace of Patali- 
putra left by classical authors, evidently following Megasthenes, 
and by the actual remains of the same city and palace unearthed 
by Waddell and Spooner 5 . Strabo says that the city of Pali- 
bothra was situated at the confluence of the Ganges and the 
Erannoboas (Hiranyavaha, the modern Son) ; it was 80 stadia 

1. A. S. X. Pt. I, 1919—20, p. 23, Pi. XL fig. 2. 

2. Camb. Anc. Hist VI., p. 402 ; C. H. I, pp. 319 — 44* 

3. C. H. I. I. p. 359 ; Smith Early History of India, 4th edn. pp. 65— 66. 

4. Mitra, ‘Origin of the Bell-CapitaP, /. H. Q- VII, pp. 229 — 230. 

5. McCrindle, Waddell and Spooner, op. cit. 



MAURYAN ART 


357 


in length and 1 5 in breadth and was of the shape of a parallelo- 
gram. The city was surrounded by a wooden wall pierced with 
loop-holes for the discharge of arrows, crowned with 560 towers 
and provided with 60 gates. In sumptuousness and magni- 
ficence, according to Strabo, Pataliputra compared very favour- 
ably with Susa and Ecbatana. Waddell’s excavations actually 
laid bare the remains of what had been once the city wall, and 
Spooner later brought to light remains of huge wooden buildings 
at Bulandibagh and Kumrahar, both near Patna. The remains 
of one of these buildings are of particular significance — those 
of a pillared hall in which stone columns were employed to 
support the roof. Of the eighty pillars that had once stood on 
a wooden platform and supported a wooden roof Spooner was 
able to discover the entire lower part of at least one in almost 
perfect condition — it is more or less like an Asokan pillar, smooth, 
highly polished and made of grey Chunar sandstone. Writing 
about Indian towns Arrian says, fi All their towns which are 
down beside the rivers or the sea are made of wood ; for towns 
built of brick would never hold out for any length of time with 
the rains on the one hand, and on the other, the rivers which rise 
above their banks and spread a sheet of water over the plains. 
But the towns which are built on elevated places out of reach, 
these are built of brick and clay.’ The excavations of Waddell 
and Spooner admirably confirm what we are told by Strabo 
and Arrian, and constitute one more proof of the fact that before 
the employment of stone for building purposes, wood was 
generally the only material for even the most sumptuous and 
magnificent buildings. Spooner’s excavations however revealed 
for the first time that stone was employed for building purposes 
in at least one building of the Maurya royal city, and that it was 
a pillared hall. That the magnificent palaces of Pataliputra 
reminded Megasthenes of the palaces of Susa and Ecbatana 
is not without significance when it is remembered that the 
Maurya Pillared Hall reminded Spooner of the famous Hall of 
Hundred Columns erected at Persepolis by Darius the Great. 
‘Whereas no other structure of really early date in ancient 
India disclosed,’ says Spooner, ‘an arrangement of pillars in 
square bays over the whole floor the hall at Kumrahar did show 
this otherwise unparalleled arrangement, and this was identical 



358 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with the arrangement cf the pillars in the Achaemenian Hall. 
The columns themselves moreover showed a technique in their 
polished surface which is not only known to have been un-Indian, 
and outside the line of Indian architectural development, but 
which again is identical with Persepolitan workmanship’. Apart 
from the question of the origin and morphology of the Asokan 
pillars to which we shall have occasion to turn later on, there 
can hardly be any doubt that the Maurya Pillared Hall owed 
its inspiration and general design to the Hall of Hundred Columns 
erected by Darius. We have it on the authority of classical 
writers that Chandragupta’s palace at Pataliputra consisted of 
halls whose gilded pillars were adorned with golden vines and 
silver birds ; indeed fragments of golden vines have been dis- 
covered in the excavations at Kumrahar. We know that the 
halls of the palaces of Ecbatana had gilded pillars constructed of 
cedar and cypress and golden vines of the pillars invariably 
recall the vines hanging over the couch of Darius — a gift of the 
Lydian Pythias and perhaps of Ionian workmanship. It is 
difficult to say -whether the Maurya Pillared Hall at Pataliputra 
was the conception of Chandragupta himself or one of his suc- 
cessors — personally I think it was built at the direction of Asoka 
— but there can be no doubt that one of the three early Maurya 
emperors was responsible for it, ncr is it unlikely that ‘this adop- 
tion of the Persepolitan style of building at Pataliputra was not 
the normal result of the contact of the Achaemenian and Indian 
sculptures but was due to conscious adoption of the plan of the 
Achaemenian Hall of Public Audience by the Mauryan emperor 
(Asoka) as a part of the paraphernalia of his imperialism. . . .*L 
It has been argued with some force that Mauryan imperia- 
lism as revealed in the inscriptions of Asoka was largely influenced 
by the imperial ideology of the Hellenistic and Achaemenian 
monarchs 1 2 . This may not be altogether unlikely, but be that 
as it may, the fact remains that the inscriptions themselves reveal 
the extent to which Asoka was indebted to his great Achaemenian 
predecessor Darius, not only for the idea of making his royal 
edicts known throughout his empire but also for the form of the 


1. Chanda, Beginnings p. 12. 

2. Ibid, p. 17 — 20. 



MAURYAN ART 


359 


inscriptions themselves 1 . At the end of the Susian version of 
the Behistun inscription of Darius we have the following : 

6 (Thus) saith Darius, the king : By the grace of Auramazda I 
made inscriptions in another fashion . . . .such as was not formerly 
. . . .and it was written and I. . . .then I sent the same inscrip- 
tions into all lands, and the people. 

The duplicate copies were evidently written on leather or 
brick as the one discovered by Koldeway suggests. This was 
also the arrangement made by Asoka for the circulation of his 
edicts (R.E. XIV, Kalinga Edict I, P. E. VII). The very idea 
indeed of recording royal orders and directions on such perma- 
nent material as rocks (and pillars) seems to have been inspired 
by Achaemenian practice. In respect of the form of the Asokan 
inscriptions Senart long ago pointed out their strong resem- 
blance with that of the inscriptions of the Achaemenian kings. 
The edicts of Asoka begin with the usual formula Devanampiya 
Piyadasi evamaha which according to Senart ‘is an absolutely 
isolated example in Indian epigraphy .... In the entire series 
of the inscriptions of the Achaemenides, from Darius to Art- 
axerxes Ochus, the phrase thatey Darayavaush Kshayathiya , “thus 
saith the king Darius,” or its equivalent thatey Kshayarsha , etc., 
inevitably forms the preamble of each of the proclamations. 
In both cases, this phrase in the third person is immediately 
succeeded by the use of the first person, and we are still further 
justified in drawing attention to this curious fact that, again 
in both cases the same word — dipi , lipi — is used to designate the 
inscriptions, and that, as we have seen, we are led to admit, 
on altogether independent grounds, that the Indian form of 
the word was originally borrowed from Persia/ Asoka s peculiar 
way of exhorting people to follow the laws of Dhamma also seems 
to have been adopted from Achaemenian practice initiated by 
Darius in his inscriptions (Behistun and Naksh-i-Rustam 
inscriptions ). 2 

Two important facts emerge. First, that whatever extant 
remains we can lay our hands on as definitely belonging to the 
Maurya Period are products of the Maurya Court, i.e. they were 
worked out by orders of the Maurya monarchs and perhaps also 

1. Ibid, pp. 21 — 26. 

2. Ind. Ant. XX. pp. 255—56. 



360 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


under their direct supervision. Secondly, that this court and its 
presiding lords were all ardent Hellenophils and were largely 
under the influence of Achaemenian art and culture at the same 
time. It is to this second factor that we can ascribe the fixation 
of Indian art in permanent materials during this period for the 
first time and the handling of stone for sculptural and architec- 
tural purposes with perfect ease and efficiency. At the same 
time it has to be recognised that there existed in India a pre- 
Mauryan art mainly practised in wood and partly in sun-dried 
brick, clay, ivory, metal and mineral stone. Admittedly this 
art could hardly conceive life and things in huge proportions 
and large dimensions ; tribal and primitive outlook circums- 
scribed the vision of the artists and craftsmen who must also have 
been handicapped by the very nature of the materials they used. 
But this art happened to be the repository of certain patterns, 
designs, and motifs that India shared in common with the rest 
of the early Asiatic world. 

For the rest, we know from Megasthencs, Kautilya and the 
Inscriptions of Asoka himself that the Maurya administration 
was a highly centralised bureaucracy ; and the Maurya monarch 
nothing short of a benevolent autocrat. Asoka’s dhammavijaya 
was more an imperial policy than a religious missionary move- 
ment and his moral exhortations to his people had almost the 
force of law behind them. He had even gone to the length of 
regulating the social and religious life of his people according to 
his conception of Dhamma. The king and the court were both 
highly conscious of their power and their imperial glory — 
Asoka’s inscriptions breathe the very air of this consciousness. 
And if the Arthasdstra of Kautilya is to be believed, law, order 
and precision were the watchwords of the Mauryan govern- 
ment. Thu is surprisingly reflected in the writings of the ins* 
criptions themselves ; not only are they beautifully executed, 
but they are indeed remarkable for their clarity, orderliness 
and precision ; every single letter is cut into the stone with 
accuracy and care, lines are more often them not straight and 
well-ordered, and mistakes, considering the enormous output, 
few and far between. The socio-economic policy of the 
Mauryan State was also highly centralised and mono- 
polistic. 



MAURYAN ART 


361 


Mauryan art has to be viewed and understood against this 
historical, cultural, and sociological background. This would 
help us to understand the outlook and ideology of Maury- 
an art. 


Ill 

Columns 

The highly polished, tall and well proportioned columns with 
slightly tapering monolithic shafts, and standing free in space 
and complete and independent by themselves are admittedly 
the best representatives of the court art of the Mauryas. The 
columns that bear the edicts of Asoka include those of Delhi- 
Mirath, Allahabad, Lauriya-Araraj, Lauriya-Nandangarh, 
Rampurva (with lion capital), Delhi-Topra, Sankissa, Sanchl 
and Sarnath ; the non-edict bearing columns known up till now 
include those of Rampurva (with bull-capital), Basarh-Bakhira 
(with single lion capital), and Kosam (capital not yet recovered) 
the third category, that of columns bearing dedicatory inscrip- 
tions, includes at least two well-known specimens, those of 
Rummindei and Nigali Sagar. Of these the capitals of Basarh- 
Bakhira and Lauriya-Nandangarh pillars arc in situ ; those of 
Rampurva (both bull and lion crowned), Sankissa, Sarnath 
and Sanchl have been recovered in more or less damaged condi- 
tion. The Lauriya-Nandangarh and Basarh-Bakhira pillars 
and one of the two Rampurva columns are crowned by a single 
lion seated on its haunches ; the Sankissa pillar by a standing 
elephant ; the second Rampurva column by a standing bull ; 
and the Sarnath and Sanchl columns by four semi-lions addorsed 
or united back to back. The Lauriya-Araraj column seems 
once to have been crowned by a Garuda capital 1 , while the 
fragment of a capital of Chunar sandstone with Mauryan 
polish and probably of Mauryan date, (now in the Patna 
Museum) recovered from the village called Salempur, Muzaffar- 
pur District, shows that it consisted of four semi- bulls seated back 
to back on a plain square abacus, the animals themselves being 
superimposed by a square block decorated with honey-suckle 


r. Chanda, Beginnings, p. 23. 



362 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


ornaments. Perhaps the Rummindei pillar was once crowned 
by a horse 1 . 

It has been suggested on an eighth century Sinhalese parallel 
that these crowning animals — elephant, horse, bull and lion — 
should be considered as guardians of the four cardinal points 2 . 
Doubts may be entertained if such an interpretation derivable 
from an eighth century Sinhalese monument can with equal 
force be ascribed to the Asokan animal capitals. Nor can it de- 
finitely be said they are all even exclusively Buddhist Symbols. 
Except the horse, all the three other animals as well as the Garuda 
that is assumed to have once crowned the Lauriya-Araraj pillar 
are symbols associated with early Brahmanical tradition and 
mythology, though the elephant, especially the white elephant, 
was considered particularly sacred in Buddha-legend as well. 
(Gf. also the Dhauli elephant and the word, *seto’ or the ‘White 
One* at the end of the sixth edict ; the phrase alluding to the 
white elephant below the thirteenth Girnar R.E. ; the word 
^gajatame' or ‘the best of elephants’ and the drawing of an 
elephant on the north face of the KalsI rock). Moreover, a 
close study of the Rupnath and Sahasram Rock Inscriptions, 
and the Seventh Pillar Edict suggests definitely that some at 
least of the pillars bearing his edicts must have been in existence 
before Asoka chose to have his rescripts on morality engraved 
on them — they may even be pre- Asokan, and consequently 
may have nothing to do with Buddhism — while others were 
erected by Asoka himself and were his own Dharmastambhas. 
And lastly, it has been argued with some force that these pillars 
with animal capitals are but translations in stone of primitive 
animal standards 3 . 

The internal evidence of the Inscriptions themselves helps 
us to arrive at a rough chronological sequence of the columns. 
The Rummindei pillar was raised in the 20th year of the great 
monarch’s reign while the Rampurva column with the lion 
capital in the 26th year, followed a year later by the Lauriya- 
Nandangarh column bearing the six pillar edicts dated in the 

1. Smith, A History of F\ru Art in India 0 Ceylon, p. 18 ; Huitzsch, C.I.I. f 
I. p. xxii. 

2. Smith, ‘The Monolithic Pillars of ASoka/ D. M. G,, 1911. 

3. Chanda, Beginnings pp. 31 — 33. 



MAURYAN ART 


363 


27th year. The Sarnath pillar could not have been raised 
before the 28th year ; it bears edicts that do not find place in 
other columns. In any case, all scholars agree that this column 
belongs to the last years of Asoka’s reign. 

We may add to this the stylistic evidence afforded by the 
columns and capitals themselves. So far as columns are con- 
cerned a definite starting point is furnished by the Basarh-Bakhira 
column. Compared with the other columns of known Asokan 
dates the shaft of this column is heavy and of shorter propor- 
tions, its workmanship crude and rough. The plain square 
abacus which is by itself an almost sure indication of an earlier 
date has no integral relation with the bell-capital below, and is 
moreover heavy in proportion. The crowning lion recouchant, 
though a free and independent figure, is not only rough and 
crude in execution, but has not yet evolved the form and appear- 
ance so as to make of itself an integrated whole together with the 
shaft, capital and the abacus. The next milestone is furnished 
by the elephant-crowned Sankissa column. The clumsy and 
heavy workmanship of the animal, its plump shape, and the 
sense of form revealed seem to suggest a near parallel with the 
Dhauli elephant which has to be dated in the twelfth or thirteenth 
year of the reign of Asoka. The filling up of the depth between 
the legs by rock-designs and the decorations of the abacus framed 
only at the lower border are both primitive in design and work- 
manship and are presumably translated from wooden designs ; 
the border decoration is particularly reminiscent of wood. But 
already the abacus has changed from square to round and has 
been given a form that keeps rhythmic balance between the 
animal above and the capital below. The bull-crowned Ram- 
purva pillar seems to form a pair with the one just described 
so far as stylistic chronology is concerned or comes not very long 
after. The crowning bull though rendered with energy and 
evident naturalism indeed fails to keep harmony with the abacus 
and the capital, and the rosettes and honey-suckle decoration 
on the abacus itself is a little heavy and rough in execution. 
But it cannot be far out in date from either the lion-crowned 
Rampurva column or the similarly crowned Lauriya-Nandan- 
garh column. In both instances the abacus, which is artistically 
integrated and harmonised with the capital below, is decorated 



364 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


with a row of pecking geese ; but while the Rampurva lion is 
entirely contained within the abacus, the Nandangarh lion 
finds it difficult to fit itself to the round abacus ; its rump and 
part of its hind legs project beyond the abacus in an unbalanced 
manner. The last stage in the evolution is marked by the Sar- 
nath and Sanchl pillars both crowned by four semi-lions joined 
back to back at the shoulders and carrying the Buddhist symbol 
of the Wheel, instead of by a single animal (whether lion, bull 
or elephant) as had hitherto been the practice, and that without 
any crowning symbol. The Salempur column crowned by 
four semi-bulls joined back to back must also belong to this 
stage of evolution. 

We shall try to see at a later stage to what extent this chrono- 
logical sequence is upheld by a stylistic analysis of the animal 
sculptures themselves. 

A clear idea of the whole and of component parts of a Maurya 
column is afforded by the Lauriya -Nandangarh column which is 
a perfect specimen cf the long series of such columns. All 
Maurya columns, no matter where they are set up, are chiselled 
out of grey Chunar sandstone and have a lustrous polish due to 
the application perhaps of silicious varnish on the stone. This 
uniform place of origin of the material probably suggests that 
there was at or near Chunar an art-centre established and patro- 
nised directly by the Maurya Court, an assumption supported by 
the additional fact that all the component parts of the columns 
including the crowning animal, abacus and the shaft tend 
increasingly to form one whole so far as form and technique are 
concerned. At least this was the problem the artists were con- 
fronted with and which they tried to solve with increasing success. 
The component parts that a re easily known are (1) the shaft always 
plain and smooth, circular in section and slightly tapering up- 
wards, without any base whatsoever, and always and invariably 
chiselled out of one piece of stone ; (2) the capital having 
the shape and appearance of a gently arched bell formed of 
lotus petals, the proportionate ratio of breadth and height 
being variable from capital to capital, and joined with the shaft 
by a copper- bolt of cylindrical shape bulging in the middle 
(Cf. the Rampurva lion-capital column and the copper bolt 
that used once to connect the capital with the shaft) ; (3) the 



MAURYAN ART 


365 


abacus, square and plain in the earlier specimens and circular 
and decorated in the later ones, and of variable proportions 
(4) and the crowning animal, seated or standing, always and 
invariably in the round, and always constituting a single piece 
with the a.bacus. The constituent elements may now be taken 
up one by one. 

The surface of the shaft as of the other elements is cut and 
executed with remarkable precision and accuracy, and except 
in the case of the Basarh-Bakhira pillar which is heavy and 
massive, the shafts, to judge by the Lauriya-Nandangarh ex. mple 
as well as fragments of the column, seem to have maintained a 
graceful and elegant proportion throughout. They are main- 
tained in position by simply being buried in the earth and by 
plain slabs of stone or plain brickwork at the bottom. This 
gives them an appearance of stability, as if they stand by their 
own weight. The shaft is superimposed by the bell-shaped 
capital. In some cases as in the Rummindei column the transi- 
tion from the shaft to the capital is abrupt, while in other ins- 
tances it is made easy and gradual by the introduction of inter- 
mediate mouldings of variable stages and designs ; in the Basarh- 
Bakhira column there are three retreating mouldings decorated 
with rope-bead-reel designs ; similar mouldings are to be seen 
in the Lauriya-Nandangarh example as well ; elsewhere the 
mouldings are plain. The surface of the gently arched bell- 
shaped capital is decorated with highly stylised longitudinal 
lotus-petals with sharp and thin ridges in the middle, and wide 
and roundish border mouldings, the spaces between the ends 
of the petals being filled up with short mouldings. In the 
earliest Mauryan example, i.e. the Basarh-Bakhira specimen, the 
transition from the capital to the square abacus is marked by a 
cable moulding of West-Asiatic twisted rope design which is 
repeated in later examples also, except in the lion-topped Ram- 
pur va and Sarnath examples. In other Mauryan examples 
the formal appearance of the capital is the same, but there is a 
progressive attempt towards a clearer and sharper definition of 
the middle ridge and border mouldings and increasing stylisa- 
tion which are all fully in evidence in the Sarnath specimen. The 
real aesthetic significance of the beautifully arched and elegant- 
ly ribbed floral bell of the Mauryan capital lies in its gentle curve. 


366 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


its chaste and rhythmic proportionandinitsveryeffectivecontrast 
with the chaste, elegant, plain, smooth, tall and tapering shaft that 
it crowns. The capital also, like the abacus and the shaft, shows 
the different stages of a process of artistic evolution, though 
the chronological sequence cannot be definitely established ; 
but the steady growth of the feeling for form and more and more 
linear rhythm is unmistakable. The abacus is indeed the 
pedestal for the crowding animal ; in the change of its form 
from square to round, of its appearance ficm plain to decorated 
surface beginning with low and culminating in bold and high 
relief work in various motifs and designs, and in the attempt 
for increasing harmonisation of the abacus with the bell-shaped 
capital below and the crowning animal above, a discerning eye 
can clearly trace the stages of the prcgiessive evolution of an 
architectonic form existing by itself. This becomes further evident 
when we compare the entire ensemble formed by the crown- 
ing animal, the abacus and the capital as we see it in various 
stages from the Basarh-Bakhira example through Sankissa and 
Rampurva to Sarnath. Beginning ficm disjoined and un- 
unified parts of unequal proportions and a broken linear rhythm 
at Basarh-Bakhira, it steadily marches towards integration of the 
component parts into one whole until it reaches its perfection at 
Sarnath where the parts are clear, distinct and well-defined, 
well-proportioned and singularly evenly balanced and forming 
one integrated whole and maintaining a linear rhythm through- 
out, so much so that the crowning elements on the shaft con- 
tribute the most positive character that gives the Maurya 
columns the independent effect of complete monumental works. 
From primitive animal standards to such monumental works 
it must have been a long journey, but royal will and state re- 
sources, the individual taste and ideology of a benevolent auto- 
crat, and perhaps also foreign hand and inspiration so potently 
at work at the Maurya court achieved the end of this long and 
arduous journey within a very short space of time. The total 
aesthetic effect of Maurya columns has never been surpassed 
in later Indian art, and in the whole realm of independent 
monumental columns of the world, Mauryan columns occupy 
a proud position by reason of their very free and significant 
artistic form in space, the rhythmic and balanced proportion 



MAURYAN ART 


367 


of their constituent elements, the unitary and integrated effect 
of the whole, the chaste and elegant shaft and capital, and no 
less by the conscious, proud and dignified attitude of the crown- 
ing ornaments. 

There can be no doubt that the impetus came from outside. 
The very sudden use of stone and that at once for monumental 
art of large designs and huge proportions, and the quick process 
of evolution from primitive to conscious, civilised and sophisti- 
cated form and appearance, from tribal to imperial outlook 
that is evident in the total effect of the columns point unmistak- 
ably in that direction. It has been repeatedly suggested, not 
without reason, that this extraneous impetus and inspiration 
came from Iran of the Achaemenid emperors ; some have even 
suggested that Mauryan columns are but Indian adaptations of 
the Achaemenian prototype. As repeatedly attempts have 
been made to deny the alleged extent of debt, not again without 
a certain amount of justice ; but few have seriously doubted that 
West Asiatic art-forms in general and Achaemenian impetus 
and inspiration directly and in particular were at work at the 
root. Nor against the background of what we know of Mauryan 
relations with Hellenic East and the Mauryan court ideology 
and tradition deeply tinged with Achaemenian ideas were such 
impetus and inspiration unlikely, especially when we take into 
account the extent of Achaemenian influence on Asokan 
epigraphs, his imperial idea and policy and the conception of 
the Mauryan Pillared Hall referred to above. But the differences 
that separate the Mauryan columns from the Achaemenian ones 
are also considerable and must not be lost sight of. 

The stone columns of the Maurya Pillared Hall were 
evidently without capitals whereas the columns of the pillared 
halls of Persepolis are provided with more or less elaborate 
capitals. Achaemenian columns stand either on bell-shaped 
bases or on plain rectangular blocks or on plain circular mould- 
ings while the independent Mauryan columns have no base at all. 
The bell form that is used as supporting base in Persian columns 
serves as capital in Mauryan ones and makes altogether a differ- 
ent aesthetic effect ; and moreover in form, shape and appea- 
rance the Mauryan bell, which along with the Achaemenian 
may have originally been derived from stylised lotus design and 



368 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


which may have been a common art-motif in both Indian and 
Iranian art-heritage, is a long way off from the Achaemenian 
bell in which a ring of leaves and petals plays an important part 
in the decoration of the upper end of the motif and which has no 
bulge whatsoever in the middle that makes the Mauryan bell 
so gainly and conspicuous. The Achaemenian shaft is fluted 
in all cases ‘save in the facades of the necropolis at Persepolis 
and the single column that still remains of the palace of Cyrus 
in the upland valley of Polvar. In the latter case the anomaly 
is to be explained by the fact that the building to which the 
support belonged dates from a time when Persian art had not 
constituted itself and was as yet groping to strike out a path of 
its own. On the contrary, the rockcut tombs are coeval with 
the palaces of Darius and Xerxes and if in them the shaft is plain, 
it was because the vaults stood at a consider.. ble height above 
ground. To have made them fluted therefore would have still 
further reduced the column and divested it of a frank clear 
aspect w r hen viewed at that distance. To obviate so untoward 
a contingency the Persian sculptor modified the forms as the 
Greeks cften did in similar cases 1 / Mauryan columns z re all 
plain and circular, but evidently they did not adopt the type 
from Achaemenian unfluted ones which had for ordinary pur- 
poses been discarded by the Achaemenians themselves. A 
funeral mound at Lauriya-Nandangarh has yielded to the exca- 
vator’s spade a plain and circular piece of a column carved out 
o fsula wood ;such columns are in our litera ture known as sthuna , 
and the primitive animal standards were evidently comprised 
of such sthuna columns 2 . It is not unlikely that the Mauryan 
shaft was derived from such wooden originals. The assump- 
tion derives further support frcm the fact that Achaemenian 
shafts are indeed built of separate pieces or segments of stcne 
and evidently present the essential character of the work of a 
mason, while the Mauryan shaft is one piece which pertains 
to the character of the work of a wood-carver or carpenter. 
The Achaemenian capitals crowned with a cluster of stylised 
palm-leaves after the old Egyptian manner, and formed of either of 

1. Perrot and Chipiez, History of Art in Persia , pp. 87 — 88. 

2. A. S. R. 1908 — 09, pp. 123—24, PL XL ; also see, Maitra, ‘Mauryan 
Art,’ I. H Q. Ill, pp. 543—45. 



MAURYAN ART 


36ft 


two semi-bulls or unicorns or lions seated back to back, or of ar? 
upright or inverted cup, and the whole crowned with project- 
ing double volutes have nothing whatsoever in common with the : 
Mauryan capitals which consist, as we have seen, of simply 
a bell formed of stylised lotus-petals. The crowning abacus 
and the round and independent animal motif of Mauryan columns 
are also altogether absent from Achaemenirn examples. 

The result achieved by this almost thorough transformation 
is altogether different. The Aehaemenian column intended 
invariably as part of a larger architectural conception is composed 
of much too many component parts presenting harsh contrasts 
and looking complex and complicated, while the Mauryan 
column intended to produce the effect of an independent 
monument at least in its latest and best specimen is simpler, 
mere harmonious in conception and execution, and gives the 
feeling of greater stability, dignity and strength, be in perhaps 
of other primitive and elemental origins. The indigenous and 
original contribution to the creation of this item of Mauryan 
art is therefore undeniable. Equally undeniable is also the fact 
that in their lustrous varnish, in their adoption and adaptation 
of the bell-shaped capital, in the higher plane of conception and 
driving idea and in the general monumental and dignified 
quality and appearance they exhibit, the Mauryan columns 
seem to reveal clearly the debt they owe to Aehaemenian art, as 
well as to Hellenistic Art so far as the crowning member of the 
columns and part of the general effect are concerned. The 
twisted rope design, the bead-reel-cable design and so on to mark 
the transitions, the acanthus-leaf and palmette and other designs 
to decorate the abacus may have however been derived from the 
older and common West-Asiatic art-heritage. 

IV 

Animal Figures 

The almost colossal animal sculptures that crown the Mau- 
ryan columns along with the elephant of Dhauli in Orissa may 
conveniently be studied separately. Here too as in the case of 
the column itself a rough chronological sequence of the stages of 
striving after the desired effect can well be traced. The Basarh- 
Bakhira lion evidently marks one of the earliest stages ; the next 



^70 age of the nandas and mauryas 

definite stage is reached at Dhauli where the elephant but half 
emerges from live rock and which is datable as we know in the 
twelfth or thirteenth year of Asoka’s reign ; to this stage must 
also be ascribed the elephant of Sankissa. The Rampurva bull 
marks the next stage in the ascending scaleclosely followed by 
the Lauriya-Nandangarh lion ; while the Rampurva lion leads 
us to the final stage represented by the quadripartite semi-lions of 
Sarnath and Sahchi — an unmistakable evidence of clever accumu- 
lation that always comes at a later stage of the evolution of form. 

The Basarh-Bakhira lion is clumsy in form and appearance 
and crude in execution. The feeling for linear rhythm is evident 
in the flowing line gliding downwards from the top of the head 
but ends abruptly at the hard line of the slab where the tail 
turns inwards. The manes are already highly stylised and locks 
are treated in separate volumes clumsily arranged. The facial 
expression is quaint and primitive and the entire attitude lacks 
dignity. The volume of the lien’s body has undoubtedly been 
fully visualised and reproduced, but the essential plastic sense 
has not yet matured. The living body is hardly moved by any 
energy and vigour that is within ; it exists only by the weight 
of its volume. 

Compared to this the Dhauli elephant shows a much more 
developed sense of form and is artistically far superior to its 
Sankissa cousin. Indeed, such plastic presentation of bulky 
volume, such feeling for living flesh rendered with remarkable 
realism, such knowledge of the physiognomical form of the 
subject treated and such sense of dignified movement and linear 
rhythm have no parallel in Mauryan animal sculptures. Com- 
pared to this even the Rampurva lion or the Sarnath quadri- 
partite with their tight and coagulated treatment of the veins 
and muscles shown in meaningless tension, in spite of full repro- 
duction of volume and advanced proof of visualisation appear 
sapless and lifeless. The loud exhibitionism of pomp and 
power of the Rampurva or Sarnath specimens has nothing to 
compare with the quiet dignity of the Dhauli elephant. With 
its right front leg slightly tilted and the left back straight in short 
angle exhibiting a slight forward motion, and with its heavy 
trunk flowing rhythmically in a delightful curve, it walks majesti- 
cally out of a deep ravine as it w r ere. It indeed symbolises His 



MAURYAN ART 


371 


Imperial Majesty King Asoka presenting himself with quiet 
dignity before the people of Kaliriga. The Sarnath quadri- 
partite is on the other hand an exhibition of imperial pomp, 
power and authority before the Buddhist monks that had chosen 
the site of the First Turning of the Wheel as their place for the 
quiet pursuit of the religion of Sakyamuni. Compared to the 
Dhauli elephant the Sarnath quadripartite and its Sanchl counter- 
part are bombastic in style. 

The Sankissa elephant is on a lower level of artistic concep- 
tion. In spite of an appearance of movement the huge and 
plumpy animal is plastically speaking comparatively static, 
though there is some evidence of movement in the modelling of 
the muscles and of the volume of live flesh of the hind portion 
and the legs. The front legs are however treated pillar-like 
though the intended effect was presumably one of tension, since 
the animal appears to shrink backwards with the body- weight 
pressed in that direction. This attitude of the body, by the 
way, fails to harmonise with the abacus and the capital below. 
From Dhauli to Sankissa there is a steady direction, it seems, 
towards a stylised treatment of the plastic volume, of muscles 
and body- flesh. This is evident in the treatment of the upper 
but more in the lower portion of the chest and abdomen of the 
Sankissa elephant, but nowhere increasingly more and more 
than in the lion-figures. 

Compared to the Basarh-Bakhira lion, the Lauriya-Nandan- 
garh example is more tense and tight without doubt ; the surface 
treatment is also more clear and precise. On the whole the 
st)lisation of the treatment of veins, muscles and flesh is on the 
increase, the form and treatment tends to be more conventional. 
In visualisation and realistic presentation of volume there is 
however hardly any advance, nor is there any attempt to har- 
monise the animal form with the component parts of the 
columns below. 

From the Lauriya-Nandangarh specimen to the Rampurva 
lion there is a decided advance in the clear and precise cutting 
of the stone, in general finish, in the feeling for form and in 
linear rhythm. There is also an evident advance in modelling 
which is powerful and vigorous, specially in the muscle and thews, 
but the entire artistic conception is conventional and treatment 


372 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


stylised which is nowhere more evident than in the schematic 
treatment of the manes and the almost lifeless and conventional 
presentation of the legs and paws. Yet, compared to the Sarnath 
quadripartite the Rampurva lion as a piece of independent 
sculpture must be considered artistically superior, though the 
former, architectonically speaking, is more rdvanced since no- 
where else in the Maurya columns has been achieved a better 
and more efficient harmony with the abacus and the capital. 

The Rampurva bull is architectonically less advanced than 
the lion from the same place since ‘it fails to harmonise with the 
capital on which it stands’ 1 . Marshall argues that it is not 
‘so well-executed as the (Rampurva) lion’. If he means that it 
Is not as tense and tight in formal appearance or does not show as 
conventionally powerful and modelled treatment or stylisation 
of form he is undoubtedly correct. But at the same time it has 
to be recognised that the artist responsible for this piece of sculp- 
ture had a remarkable sense of form as well as of plastic volume 
and of the quality of the flesh. Here is indeed realistic vision 
and close observation of nature and full understanding of the 
character of the object ; nothing stylised or conventional or 
abstract has blurred the mental image of the artist or stood in 
the way of his execution. The animal is supposed to stand with 
full weight on earth in quiet and restrained dignity, and the 
artist has rendered that idea with remarkable clarity and perfect 
realism. Here too the modelling is vigorous but not conven- 
tional, plastic and linear sense fully mature but not schematised ; 
the energy and vitality that are within express themselves in 
restrained but powerful dignity ; a dynamic naturalism gives 
it potency and strength. 

A comparison with the vigorously striding bull on the abacus 
of the Sarnath column is at once suggested. Here the bull is 
rendered w'ith all the tension and accentuation of muscles, 
veins and bones that a vigorous movement brings into play ; 
the sense of linear rhythm and plasticity of volume are also fully 
in evidence ; the execution is clear and precise, but it is at the 
same time hard to deny that the entire treatment is conventional 
in as much as the muscles are unduly exaggerated, the tension 

*. J. R. A. S., 1908, p. 1088. 



MAURYAN ART 


373 


in movement overemphasised and the modelling coagulated. 
A different aesthetic vision and tradition are indeed at work 
here. 

The Sarnath quadripartite is on a most superior level and 
must be admitted to be a very successful solution of a problem 
the Maury a artists grappled with from the very beginning. Of 
all Maurya sculptures it is the best known, most highly spoken 
of and reproduced on most occasions. Marshall is justified in 
saying that ‘the Sarnath capital, though by no means a master- 
piece, is the product of the most developed art of which the world 
was cognisant in the third century B.G. — the handiwork of one 
who had generations of artistic effort and experience behind 
him. In the masterful strength of the crowning lions, with 
their swelling veins and tense muscular development, and in 
the spirited realism of the reliefs below, there is no trace of 
primitive art. So far as naturalism was his aim, the sculptor 
modelled his figures direct from nature, and has delineated their 
forms with bold, faithful touch. . . . Equally mature is the techni- 
que of his relief work .’ 1 But at the same time it must not be 
lost sight of that the entire conception and execution is conven- 
tional from beginning to end. Compositionally the accumula- 
tion of form of the four semi-lions is schematic, though from 
consideration of technique clever and efficient. The veins and 
muscles are overemphasised, and with all their seeming tenseness 
and bold delineation appear lifeless and conventional. The 
heads with gaping mouths and curved moustaches treated con- 
ventionally are more decorative and ornamental than endowed 
with real life ; the same is true of the manes treated convention- 
ally and arranged schematically. The extravagance of form 
saps the life out of the object that it represents, though from the 
point of view of technique the art is fully developed and civilised 
and its appearance conscious and conventional. 

The animal reliefs on the abacus are all worked almost in the 
round showing deep contrast of light and shade. Technically 
therefore they are far in advance of the row of pecking geese 
that decorates the Rampurva lion abacus, though tae latter is 
very realistically treated and imparts a sense of movement that 


i. C. H. /, I, p. 620. 



374 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


comes from life itself One of the four animals of the Sarnath 
abacus is a galloping horse very spirited in movement, and 
the modelling and treatment of its plastic volume partake 
of the same conventional attitude and execution as those of the 
lions discussed above. This is equally applicable to the two 
other animals on the abacus namelv the vigorously striding lion 
and the humped Indian bull, the forms a,nd types in each case 
having been already fixed bv convention, as we shall see later 
on. The only animal on the abacus that is treated in a different 
manner and viewed from a different attitude is the elephant 
slowlv striding forward. It is much less conventional and the 
modelling shows a more realistic feeling for plasticity of volume, 
though the form has been but inadequately realised. Com- 
pared to the Dhauli elephant the elephant of the Sarnath abacus 
looks like a wooden toy. 

The Sanchi counterpart of Sarnath belongs to the same stvle 
and is equally conventional and stvlised. The manes of the 
Hons are rendered with increasing schema tisation which is per- 
haps an indication of a date later than Sarnath. Architectoni- 
cally it conforms to the solution already achieved at the latter 
place, but the Sanchl abacus which is decorated like the Ram- 
purva lion capital with a row of pecking ee^se done in higher 
and bolder relief, is narrower than the Sarnath one, and is 
aesthetically more in harmony with the capital below and the 
crowning lions above. 

It is somewhat curious that the lions in Mauryan art are 
alwavs and invariably done in a manner that seems a.lreadv to 
have been fixed by convention. Their formal pose and appear- 
ance, the rendering of their volume, bold and vigorous but 
stylised, their plastic conception in one word, and the sense of 
form as revealed in them are on the whole the same and already 
pre-determined. The trend of the style is already evident in 
the Basarh-Bakhira lion and it is within the limits of the given 
trend that the style evolves and advances in treatment and execu- 
tion. The aesthetic vision and imagination and the attitude 
and outlook of the artist do not mark any definite change. This 
is partly true as well of the lion, the horse and the bull on the 
Sarnath abacus. It raises the presumption that this style and 
convention came from outside where they were already fixed and 



MAURYAN ART 


375 


well established. The horse on the S^rnath abacus in its move- 
ment and modelling recalls the two horses in the relief on the 
Sarcophagus of the Amazons 1 ; the vigorously striding lion and 
the bull recall well-known Achaemenian prototypes of the same 
style and convention 2 . Even the elephant on the abacus has a 
distant kinship with the horned elephants on the early coins 
of the Seleucids, though the Sarnath elephant is much less 
conventional and shows somewhat a different sense of form and 
treatment. 

The aesthetic vision and imagination and the conventional 
style and fixed expression just spoken of are most evident in the 
crowning lions. Compared with later figural sculptures in the 
round of Yakshas and their female counterparts or the reliefs of 
Bharhut, Saiichl and Bodhgaya, the art represented by these 
crowning lions belongs to an altogether different world of concep- 
tion and execution, of style and technique, altogether much 
more complex, urban and civilised. They have nothing archaic 
or primitive about them, and the presumption is irresistible 
that the impetus and inspiration of this art must have come frrm 
outside. Did it come from the Achaemenian west ? This 
seems to be very doubtful, for the modelling of there sculptures 
has nothing in common with Achaemenian sculptures, nor does 
the powerful feeling for volume and preference for rounded forms 
have anything in common with Achaemenian Iran. Moreover 
West-Asiatic art, especially Iranian Art during the Achaemenian 
period came heavily under the influence of Hellenistic Art ; 
further, ‘the few attempts made in Iran in the domain of free 
plastic art bear an entirely different stamp in their preference 
for angular forms’ 3 . Marshall therefore argued for Hellenistic 
plastic tradition as practised by Graeco-Bactrian artists. 
From what we know of the Hellenistic colonies in West Asia 
and the part they played in Mauryan India, it is possible, nay 
highly probable, that Hellenistic art and culture played also a 
very dominant role in Mauryan Art. The Mauryan lions 
indeed in their aesthetic conception and plastic vision, in their 

1. Garotti, A History of Art , I, p. 218, fig. 298. 

2. Perrot & Chipiez, History of Art in Persia , p. 407, fig. 195 ; C. H . /., 

I, p. 463, PI. IX, figs. 1 and 2. 

3. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture , I p. 6 — 7. 



376 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


conventional modelling, advanced visualisation, feeling for 
volume and sense of form invariably recall conventional and 
decadent colonial Greek works of the same art-form and design. 
It is here that we can trace the source of the impetus and inspira- 
tion of the conventional art of the crowning lions of Mauryan 
columns. Here then, in a tradition familiar with lions and bulls 
and horses, was the convention fixed and determined. 

These remarks are however hardly applicable to the Dhauli 
elephant or the Rampurva bull which both seem to belong 
to a somewhat different aesthetic vision and outlook, perhaps 
to a different art-tradition. True, indeed, so far as feeling for 
volume and its reproduction are concerned they belong to the 
same fully developed stage of art as the crowning lions discussed 
above and that there is nothing archaic and primitive about 
them ; but it is equally true there is nothing conventional about 
them as well, and the plastic sense and method of treatment is 
altogether different. The modelling betrays a full knowledge 
of the softness of the flesh and of the flowing current of life that 
is within ; it is also restrained and is not contaminated by any 
conventional exaggeration or localised emphasis. Nor is there 
any evidence of schematisation of form. Indeed these 
two examples (with the Sankissa elephant as a close third) 
represent a different aesthetic outlook, a different art-tradi- 
tion than those of the crowning lions and the lion, horse and 
bull reliefs on the Sarnath abacus. This difference in outlook 
and tradition is clearly brought to the fore when the Rampurva 
bull is compared with the relief of the same animal from the 
Sarnath column ; the two bulls belong to two different worlds 
as it were. It is, I think, permissible to as ume that it is Indian 
aesthetic vision and imagination and Indian art-tradition that 
are here largely at work, so far as art-st)le at least is concerned. 
The same plastic conception and quality of modelling consti- 
tute the pivot round which early Indian art moves, and the same 
restraint and quiet dignity are the qualities that Indian art 
ideal has sought to achieve in higher art from the very beginning. 
Moreover, if the Dhauli c*nd Sankissa elephants, particularly 
the former be compared with the figures of elephants in bold 
and high relief in the frieze of the facade of the Lomasa Rishi 
cave, it will at once be seen that they belong to the same style 


MAURYAN ART 


377 


and tradition of art. This cave may not be of Mauryan date, 
but it cannot be very much later also ; all scholars recognise 
that the entire facade of this cave is the exact and literal transla- 
tion in stone of a wooden prototype. It may be assumed there- 
fore that figures of elephants in the same style and tradition as 
we see them on the stone-facade were already being rendered in 
wood for generations before they came to be transferred on 
stone. It is not unlikely that in the Dhauli elephant, the Ram- 
purva bull and partly in the Sankissa elephant, all of which are 
decidedly Indian in feeling, appearance andspirit, we but witness 
the traditional Indian conception of these objects and the older 
or contemporary Indian art-style and tradition transferred into 
stone in terms of the requirements of that particular material 
and according to the dictates of bolder designs and bigger 
dimensions. The mastery of the third dimension, in other words 
the solution of the difficult problem of free figure as revealed 
in them, is the only lesson the artists seem to have learnt from 
Graeco-Bactrian art-tradition. But here too it is possible to 
present the counter-hypothesis that there must have existed in 
pre-Mauryan India an art of wood-carving and clay-modelling 
that carved and modelled free and round figures of men and 
animals out of wood and clay, and perhaps also of big dimensions. 

It is difficult to say anything about the nationality of the 
artists of the Maurya court ; there is no evidence on the point. 
But from what has been said above, it is permissible to assume 
that the Dhauli elephant, the Rampurva bull and perhaps also 
the Sankissa elephant are works of Indian artists working in 
contemporary Indian style and tradition, and having a thorough 
mastery of the third dimension and a full consciousness of the 
Indian outlook. The crowning lions of the early phases, namely 
the Basarh-Bakhira and Lauriya-Nandangarh examples, are 
also works of Indian artists but tutored in the style and tradi- 
tion of contemporary Western art; this is marked in the grappling 
with the problem of form and its precise execution evident in 
these sculptures. There is decided advance in the Rampurva, 
Sarnath and Sanchi specimens ; this may have been achieved by 
the same Indian artists working increasingly in the direction of 
contemporary Western art, or by colonial artists of the Hellen- 
istic Orient imported by the Maurya Court. In any case, there 


378 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


are in these specimens a strong and undeniable Hellenisticstamp 
that may not have been imprinted by Indian hands. 

V 

Alleged Maury an Sculptures 

Besides the animal sculptures described and discussed above, 
quite a considerable number of independent figure sculptures 
in the round and of various size and proportion and a few frag- 
ments of reliefs have been ascribed to the Maurya period 1 mainly 
on the ground of their having the so-called Mauryan polish 
on them and their being carved out of grey sandstone from 
Chunar. These are insufficient grounds indeed. The art 
of giving a lustrous polish to the stone, the Maurya artists learnt 
evidently from the Achaemenians and once they practised it in 
large scale and made it current, it is only in the nature of things 
that the practice would continue for some time at least, and at 
least in stray instances even when the power and authority of 
the Maurya court had vanished and Maurya court art that 
apparently found in this polish an expression of imperial glory 
and splendour had become a thing of the past. Nor is the 
argument of a common place of origin so far as the material 
is concerned more potent. Stone as the material par excellence 
for sculptural work was a sort of a new learning with the Mau- 
ryan court artists, and this material was quarried at Chunar. 
It was handled for at least a few generations and found to res- 
pond very well to the hammer and chisel of the stone-sculptor. 
It is only likely therefore that later sculptors would continue 
at least for some time to have their material imported from the 
same quarry until they struck at other quarries and found their 
stone good enough to meet their requirements. It is therefore 
on the arguments of conception and style that we must take 
our stand to argue whether they can be labelled as Mauryan 
or not. 

The two Patna Yakshas almost identical in form and appear- 
ance, conception and treatment, dress and ornament, and now 
in the Indian Museum come first in the list of alleged Mauryan 

I. Marshall, Chanda, Kramrisch, Coomaraswamy, Bachhofer, indeed 
all authorities have so far ascribed these sculptures to the Maurya period. 



MAURYAN ART 


379 


sculptures. It deserves consideration that both the statues 
have on the scarf of their shoulder a line of Brahrni inscription 
that has paleographically been dated round about the beginning 
of the Christian era, and that helps to identify the statues as 
those of Yakshas. No reason is adduced why the statues should 
not be considered as belonging to the same period as that of the 
inscriptions. The so-called Mauryan polish on which the 
main argument for a Mauryan date rests is conspicuous only 
on the upper half of the bodies, which may be taken to point 
to the fact that the practice of Maurya court art was already 
on the wane. While there is nothing peculiarly Mauryan 
about this couple there are elements that seem to connect them 
with some of the sculptures on the eastern gate of the Great 
Stupa at Sanchi on the one hand and the Kushana school of 
Mathura on the other. The heaviness, the almost archaic 
stolidity and weighty volume, the conflict between fully rounded 
and modelled volume as seen in the arms, breast and abdomen 
on the one hand and flat surface at the back on the other seem 
to suggest a close parallel with the huge heavy and ‘primitive’ 
Boddhisattvas of the Mathura school. The treatment of the 
garment when it does not cling to the body as volumes separate 
from the body is a particular characteristic of the Kushana 
school of Mathura- The same remark applies to the treat- 
ment of ornaments. Where the garment clings to the body 
it is treated as a wet cloth and is almost invisible except for the 
parallel ridges that indicate the folds. A similar treatment 
of the garment characterises the Didarganj Yakshi also, to be 
considered later. On the other hand so far as general shape 
and appearance of the upper part of the body and the quality 
and character of the modelling are concerned, a kinship with 
the art of the bigger reliefs on the eastern gate of the Great Stupa 
at Sanchi seems to be admissible. 

Much less known than either the Patna Yakshas or the two 
other colossal polished sandstone standing statues from Parkham 
and Didarganj are the two torsos of naked Jaina images, both 
recovered from Lohanipur near Bankipur, Patna, and now 
in the Patna Museum. The larger torso, a free and round 
sculpture carved out of Chunar sandstone, has the hieh 
Maurya polish on it ; while the smaller one, identical in appear- 



380 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


ance and style and of the same material has no polish on it. 
They have both been found together on the same level under- 
ground along with a silver punch-marked coin which Jayaswal 
says ‘precedes Maurya coinage*. He ascribes the larger torso 
to the Maurya period and the unpolished smaller one to the 
‘Sungan or later’, on what grounds he does not state 1 . If one 
is to go by style and appearance, both the torsos must belong to 
the same period which may not be far out of date from the Patna 
Yakshas on the one hand and the Parkham Yaksha on the other. 
In their tight and stiff modelling, in their fully rounded arms 
and thighs and in their general earthy heaviness of form they 
have a kinship with the Patna statues ; both pairs are character- 
ised by a smooth and lifeless inertia, and by a comparatively 
flat surface treatment of their backs. The Lohanipur statues, 
moreover, are more primitive and archaic in outlook and appear- 
ance, heavy and a little bit unbalanced in proportion which 
seem to link them with the Baroda and Parkham Yakshas to 
be discussed later. 

The same conflict in a rather accentuated form of fully 
rounded volume and flat surface, the same complex relation of 
ornaments and garments to the body, the same heaviness and 
archaism, rigidity and lifeless smoothness, characterise what 
remains of the colossal sandstone statue of a Yaksha 2 recovered 
from Baroda near Parkham and another slightly smaller but 
comparatively well-preserved Yaksha statue from Parkham 
itself (both now in the Mathura Museum), the latter having 
the same polish as that on the Mauryan columns. There can 
be no doubt that in all these statues we have a clear expression 
of the weighty and imposing earthiness that traditional Indian 
imagination connects with its Yakshas and Yakshinis, gods 
and goddesses of material plenty and physical welfare. The 
lightly bent knees and the comparatively thin legs of the stand- 
ing Parkham figure have some kinship w T ith those of the Mani- 
bhadra Yaksha statue from Pawt.ya near Gwalior 3 , while the 


1. Jayaswal, ‘Jaina Image of the Maurya Period’, jf, B. 0 . R- S., XXII> 
pp. 130 — 32 and plates. 

2. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian & Indonesian Art , p. 1 7 j *5 9 
Vogel/Mathura School of Sculpture’, A . S. R., 1909 — 10, p. 76, PI. XXVIII, a. 

3. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture , I, plate 62. 



MAURYAN ART 


381 


frank and unconditional frontality of both Baroda and Parkham 
statues, attaching little or no importance to the back reminds 
one again of primitive Bodhisattvas of the Mathura school. 
Compared to the Patna Yakshas the Parkham specimen is more 
stiff and archaic in appearance, more rough and crude in execu- 
tion ; but in the relation of ornament and dress with the body 
and in the quality of the tight and stiff modelling it betrays 
the same essential characteristics. In its upper part it shows no 
doubt a tendency towards flattened surface treatment, but in 
the lower half fully rounded and powerfully modelled mass is in 
full evidence giving the legs a lively form and appearance in 
strong contrast to the torso with a protruding and deformed 
abdomen that is possibly an individual characteristic. The 
flowing drapery which is treated as transparent where it 
clings to the body, and as separate though in thin and 

flat volumes where it is gathered together, is indicated 

at the front by incised wave lines as in Bharhut and 
at the ends by a single rounded ridge. It seems that 

such treatment of drapery as we see in the Parkham image 
can in no way be dated earlier than Bharhut, and similar shape 
and modelled form of the legs cannot be earlier than the first 
century B.C. In any case the Baroda and Parkham statues 
constitute what we may call the earliest Mathura primitives 
and the initial chapter of the Mathura school of sculpture. They 
have hardly anything to connect them with Mauryan 

sculpture of known date and locality, and are perhaps later 
than even the Patna Yakshas discussed above. 

Artistically the Didarganj Yakshini is the best of the series 
and can in no way be considered as archaic or primitive. In 
the easy and light stoop and forward movement of the upper 
part of the body helped by a slight bend of the right knee-joint, 
the narrow waist and full round breasts with the necklace hang- 
ing rhythmically along and between the breast-lines, the broad 
hips, the shapely legs gradually tapering down to the thin 
ankles decorated by heavy and fully jewelled ornaments, the 
style of doing and decorating the hair, and not the least in the 
sensitiveness of flesh as revealed in what remains of the model- 
ling of the abdomen, the chin and the region round the eyes, 
but more fully and clearly of the back — one witnesses here per- 


382 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


haps an earliest urban, conscious and sophisticated female type 
and form immortalised in later Indian art and literature. The 
fact that the treatment of its ornaments and drapery, especially 
of the latter, is the same as that of the PatnaYakshas is no reason 
why it should be labelled as primitive or considered as belong- 
ing to the same period or phase of early Indian art. The statue, 
plastically fully round, is bound by no *law of frontality’ and is 
meant to be seen from all sides — it has no primitivity whatso- 
ever about it. Its heavy but loose mass of hair, its full 
soft bosoms and the firmness of the flesh at the back, and 
its attenuated waist with soft abdominal muscles and 
the broad hips at once recall the still daintier and more 
lively Yakshinls of the Mathura reliefs of the second century 
A.D. which are characterised by fully lound and lively 
modelling of their limbs, scarfs and anklets. Indeed the Didar- 
ganj Yakshini cannot be very much earlier than the latter, in 
spite ofso-called Mauryan polish or its material which is Chunar 
sandstone. 

These life size, plastically round statues belong thus to 
different aspects and phases of Indian art. They are all Indian 
in form and appearance ; and in style and treatment they have 
hardly any relation with the court art of the Mauryas. The 
third dimension was already mastered by the courtly Indian 
tradition, in the Dhauli elephant and the Rampurva bull for 
example, so that the conception and execution of either the 
Didarganj Yakshini or perhaps the Patna Yakshas presented 
them with no new problem. Indeed they belong to the same 
line of evolution, but at later stages, reflecting on themselves the 
currents of the flowing tradition and fashions of contemporary 
practice. The Baroda and Parkham statues along with a seated 
Yakshini (now in worship as ManasadevI) from Mathura 1 on 
the other hand belong perhaps to a different conception and 
tradition altogether, a primitive folk tradition much older and 
more rooted to the soil, that was current and co-existent with 
the Maurya court art but of which the latter knew nothing. 
The fixation of that art in permanent materials is first to be 

i. Chanda, ‘Mathura School of Sculpture/ A. S. if. 192* — 23, p- > 

A. S. R. 1920—21, PI. XVIII. 



MAURYAN ART 


383 


seen at Bharhut and later in various other places where it slowly 
and steadily grappled stage by stage and with varying measure 
of success with the problem of the third dimension. The 
Baroda and Parkham statues along with others of still later 
date represent the different stages in that direction. 

Two male heads and three small fragments of head, of the 
same material and similarly polished, all from Sarnath, have 
usually been assigned to the Maurya period for no other reason 
than that they are carved out of Chunar sandstone and have 
the so-called Mauryan polish on them. It is very likely as 
Coomaraswamy surmises on the ground of their ‘extraordinary 
actuality’ and ‘marked individuality’ that these are ‘parts of 
portrait- figures, and presumably portraits of donors’. Their 
head-dress consisting of either a fillet with a laurel wreath or a 
mural crown is certainly reminiscent of Hellenistic motifs . 
Similar fragments of stone heads with identical head-dresses hail 
also from Bhita and Mathura which along with the Sarnath 
examples constitute a ‘well-marked stylistic group’, but there 
is nothing to connect them definitely with Mauryan art. All 
that they — together with some terracotta heads and figures 
from Mathura, Sarnath, Basarh, Bulandibagh, Kumrahar, 
and other places with Greek motifs on their head-dress and some- 
times even foreign facial types — prove is that Greek motifs and 
types along with Hellenistic provincial art had migrated as far 
east as the Ganges valley 1 . Since Hellenistic contacts were 
potent and effective even after the fall of the Mauryas, migration 
and adoption of Hellenistic art forms and motifs at later periods 
of history cannot be ruled altogether out of consideration. 

A few other fragmentary reliefs have also been assigned to 
the Mauryan period, again without sufficient reason. Intensely 
lyrical and qualitatively of a very subtle significance is the figure 
worked in high relief out of the fragment of an arch, of a young 
sorrowing lady 2 . The soft and delicate modelling of the nude 
upper body nowhere so sensitively rendered as in the back and the 
fresh young breasts, the soft linear rhythm and the composi- 

1. Bachhofer, Early Indian Sculpture, I, pp. 12* — 14, plates 12 and 13 ; 
Coomaraswamy, History of Indian & Indonesian Art , pp. 19 — 20, figs t8, 19, 
20, 22, 23. Fig. 2i of Coomaraswamy is much later still. 

2. Kramrisch, Grunduzugc der Indischcn Kurts l } Indian Sculpture , p. 12, fig. 11. 



384 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


tional unity has no parallel in early Indian art. Indeed its 
plastic and linear expressiveness does not fit in against the back- 
ground of either Maurya or Suriga art. The style and treat- 
ment of the hair, ornaments and garment have indeed a primi- 
tive heaviness of form but the modelling and linear composition 
are very much in advance. Another relief from Bliita 1 also shows 
decided advance in general appearance, pose and movement, 
and from the character of relief composition, facial type and 
surface treatment it cannot be dated earlier than the reliefs of 
Bodhgaya and Sarichl. 

A considerable number of terracottas said to have been 
recovered from ‘the lowest, or nearly the lowest, levels at several 
widely separated sites, extending from Pataliputra to Taxila ’ 2 3 4 
have sometimes been assigned to the Maurya period, mainly 
on grounds of style and appearance. Kramrisch and Gordon 
have drawn pointed attention to the hazards of trying to date 
terracottas — moulded or modelled — on ground of style or that of 
appearance 5 . Moreover, excavation methods pursued in India 
till very lately were not such as to make level or stratification 
a dependable argument for determining chronological sequence, 
so far as terractottas at least are concerned. Most terracotta 
pieces, except perhaps a few from the ancient site of Pataliputra, 
that had originally been labelled Mauryan, are now being 
ascribed to the Suriga, Kushana or early Gupta periods*. 

VI 

Cave Architecture 

Of the architectural remains usually ascribed to the Maurya 
period very few are artistically significant. Tradition ascribes 
a large number of stupas and chaitya-hvAls to the building activi- 
ties of Asoka, but none of them exists today in their original 
form and plan except the excavated chaitya- halls, bearing 
inscriptions of Asoka and Dasaratha, in the Barabar caves. The 
monolithic rail at Sarnath in grey and polished Chunar sand- 
stone may have been erected under the direction and patronage 

1. Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 20, fig. 13. 

2. Coomaraswamy. op. cit., pp. 20 — 21, figs, 16, 23, 57, 60, 

3. Kramrisch, J. I, S. O. A., VII pp. 89-110. Gordon, J. L S. O . A . 
XI pp. 136-95- 

4. Ibid, Kramrisch. 


i 

♦ 



MAURYAN ART 


385 


of Asoka himself. Its architectural form is exactly that of the 
rails of Bharhut, and must have been literally transferred into 
stone from contemporary wooden originals without possibly 
any understanding of its constructional characteristics. The 
plinth or the alambana, the uprights or the stambhas , the horizontal 
bars or the suchis and the coping or the ushmsha have all been 
just carved out of what must have been a huge slab of stone ; 
an understanding of the constructional characteristics would 
have certainly made the task easier by piecing together the 
constituent parts of smaller slabs of stone exactly in the same way 
as we see them done at Bharhut or Sahchi or Bodhgaya . 
The altar or the bodhimanda at Bodhygaya is also traditionally 
associated with Asoka. It is permissible to assume that it 
was perhaps much like the bodhimanda as we see it on one of 
the Bharhut reliefs 1 bearing the inscription in Brahml 
characters ‘Bhagavato Sakya Munino Bodho.’ The point 
cf architectural interest is that the Bharhut altar consists of 
four pilasters the forms of which were evidently derived from 
wooden prototypes and had nothing to do with the monumental 
Asoka columns. 

The Barabar and Nagarjuni caves of which the Sudama 
seems to be the earliest are lineal descendants of similar rock- 
hewn caves that must have been in use by peoples of rude 
primitive tribes and recluses. They are the earliest examples 
of the rock-cut method, and are exact translations in stone of 
existing wood and thatch structures. The exterior walls and 
roofs of these simple cells, including that of the Lomasa Rishi 
cave of the same Barabar-Nagarjuni series have all received the 
high polish so typical of Mauryan art. The earliest of these 
caves is presumably the one bearing an inscription dated in the 
twelfth year of Asoka’s reign — the Sudama — and saying that 
it was dedicated to the monks of the Ajivika sect. This rock- 
hewn cave consists of two chambers ; a rectangular antechamber 
with barrel- vaulted roof and a doorway with sloping jambs — 
an indication of adoption of wooden prototypes — in the long 
side of the chamber at the end of which there is a separate cir- 
cular cell with a hemispherically domed roof. The two chambers 


i. Coomaraiwamy, op. cit., fig. 41 



386 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


are connected by a central interior doorway. At the 
outer side the circular cell has overhanging eaves which are 
but transference in wood of thatch construction ; moreover 
the live rock walls are marked by irregular perpendicular grooves 
which are but translation on live rock of upright wooden or 
bamboo planking 1 . 

Furgusson states that a second of this series of caves ‘called 
the Karna Chaupar, bears an inscription which records the 
excavation of the cave in the nineteenth year after the corona- 
tion of Asoka. It is simply a rectangular hall. . . .and except 
in an arched roof. . . .has no architectural feature of importance. 

At the right, or west end is a low platform as if for an image ’ 2 

In the granite Nagarjuni hill are three more caves, each 
bearing an inscription of the Maurya king Dasaratha that 
purports to dedicate them to the same Ajivika sect.. Two of 
these are very small, consisting of a simple rectangular cell 
each, each entered from the end, and having a barrel- vaulted 
roof. The largest is the one known locally as Gopi or Milk- 
maid’s cave which is a long rectangular hall with a barrel-vaulted 
roof and with circular ends. It is entered through a doorway 
in the centre of the south side 3 . 

Chronologically the latest and architecturally the best of the 
series is undoubtedly the LomasaRishi 4 which though bearing 
no inscription may be taken to belong to the Maurya period. 
In ground plan and general design it is much like the Sudama, 
and consists similarly of a rectangular antechamber with barrel- 
vaulted roof entered by the long side through a doorway with 
sloping jambs ; this antechamber is connected at the end through 
a central doorway with a separate cell which is oval and not 
round as in the Sudama. But the most interesting architectural 
element in the LomaSa Rishi is its facade which is frankly an 
exact translation of the gable end of a wooden structure in the 
language of stone. The carpenter’s handiwork has been copied 
in stone in every little detail. From this facade can easily be 

r. Fergxisson, History of Indian & Eastern Architecture, I. pp- I 3° 3 1 ’ 

Brown, Indian Architecture : Buddhist & Hindu, pp. 12—13. 

2. Fergusson, op. cit. p. 130. 

3. Ibid, p. 132 ; Brown, op. cit. p. 13. 

4. Fergusson, op. cit. p. 131 — 32 ; Brown, op. cit. p. 13. 



MAURYAN ART 


387 


reconstructed the wood-built structural chaityas of this period 1 . 
The finial that surmounts the gable of the facade also seems to 
be translated from either terracotta originals or from wooden 
copies of them. 

These caves or rock-cut chaityas represent about half-a-century 
of building activity, but unlike Mauryan sculpture these almost 
primitive architectural essays show no process of evolution . From 
the Sudama to the Lomasa Rishi there is no doubt an 
elaboration, but the three caves of Dasaratha do not fit in along 
the line of any supposed or actual evolution. Indeed these 
caves do not represent, except in their high polish, any conscious 
attempts towards architectural achievement. The architects 
of the Maurya court, so far as these caves are concerned, merely 
copied in stone what they saw before them constructed of wood 
and bamboo and clay. But the facade of the Lomasa Rishi 
proves once for all that even here in these primitive caves there 
was no slipshod work permitted in the actual cutting of the stone ; 
every little detail is sharply and precisely chiselled. 
Whatever their architectural quality these rock-cut chaitya 
halls represent the earliest extant remains of and perhaps the 
second stage in the evolution of this type of Indian monuments. 
The history of later chaitya architecture is roughly the history 
of the evolution of the ground plan and elevation of the Sudama 
and the Lomasa Rishi. 

VII 

Concluding Remarks 

With all its urban, conscious and civilised quality, its advanced 
power of visualisation and full knowledge and comprehension 
of the third dimension, Maurya court art constitutes only an 
interlude, in the history of Indian art. Kramrisch rightly 
hits the point when she says, ‘in the organism of Indian art 
Mauryan sculpture has only marginal importance’ 2 . It was 
indeed a hot-house plant reared up by the will, care and patro- 
nage of a court heavily under the influence of foreign culture 
and ideology. In course of time the glass walls fell to pieces 

1. Ibid. 

2. Kramrisch, Indian Sculptun , p. u — 12. 



.388 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


.and the plant withered. Maurya court art failed to make any 
notable permanent contribution to the growthof Indian art except 
that it directly helped the fixation of the latter in permanent 
material. A most important exponent of Maurya court ideology 
in sculpture are the crowning lion figures which, we have seen, 
were conditioned by a plastic vision and artistic convention 
already fixed and determined within a foreign art tradition. 
They raise the presumption that they for the first time introduced 
into the realm of Indian Art a highly advanced power of visuali- 
sation and a fuller comprehension of the problem of the third 
dimension. But here a counter-hypothesis, I have already 
pointed out, presents itself. It is quite permissible to assume 
that these two essential qualities of high art were not unknown 
to Indian artists who used to work in wood and clay and 
shape images in fully rounded form. This assumption seems 
to find strong support not only from the spirit and appearance 
but also from the general conception, treatment and execution 
of the Dhauli elephant and the Rampurva bull which 
undoubtedly belong to a different art tradition. I have tried 
also to point out that the Patna Yakshas, the Didarganj 
Yakshini, and the Lohanlpur Jaina images to an extent belong 
to the line of evolution of this tradition, though it must be 
admitted that the Maurya elephant and the bull belong qualita- 
tively to a higher aesthetic level. This court art does not seem 
to have taken cognisance of another tradition of art, a more 
primitive, perhaps folk tradition of presumably some significance, 
that was hardly conscious of the third dimension and fully 
rounded form. This tradition came to be fixed in 
permanent material for the first time in Bharhut where already 
the conflict between round volume and flat surface makes its 
appearance and gradually shows itself not only in the Baroda 
and Parkham Yakshas and the so-called ManasadevI of Parkham 
still in worship but also in the Patna Yakshas, the Lohanipi r 
images and some of the huge primitives of the early Mathura 
school. 

No less important an exponent of Maurya court art is the 
independent column standing free in space. The idea and 
impetus persisted even after the Mauryas, but the form under- 
went considerable change. It was never adopted as part of any 



MAURYAN ART 


389 


larger architectural entity in which case pillars and pilasters 
invariably show and evolve other forms directly derivable from 
wooden prototypes. Already in the first century B.C. the 
Garuda column from Besnagar 1 raised by the direction and 
patronage of a colonial Greek converted to Bhagavata 
Vaishnavism, shows form and features that are different from 
those of Asokan columns. The lowest third of the shaft is octa- 
gonal terminated by eight half- lotus designs; the middle third is 
sextagonal which is terminated by an octagonal band, each side 
of the band being decorated by a stylised full and round lotus 
design ; the upper third is round and is super-imposed by a bell- 
shaped capital that in its shrpe, form and appearance is related 
not so much with the Asokan capitals as with the typical Perse- 
politan ones with a ring of pointed lotus petals at the upper end 
of the base. The crowning adornment is not that of an animal 
but consists of a high cube supporting a stylised cluster of palmyra 
branches which again recall similar motifs in West Asiatic art. 
The fact that this column was raised by a colonial Greek probably 
explains this emphasis on Achaemenian and west Asiatic motifs , 
but the fact remains that post-Maurya art and architecture 
discarded the type and form of columns made current by the 
Maurya monarchs. This is further supported by the shape and 
form of pilasters met with at Bharhut and derivable from wooden 
prototypes. 

In the realm of architecture also Maurya court art failed to 
make any impress. The Mauryan palaces and the Pillared 
Hall brought into existence directly by the impetus and inspira- 
tion of Achaemenian architectural form and ideal do not seem 
to have captured the imagination of Indian builders and 
architects, and there is no evidence in later Indian art to show 
that such plans and designs were ever adopted. On the other 
hand the few rock-hewn chaitya-cells patronised by the Maurya 
monarchs reveal that they w r ere exactly and literally translated 
from wooden prototypes. The evidence of civil and religious 
architecture furnished by the early Indian reliefs of Bharhut, 
Sanchi, Amaravatl and other places also points to that conclusion 2 . 

1. Bachhofer, op. cit. plate, 14* 

2. Fergutton, op. cit. chaps. IV — VI. Brown, op. cit. chaps. II and III j 
Smitfe, History of Fins Art in India & Ceylon y pp, 21 — 28. 



390 


AGE or THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


Here also the Indian style, form and tradition made them- 
selves felt. 

It is true, that early Indian artknowsof certain motifs, patterns 
and designs made current and popular by Maurya court art — 
this without any reference to the question of art-style, and that 
quite a large portion of this repertory of motifs and designs belongs 
to the art of Asiatic west which was for a time dominated by 
Achaemenian and later by colonial Greek imperialism ; but 
it would be short-sightedness to assume that c the whole group 
of motifs of western Asiatic aspect was introduced by Asoka’s 
Persian craftsmen en bloc\ There can hardly be any doubt 
that quite a few of such motifs were made current even before 
the Mauryas, while those that are definitely Hellenistic came in 
during and after the Maurya period. 

The imperialism of the Maurya monarchs, especially of 
Asoka, was a synthesis of Indian, Achaemenian and Hellenistic 
ideals. It was the expression of an individualistic taste and 
ideology, not of collective social will. Asoka’s personal religion, 
his conception of Dhamma and his policy of Dhammavijqya also 
reflect the individual ideology and preference of a resolute but 
intelligent and benevolent autocrat who dominated the Maurya 
court and administration. Maurya court art also was no excep- 
tion to this basic and fundamental factor. Nanda-Maurya, 
particularly Maurya imperialism and Asokan policy of Dham - 
mavijaya drew India out of her primitive local tribal outlook. 
Asokan policy in the realm of religion raised Buddhism to the 
status of an international religion right from the position of a 
tribal and regional cult. So in the realm of art as well. Indi- 
vidual taste and preference of Maurya monarchs like Chandra- 
gupta, Bindusara and Asoka for ideas and objects from Achae- 
menian and Hellenistic Orient furnished the impetus and inspira- 
tion, and Indian art not only came to be fixed in permanent 
material but it was raised from the position of handicraft and 
primitive art to the dignity and status of higher art. The main 
lines of this art, just as the main lines of Asoka’s policy of Dham- 
mavijaya were chiefly determined by individual will, taste and 
preference. Both lacked deeper roots in the collective social 
will, taste and preference, and were therefore destined to have 
isolated and short lives coeval and coexistent with and within 



MAURYAN ART 


391 


the four limits of the powerful Maurya court. This explains 
why Maurya court art with all its dignified bearing, monumental 
appearance and civilised quality forms but a short and isolated 
chapter of the history of Indian art. Like the columns and the 
animal figures themselves Maurya Art stands aloof and apart. 



392 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Barnett, L.D. : Antiquities of India, (London, 1913). 

Cambridge History of India, Vol, I, (Cambridge 1922). 

Lassen, Christian : Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. II 

2nd Edn. (Leipzig, 1874). 

Masson-Oursel and others : Ancient India and Indian 

Civilization, (London, 1934). 

Rapson, E. J. : Ancient India from the earliest times to the 
first century A.D., (Cambridge, 1914). 

Raychauhuri, H. C. : Political History of Ancient India, 
4th Edn,, (Calcutta, 1938). 

Vallee-Poussin, Louis de la : LTnde aux Temps des Mauryas 
(Paris, 1930). 


Chapters I {India in the age of the JVandas) and IV Chandra - 
Gupta and Bindusara . 


SOURCES : — 

Arrian : Anabasis of Alexander and Indica (English Tr.) 

E. J. Chinnock, (London, 1893). 

The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as described 
by Q. Curtius, Diodorus, Plutarch and Justin, transla- 
tion by J. W. McCrindle, Westminster, 1896). 
Hathlgumpha Inscription of Kharavela— Ep. Indica, X., 
App. No, 1345 ; J.B.O.R.S., Dec. 1917 ; J.R.A.S., 1910 
(Fleet), 1918 (Smith), 1919 (Chanda) ; I A. 1919 

(Majumdar, R. C.), 1920 (Sankara Aiyer), Ep. Indica, 
XX, pp. 71-89. 

Kalpasutra of Bhadrabahu, Ed. H. Jacobi, (Leipzig 1877) 
Trans, by H. Jacobi S.B.E. XXII. 

Kalpasutra of Bhadrabahu, Trans, by H. Jacobi, S. B. E. 
XXII. 

McCrindle : Ancient India as described in classical litera- 
ture (Westminster, 1901) 

Mudrarakshasa of Visakhadatta, (Bombay, 1928). 

Pargiter : Purana Texts of the Kali Age, (Oxford, 1913) 
Rigveda Brahmanas — A. B. Keith (Harvard, 1920). 

Shama Sastri, R. : Arthasastra of Kautilya, (Mysore 1909). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


393 


Strabo — Geography, Eng. Tr. Hamilton and Falconer 
(London, 1854 — 7). 

Sthaviravalicarita of Hemachandra, ed. H. Jacobi, (Cal- 
cutta 1891, 2nd Edn. 1932). 

MODERN WORKS 

Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India (London 1903). 

Spooner, D. B. : The Zoroastrian period of Indian History, 

J. R. A. S., (1915, pp. 63-89, 405-55). Further dis- 
cussion by (1) V. A. Smith ib. pp. 800-2 (2) A. B. Keith 
ib. 1916, pp. 138-43 and (3) F. W. Thomas ib. pp. 362-6. 
See Modern Review, 1916 (XIX). 

Tarn, W. W. : The Greeks in Bactria and India (Cambridge, 
1938). 

Waddell, L.A. : Report on the excavations at Pataliputra* 
(Calcutta, 1903). 



394 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter II — Alexander's Campaigns in India 

Breloer, B. : Alexander’s Kampf Gegen Poros (Stuttgart, 
1932-3). 

Cambridge History of India : I, (1922) chapters XV and XVII 
beginning. 

Cambridge Ancient History, VI, ch. XIII, esp. iv-vii. In his 
account of the battle of Jhelam, Tarn, following 
Baer, says that Alexander divided his cavalry force 
in order to draw the Indian cavalry, a weaker 
force than his own, to charge him and thus draw 
them away from the elephants (1928). 

Cavaignac, E. : A propos de la bataille d’Alexandre contre 
Porus (JA.1923 ii 332-4), points out that Alexander 
crossed the river above his camp as Curtius (viii. 
13) says that Ptolemy’s troops watched by Porus 
occupied the bank of the river lower down. 
(Contra. C.H.I. i, p. 361 n . 2 and p. 365). 

Holdich : The gates of India (London, 1910)' — ‘Aornos 
appears to have been a kind of generic name with 
the Greeks, applied to mountain positions of a 
certain class’ (109). ‘We shall never recognise 
Aornos by its superficial features’ (118). 

Lassen : Indische Alterthumskunde 2 ii pp. 124 — 205 (Leipzig 
1874). 

McCrindle, J.W. : The Invasion of India by Alexander the 
Great as described by Arrian, Curtius, Diodorus, 
Plutarch and Justin (Westminster, 1896) 

McCrindle, J. W. : Strabo and the Itinerary of Alexander 
the Great (pp. 6-101, and 150-155 of Ancient 
India as described in Classical literature). 

(I have followed Arrian’s narrative in the main ; where I 
have preferred Curtius or Diodorus, this is 
indicated in the text. For the references, very few, 
to occurrences after Alexander’s death I have 
depended on citations in standard modern works). 

Smith, V. A. : Early History of India 4 — chapters III and IV, 
(Oxford, 1924). 

Stein : Alexander’s campaign on the Indian N. W. Frontier, 
Geographical Journal, 1927. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


395 


Stein : On Alexander’s track to the Indus (London. 1929). 
Stein : An Archaeological Tour in Upper Swat and adjacent 
Hills Tracts (A.S.I. Memoir, No. 42 ; 1930). 
Stein : Serindia, Vol. i. pp. 1-5 (London, 1921). 

Thirlwall : History of Greece Vol. vii (pp. 1-75), (London, 
1852). 



396 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Chapter III — India in early Greek and Latin Literature 

Breloer, B. : Kautilya — Studien 

(i) Die Grundeigentum in Indierx (Bonn, 1927). 

(ii) Altindisches Privatrecht bei Megasthenes und 
Kautalya (Bonn, 1928). 

,, Megasthenes (etwa 300 v. chr.) uber die indische 

Gesellschaft, ZDMG, 1934, pp. 130-164. 

,, Megasthenes uber die indische Stadtvervvaltung, 

ZDMG, 1935, pp. 40-67. 

[Breloer has sought to offer very plausible 
interpretations of Megasthenes’ statements on 
Indian society and polity and to explain them in the 
light of the mental equipment of a Hellenistic Greek 
administrator who was fully acquainted with all 
that had been wTitten before him by his country- 
men about India. Unlike Otto Stein, he discovers 
fundamental agreement between Megasthenes and 
Kautilya.] 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I (1922), Ch. XVI. 

Falconer, W. (and H. C. Hamilton) : The Geography of Strabo, 
3 vols. (Bohn’s Classical Library). (London 
1854-7). 

Godley, A. D. : Herodotus, with an English translation, 4 vols. 
(Loeb Classical Library) . 

Lassen : Indische Alterthumskunde 2 (1874), II, pp. 626- 
751. 

McCrindle ; Ancient India as Described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian (Calcutta, 1877). 

„ : Ancient India as described by Ktesias the Knidian 

(Calcutta 1882). 

„ : The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great 2 

(Westminster, 1896). 

,, : Ancient India as described in Classical Literature 

(Westminster, 1901). 

Monahan, F. J. : The Early History of Bengal (Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1925). 

Rawlinson, George : The History of Herodotus (Everyman s 
Library) 2 Vols. 

Stein, O : Megasthenes und Kautilya (Wien, 1921). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


397 


(Stein’s method of a mechanical confronta- 
tion of data from Megasthenes with those from 
Arthasdslra is of questionable value as Breloer has 
demonstrated ; but his discussions contain much 
that is useful). 



398 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter V — Mauryan Polity 

ArthaSastra of Kautilya ed. Shama Sastri (Mysore, 1909 2nd. 

edn. 1919). 

„ „ ,, Ganupati Sastri (Trivandram, 

1924-25). 

„ „ „ Jolly (Lahore, 1923—4). 

Modern Works : 

Bandyopadhyaya, N. C. : Kautilya (Calcutta, 1927). 

Barnett. : Antiquities of India (London, 1913). 

Breloer : Kautilya Studien I — III (Bonn, 1927-34). 
Cambridge History of India I, Ch. XIX (Cambridge, 1922). 
Gopal, M. H. : Mauryan Public Finance (London, 1935). 
Gowen, H. H. : ‘The Indian Machiavelli or Political Theory 
in India Two Thousand years ago\ Political 
Science quarterly Vol. 44, 1929, pp. 173 — 92. 
Hillebrandt, Alfred. : Altindische Politik. (Jena 1923). 
Jayaswal : Hindu Polity (Calcutta 1924). 

Law, N. N. : Studies in Ancient Hindu Polity (Calcutta, 1914). 
Monahan : The Early History of Bengal, (Oxford University, 
Press, 1925). 


Inscriptions 

Barua, B. M. : The old Brahmi inscription of Mahasthan 
(Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. X (1934) pp. 
57-66. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Maurya Brahmi inscription of Mahasthan 
(Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXI ( 1931—32 ) 
pp. 83 — 91. 

Biihler George : The Sohgaura Copper plate (Indian Antiquary, 
Vol. XXV, (1896) pp. 261—66; also JR AS, 1907, 
pp. 501 ff ; E.I., XXII pp. 1-3 (K. P. Jayaswal) 
and ABORT XI pp. 32 ff. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


399 


Chapter VI — As oka and his successors 
Inscriptions of Asoka : 

* 

Henning, W. B : The Aramaic Inscriptions of Asoka found 
in Lampaka, Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, XIII, pt. 1, pp 80. — 88. 
Hultzsch : Inscriptions of ASoka (Oxford, 1925). 

Sahni, Dayaram : The Yerragudi Reck edicts of Asoka ASI. 

Annual Report, 1928-29 pp. 161-7. 

Senart E., : The Inscriptions of Piyadasi, Eng. Tr. by G. A. 
Grierson, IA. 1890-92. 

The Gavimath and Palkigundu inscriptions of Asoka (Hydera- 
bad Archaeological Series, No. 10, 1932). 

Literary Sources : 

Divyavadana, Ed. E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil (Cambridge, 
1886). 

Dipavamsa Ed. and Tr. H. Oldenberg, (London, 1879). 
Hiuen-Tsang — Beal, Buddhist records of the Western World, 
(London, 1884). 

Watters— On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, 

( London 1 904 — 5 ) . 

Mahavamsa Ed. Geiger (London, 1908), Tr. by same 
(London, 1912) 

Mahabhashya ed. Kielhorn, (Bombay, 1880-5) 

Rajatarangini Ed. Stein, (Bombay 1892), Trans, by same 
(Westminster 1900). 

Taranatha : German Trans, by Schiefner— Geschichte des 
Buddhismus in Indien (St. Petersburg, 1869). 

Modern Works : 

Burnouf E., : Introduction a L’histoire du Buddhisme Indien 
(Paris, 1876). 

Davids, T. W. Rhyes : Buddhist India, (London, 1903). 
Dikshitar, V. R. R. * The Mauryan Polity, (Madras, 1932) 
Franke : Pali und Sanskrit (Strassburg, 1902). 

Hardy Edmund * Konig Asoka, (Mainz, 1913). 

Lassen Christian, Indische Alterthumskunde (pp. 224-88) 
II (Leipzig, 1874). 



400 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Levi, Sylvain : Le Nepal— 3 vols. (Paris, 1905-8). 

Macphail, J. M., Asoka, (Heritage of India Series, Calcutta, 
n.d.) 

Marshall andFoucher : Monuments ofSanchi 3 vols. (Calcutta, 
1941). 

Mookerji, R. K. : Asoka, (London, 1928). 

Monahan : The early history of Bengal (Oxford, 1925) 
Pr'zyluski, J : La Legende de L’empercur Acoka (Paris 1923). 
Smith V. A. : Asoka (Oxford, 1920). 

Vallee Poussin, L. de : LTnde aux temps des Mauryas (Paris, 
1930) 

Asoka and K hot an 

Beal : Buddhist Records of the Western World (above) . 

Beal : Life of Hiuen-Tsang, p. 203. (London, 1914) 

Konow Sten : Khotan Studies, JRAS, 1914, pp. 344 ff. 

Rockhill : Life of the Buddha* — Ch. VIII (Trubner’s Oriental 
Series.) 

Stein, Sir Aurel : Ancient Khotan i. pp. 156-166; 368 (Oxford, 
1907). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


401 


Chapter VII — South India & Ceylon 
Sources : Sanga Ilakkiyam (Madras, 1940). 

Modern Works : 

Aiyangar S. K. : Beginnings of South Indian History (Madras 
1918). 

Geiger W. : The Mahavamsa (Eng. Tr.) (London, 1912). 
Kanakasabhai : Tamils 1800 years ago (Madras 1904). 

Parker : Ancient Ceylon. (London 1909). 

Sastri, K. A. N. : The Pandyan Kingdom Chh. II and III 
(London, 1929). 

„ The Colas I Ch. III-IV (Madras, 1935). 

Sesha Aiyar, K. G. : Cera kings of the Sangam Period, 
(London, 1937). 



402 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter VIII — Industry , Trade and Currency 
I. Sanskrit and Pali Works : 

The Arthasastra of Kautilya (or Kautalya) Ed. R. Shama 
Sastry, 2nd Ed. (Mysore, 1919). 

Ed. J. Jolly and R. Schmidt, Vol. I, (Lahore, 1929). 
Ed. (with original Sanskrit commentary) T. 
Ganapati Sastri, Parts I-III, Trivandrum Sans- 
krit Series. (Trivandrum 1921, 1924, 1925). 
Trans. R. Shamasastry, 2nd Ed. (Mysore). 

Trans. (Das Altindische Buch Von. Welt — und 
Staatsleben) von Johann Jakob Meyer, (Leipzig, 
1926). 

Jataka. Ed. V. Fausboll. (London 1877-97). 

Trans, by various hands under the editorship of 
E. B. Cowell. (Cambridge 1895-1913). 

(None of the above works can be definitely 
stated to refer to the economic conditions of the 
Nanda-Maurya times. But they may at least be 
taken to reflect the general or traditional environ- 
ment). 

II. Greek and Latin authors : 

Arrian (Flavius Arrianus) : Indica. Trans. J. W. McCrindle 
in Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian, (London, 1877. Reprinted, Calcutta, 1926). 
Anabasis of Alexander and Indica. Trans. E. J. 
Chinnock, (London, 1893). 

Diodorus : Bibliotheke. Book II. Chs. 35-42, giving epitome 
of Megasthenes. Trans. J. W. McCrindle in 
Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian. 

Pliny the Elder (Gains Plinius Secundus) : The Naturalis 

Historia. The portions relating to India trans. 
J. W. McCrindle in Ancient India as described in 
Classical Literature. (London, 1901). 

Trans, in the Loeb Classical Library, ten volumes. 
Quintus Curtius Rufus : Historiae Alexandri Magni. The 
part relating to India trans. J. W. McCrindle in 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


401 

The Invasion of India by Alexander the Greatt- 
(London, 1896). 

Strabo. Geography. Book XV, Ch. 1 — gives connected account 
of India. Incidental notices of India in other 
books. Trans. J. \V. AlcCrindle in Ancient 
India a sdescribed in Classical Literature, (London, 
1901). 

Trans. Horace Leonard Jones in the Loeb Classical 
Library. Eight volumes, (1917-32). 

III. Inscriptions : 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Maurya Brahmi Inscription cfMahasthan. 
El., xxi, pp. 83-91. 

Hultzsch, E. : Corpus Inscrip tionum Indicar um, Vol. I The 
Inscriptions of Asoka New and revised ed. 
(Oxford, 1925). 

IV. Coins : 

(Only the recent and more important publications are noticed) 
Allan, John : A Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British 
Museum, (London 1936). 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Lectures on Ancient Indian Numismatics, 
(Calcutta, 1921). 

Bhattacharya, P. N. : A Hoard of Silver Punch-marked Coins 
from Purneah. Memoir No. 62 of Archaeological 
Survey of India. (Delhi 1940). 

Chakravortty, Surendra Kisore : A Study of Ancient Indian 
Numismatics, 1931. 

Chatterji, Charan Das : Numismatic Data in Pali Literature (in 
Buddhistic Studies, ed. B.C. Law, Calcutta, 1931).. 
Hemmy, A. S. : The Weight Standards of Ancient Indian Coins; 
(JRAS, 1937). 

Jayaswal, K. P. : Early Signed Coins of India, JBORS, xx. 

September-December 1934. (Other papers in. 
JBORS, 1935, 1936, xxiii, Part i, 1937). 

Kosambi, D. D. : On the Study and Metrology of Silver Punch* 
marked Coins (NIA. iv. pp. 1-35, 49-76). 

Prasad, Durga : The Classification and Significance of Symbols 
on the Silver Punch-marked Coins of Ancient 



404 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


India. JASB. xxx, 1934, No. 3 (Num. Supp. No. 
xlv 1934). 

Observations on the Different types of Silver Punch- 
marked coins, their periods and locale. JASB, 
1937, No. 2, (Num. Supp. xlvii for 1937). 

Rapson, E. J. : A Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British 
Museum. (London, 1908). 

Indian Coins, (Strassburg, 1897). 

Sreenivas, T. : Annual Report of the Archaeological Depart- 
ment of H. E. H. the Nizam’s Dominions (1928- 
29). 1931. Appendix O — ‘Punch-marked coins 

in the cabinet of the Hyderabad Museum’. 

Walsh, E. H. C. : An examination of a find of punch-marked 
coins in Patna City with reference to the subject of 
punch-marked coins generally. (JBORS. v, 1919). 
An examination of fifty-eight silver punch-marked 
coins found at Gorho Ghat, (JBORS. v, 1919). 
Punch-marked Silver coins, their standard of weight, 
age and minting. (JR AS, 1937). 

Notes on two hoards of silver punch-marked coins, 
one found at Ramna and one at Machhuatoli 
(JBORS. 1939). 

Punch-marked coins from Taxiia. Memoir No. 59 
of ASI. (Delhi, 1939). 

Paila Hoard of Punch-marked Coins, JNSI. No. ii, 
1940. 

An Examination of a Hoard of 105 Silver Punch- 
marked coins found in the United Provinces in 
1916. (JNSI, No. ii, Part i, June 1941). 

A Comparative study cf the Patraha (Purnea) 
hoard of silver punch-marked coins. (JNSI, No. iv, 
Part II, December 1942). 

V. General works : 

Brelocr, Bernhaid. : Kautaliya-Studien. (Bonn, 1927 etc.). 
Ghoshal, U. N. : Contributions to the History cf the Hindu 
Revenue System, (Calcutta, 1930). 

Majumdar, R. C. : Corporate Life in Ancient India. 2nd ed. 
(Calcutta. 1922). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


405 


Mehta, Ratilal N. : Pre-Buddhist India. (Bombay, 1939). 

Neogi, Panchanan. : Iron in Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1914). 

Copper in Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1918). 

Puri, K. N. : Excavations at Rairh during Samvat years 1995 
and 1996 (A. D. 1938-39 and 1939-40) Depart- 
ment of Archaeological and Historical Research, 
Jaipur State. 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. C. A. F. : Economic Conditions according 
to Early Buddhist Literature in Cambridge History 
of India, Vol. i, (Cambridge, 1922). 

,, T. W. Buddhist India. (London, 1902). 

Rostovtzeff, M. : The Social and Economic History of the 
Hellenistic World. Three Vols. (Oxford, 1941). 

Sahni, Daya Ram. : Archaeological Remains and Excavations 
at Bairat. Department of Archaeological and 
Historical Research, Jaipur State. (Not dated). 

Spooner, D. B. : Exacavations at Pataliputra. Annual Rep. 

of ASI., 1912-13. 

Subba Rao, N. S. : Economic and Political Conditions in 

Ancient India. (Mysore, 1911). 



406 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Chapter IX— Religion, 

Banerjea J. N. : The Development of Hindu Iconography. 

(Calcutta, 1941). 

Barua, B. M. : The Pre-Buddhistic Indian Philosophy The 
Aji vikas. 

Bhandarkar, R. G. : Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems, (Strassburg, 1913). 

Bhandarkar, D. R. : Asoka (2nd edition). (Calcutta). 
Buhler, G. : The Indian Sect of the Jainas (translation by 
J. Burgess). 

Chanda, Ramprasad : Archaeology and Vaishnava tradition. 
(Calcutta, 1920). 

De la Vallee Poussin : LTnde Jusque Vers 300 av. J.C. (Paris, 
1931). 

Dutt N. : Early Monastic Buddhism, Vol. I. (Calcutta, 1941). 
Geiger : The Mahavamsa. (Eng. Tr. 1912). 

Guerinot : La Religion Djaina. (Paris, 1926). 

Hopkins, W. E. : The Great Epic of India, (Yale, 1920). 
Jacobi : Jaina Sutras (S. B. E., 2 Vols.) 

Keith : The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda. (Harvard, 

1925 ). 

Kern : Manual of Indian Buddhism, (Strassburg, 1896). 

L6vi Sylvain : Le Nepal 3rds (Paris 1905-8). 

Une langue pre-canonique du Bouddhisme J. As. 
Le Laghulovado et Pedit de Bhabra, J. As. 1896. 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian, (Calcutta, 1877). 

Minayeff : Recherches sur le Bouddhisme (French translation). 
Oldenberg : Buddha, (London, 1882). 

Pali Texts : (editions of the P. T. S.). 

Ray Chaudhuri, H. : The early history of the Vaisnava sect. 

The Political History of Ancient India, (Calcutta 
University, 1932). 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India, (London, 1911). 

Stevenson : The Heart of Jainism, (Oxford, 1915). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


407 


Chapter X — Language and Literature 

Apastamba Dharma Sutra, Ed. Biihler, III Edn. (Bombay 
1932). 

Aryamanj u^rimulakalpa Text as edited by Rahula Sankrityayana 
in K. P. Jayaswal’s An Imperial History of 
India, (Lahore, 1934). 

Bhartrihari’s Vakyapadlya, Benares Sanskrit Series, Kandas 
1 and 2 (1887). 

Bharata’s Natyasastra with Abhinavagupta’s Abhinava- 
bharatl, Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baroda Pt. 1, 
1926, Pt. 2, 1934 Manuscript in the Madras Govt. 
Oriental Mss. Library. 

Bhoja’s Sringara Prakasa, V. Raghavan, (Karnatak Publi- 
shing House, Bombay. Ms. in the Madras Govt. 
Oriental Mss. Library). 

Bodhayana’s Dharma Sutra (Government Oriental Library 
Series, Mysore, 1907). 

Brhatkathakosa of Harisena Ed. by Dr. A. N. Upadhye, 
(Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1943). 

Brhatkathamanjarlof Ksemendra, (Kavyamala 69, Nirnayasagar 
Press, Bombay, 1901). 

Commemorative Essays presented to Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, 
(Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 
1917). 

Grhya Sutras Pts. 1 Oxford, (1886) and 2. (1892). 

Haraprasad Shastri, Magadhan Literature (Calcutta, 1923). 

Hultzsch, E. Inscriptions of ASoka Corpus Inscriptionum In- 
dicarum, Vol. I (Oxford 1925). 

Kamasutras of Vatsyayana, (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 
Benares). 

Kane, Mm. P.V. History of Dharma Sastra Vol. I, (Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 1930). 

Kavyalahkara Sutra and Vrtti of Vamana, (Vamvilas Press, 

( Srirangam, 1 909) . 

Kathasaritsagara of Somadeva, (Nirnayasagar Press, Bombay, 
1903). 



408 AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 

Kavyamlmamsa of Rajasekhara, (Gaekwad Oriental Series, 
Baroda, 1934). 

Kautilya’s Arthasastra, Ed. by Mm. R. Shama Sastri, (Mysore, 
1924). 

A. B. Keith : History of Sanskrit Literature, (Oxford 1928). 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described in Classical literature 
(Westminster, 1901). 

MaxMiiller : History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, (London, 
1892). 

Panini’s Astadhyayi with Katyayana’s Varttikas, (Madras, 
1917). 

Panini, His place in Sanskrit literature by Th. Goldstucker, 
(London, MDCCCLXI). 

Patanjali’s Mahabhashya. Ed. Kielhorn, (Bombay, 1892, 1906, 
1909). 

Prabhatchandra Chakravarti : Patanjali as he reveals himself 
in his Mahabhasya (IHQ,. Vol. 2). 

Sacred Books of the East, Vols. II, XXIX, XXX. 
Sthaviravall Caritra or Parisistaparvam of Hemchandra Ed. 

by H. Jacobi, (Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 

1932) . 

M. Wintemitz, History of Indian Literature, English trans- 
lation Vols. I and II, (Calcutta University, 1927, 

1933) . 

Wilson Philology Lectures on Sanskrit and Derived languages 
(1887) by R. G. Bhandarkar Collected Works of 
R. G. Bhandarkar, Vol. IV, Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, (Poona, 1929). 

Yaska’s Nirukta. 

Sten Konow, The Home of Pairsachi Z. D. M. G. 64. (1910). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


409 


Chapter XT — Maury an Art . 

Bachhofer, L. : Early Indian Sculpture. (Paris, 1929). Vol. I, 
Chap. I. pp. 1 ff. 

Brown, Percy : Indian Architecture : Buddhist and Hindu, 
(Bombay), Chaps. II and III. pp. 5 ff. 

Carotti, G. : A History of Art, I (Ancient Art). (London, 1908). 

Chanda, R. P. : Four ancient Yaksha Statues, (J. D. L., C. U., 
IV, 1921). 

do The beginnings of Art in Eastern India with special 
reference to sculptures in the Indian Museim, 
Calcutta, M. A. S. I., No. 30. (1927). 

Codrington, K. de B. : Ancient India from the earliest time to 
the Guptas. . . .(London, 1926). 

Combaz, Gisbert : L’lnde et L ? Orient, Classique, (Paris 1937). 

Coomaraswamy, A. K. : History of Indian and Indonesian Art, 
(London, 1927) Parts I and II, pp. 3 ff. 
do Origin of the Lotus (so-called Bell) Capital. (Ind. 
Hist. Q. VI, pp. 373-375). 

Cotterill : History of Art. I. 

Dalton, O.M. : The Treasure of the Oxus, 2nd edn. 

Delaporte, L. : La Mesopotamie, (Paris 1923). 

Fergusson, J. : A History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 
2nd Edn. (London, 1910). Chap. V. pp. 125 ff. 

Hultzsch : Inscriptions of Asoka (C. T. I., I Vol. I, 1925). 

Jastrow, M. : The Civilisation of Babylonia & Assyria, 2nd Edn. 
(Boston, 1898). 

Jayaswal, K. P. : Statues of two Saisunaka Emperors, (J. B. O. 
R. S. V. 1919). 

do. Another Saisunaka Statue, fJ.B.O.R. S., V. 1919*. 
do. Jaina image of the Maurya period. (JBORS., 
XXII. 1937). 

King and Thompson : The sculptures and inscriptions of 
Bahistun. (London, 1907). 

Kramrisch, Stella — Grundziige der indischen Kunst. (Hellerau, 
1924). 

do. Contact of Indian Art with the Art of other coun- 
tries, (J.D.L., C.U., X. 1923). 
do. Indian Sculpture. (Calcutta, 1933). Chap. I. 
Sec. 2. pp. 9 ff. 



410 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Lawrence, A. W. : Later Greek sculpture and its influence on 
East and West. 

Mitra, A, K. : Mauryan Art, (Ind. Hist. Q,. III. pp- 541 ff.) 
do. Origin of the Bell-capital, (Ind. Hist. Q. VII. 
pp. 213 ff.). 

Marshall, John : Monuments of Ancient India, in C. H. I., I. 
McCrindle : Ancient India as described in classical literature. 
Perrot, George and Chipiez, Charles : History of Art in Persia. 
(London, 1892). 

Sarre, Friedrich : Die Kiunst des alten Persien, (Berlin, 1923). 
Smith, V. A. : History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon 2nd edn. 

(Oxford, 1930), Chaps. II and III. pp. 15 ff. 
do. The monolithic pillars or columns of Asoka, (Z.D. 
M.G., LXV. 1911). 

do. Persian influence on Mauryan India, (I. A. 1905 

pp. 201 ff.L 

Spooner, D. B. : Didarganj image now in the Patna Museum. 
(J.B.O.R.S. V. 1919). 

do. Mr. Ratan Tata’s excavations at Pataliputra, (A. S. 
R. 1912-13). 

do. The Zoroastrian period of Indian history (J.R.A.S. 
1915). 

Tam, W. W. : Hellenistic Civilisation. (London, 1927). 
Tolman : Ancient Persian Lexican and Texts. Vanderbilt 
Oriental Series, VI. (New York, 1908). 
Waddell, L.A. : Report on excavations at Pataliputra, 
(Calcutta, 1903). 



INDEX 


Aba$tenoe, see Ambashthas, 40. 
Abhidhamma, 215, 302. 
Abhidhanachintamapi of Hemachandra, 
148. 

Abhidharmapitaka, 284. 

Abhinavabharatl a commentary on 
the Natya Sastra, 329. 
Abhinavagupta, 329. 

Abhiras, the, a tribe, 40. 

Abhisara, (Abisares) the territory 
east of the Indus, 36, 50, 51-52; 
the king of, assisted by the Assake- 
nians against Alexander, 35; and 
Pushkalavati, 36, 37; protesta- 

tions of the loyalty of the raja ob 
to Alexander. 64—65. 

Ab (h) isares, (Embisoros), the king 
of Abhisara, 37, 50, 51, 52 55, 
59 j fight of the Kathanians 
against, 66; made satrap o^ his own 
dominions, 68, 78; two serpents 
kept by, 98, 

Achaemenid (s) (Achaemenian), 

3 * 3 °> 3 2 ~ 33 > 123, 260, 318; 

influence of the, on Maurya art 
367-375 3 8 9> 39° 5 over the 

Mauryan Court, 353, 359; succes- 
sors of the, 34-42. 

Achaemenid empire, I, 31, 189, 

3 I 9 > 352 - 

Achaemenid inscriptions, 233. 
Achaemenian emperors, 318, 351 

and n, 

Adhikritas same as Gramikas, 22 
Adhyakshas , Superintendents, 115, 

1 88 ; the Arthasdstra on the duties 
of the, 180-181. 

Adraistai (Adhrshtas, Arishtas), a 
tribe, 38; submission of the city 
of the, to Alexander, 66. 

Adzatathat (Ajatasatru), 143. 


Aelian, a Greek writer, 86, 97, 166; 
on Indian birds, 99. 100; 

on the Mauryan palace at Patali- 
putra, 159; on the sons of Chan- 
dragupta, 160; on war chariots 
in India, no; one of the Klei- 
tarchus’ stories preserved by, 89. 
Agalassoi, see Agrasrenis. 

Agenor, father of Peithon, 74, 78. 
Agniskandhas , 238. 

Agoranomoi, 272, 278. 

Agramatya, cb : ef minister, 167* 
Agrammes (Augrasainya, Xandra- 
mes) see Mahapadma, 14, 16, 23, 
132, 141, 142, 145. 

Agronomoi, official of the rural 
administration in the Mauryan 
state, 120 and n; Megasthenes on 
the, 224. 

Agrasrenis (Agalassoi), the, a 
rebublican tribe in North western 
India, subjugation of by Alexan- 
der, 39, 70-71. 

Ahandn&rUy on the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, 254. 

Ahara, an administsrative division 
under the Nandas, 22. 

Ahimsa, 233, 237, 239. 

Ahuramazda, 32. 

Aitareya Brahma na y 9, 15, 188, 321, 
349 - 

Aindra grammar, 328. 

Ajatasatru (Adzatathat), 25, 143 ; 
father of Udavi, 158, n ; annexa- 
tion of the Vrijis by, 19; con- 
quest of Kossla by, 17. 

Ajita Ke£a-Kambala, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Ajivakas, a community of religious 
men, 204, 212 215 w, 241, 245, 

295”96, 299, 346, 385, 386; the. 



412 


AGE OF THE NANDAS MAURYAs 


and Bindusara. 169; and the Alexandria (Alasanda, Alakanda- 
Mahamatras, 225; animosity of kam), a city founded by Alexander 

Kautilya towards the, 325; in 46, 199, 273; the capital of Paro- 

Ceylon, 257. panisade. 78; capital of the Yonas, 

Akbar, 232. 154; Clemens of, 324. 

Akshapatala , record office, 180. Alexandrophagus, devourer of 

Ak (o) uphis. President of the hill of Alexander, 65 n. 
state of Nysa, 35; leader of the ‘Alexandrum*, 12, 144. 

Nysan deputation to Alexander, Alikasundara (Alexander of Corinth), 

48-9; visit of, to Alexander, 121. 206, 207, 217. 

Alak (s) anda (kam), see Alexandria, Allahabad, Aiokan column at, 216, 
154. 199, 271. 313, 361. 

Alberuni, 12* Allahabad-Kosam, Pillar edicts at, 

Alexander, 14, 16, 19,20,22, 23, 28, 205. 

29, 3C 32, 34, 35 , 39 ) 4 °) 4 i - 43 > Allitrochades, see Bindusara, 166, 

83, 90 n 9m, 92, 93 100101,115 168. 


n , 132, 143, 151, 153 n, 172, 173, 
188,178, 233, 262, 267. 292, 305; 
Achaemenian hegemony extingui- 
shed by, I, 33, 318; A grammes, 
the Nanda contemporary of, 141 ; 
altars of on the Hyphases, 353; 
arrangements by, for the administra- 
tion of the conquered territories, 
149; battle of. with Porus, 57-64; 
behaviour of, at Persepolis. 
352; Bucephalus, the charger of 
130; campaigns of, in India, 
45 _ 8 o, 82; capture of Aornos by, 

5 1 -5 * 5 ; collection of snake charmers 
by, 98 ; end of the prefect of 
139. 145; exploration and return 
of, to Babylon, 76-78; features 
ofthe epoch after. 197-108; gold 
coins of 280; historians of, 87-89; 
idea of, to conquer the Prasii, 
87; importance of the Indiar 
campaign of, 2; Indian coins of, 
124-126; interview of, with the 
sages, 105, 1 06; meeting of Chan 
dragupta with, 12,14,24,133,137, 
142, 144; meeting of Sophy tes 

with, 102 n., Mousikanos the 

contemporaray of, 45; movements 
of, after the battle of thejhelum, 
64-66; the period to, from Hero- 
dotus. marked by a set back in 
the Greek knowledge of India, 
87; presents to, by the Malavas, 
267, 269, by the king of Taxila, 
36, 103; prohibition of the killing 
of peacocks by, 100; results of 
the invasion of India by, 78 — 
80, 261; the return of, 

68 — 70; and the Sibi. 39; 
and Sophytes, 98; unpopu- 
larity of the Xanda contem- 
porary of, 24; visit of Akouphis 
to, 121; death of, in Babvlon, 78, 
149 - 

Aiexander of Corinth (Alikasun- 
darah 206, 207, 217. 

Alexander of Epirus, 207 and n. 

‘Alexander’s harbour*, 76. 


Alor (?), capital of Musicanus, 74. 
Amaravati, reliefs at, 389. 
Amasia, Strabo came from, 91. 
Amatyas, dharmasthiya and kanthaka- 
sodhana courts presided over by 
the, 185; highhandedness of 
the, during the days of Bindu- 
sara, 167. 

Ambashthas ( Ambastanoi, Abastenoe, 
Sambastai, Sabargae), a tribe, 
40, 74; submission of the, to Alexan- 
der, 74. 

Ambhi, (Omphis, Taxiles) 132, 139, 
149; sent back to his capital 
by Alexander, 64; put in charge 
of the Indian province, 77 — 78; 
Philip in charge of the 
satrapy of. 78; reception of 
Alexander by, 55 — 57. 

Ambigares, ruler of Harmatelia, 41 
Amitraghata (in), Amitrokhad (t) 
es, see Bindusara, 89, 13 3 ? 

168, 315. 

Amitrochades, see Bindusara. 166, 168 
Ammon, libations to, by Alexander, 

A 69 ’ 75 ' C 

Amyntas, 4b. 

Anabasis, a work of Arrian, 88. 
Anantadeva, author of Rajadhar- 
maka us tub ha .140. 

Anathapindika, ofSravasti, 270. 
Andhras, (Andrae), the, a tribe, 
222, 217, 233, 321; Megasthenes 
on the, 43. 

Andracottu (o) s, seeChandragupta, 

23, 24, 141, 144, l ' 8 

Angirasa, 288. 

Animals in India, 95 — 100. 

Animals, Asoka’s arrangements 
for the convenience of, 238; pro- 
hibition of the slaughter of, 2?9 
Animal columns, of the Asokan 


pillars, 361 — 362. 

Animal sacrifice, prohibition of, 233 
Ammal standard (Dhvajastambha) 
worship of, 344. 

Antamahamutras, officers of the 
borders, 226. 



INDEX 


413 


Antapala guardian oi the frontier, 
877, 278. 

Ant-gold, 95. 

Antialcidas, Heliodorus the amba- 
ssador of 305. 

Auugonus 151; favoured by Pithon, 
150; war of Seleucus with, 137— 

Antigonus Gonatas of Macedonia 
(Antikena), 206, 207. 

Antikmi, 217. 

Antiochus, (So ter), I of Syria, 152; 
153 1 ^ 9 f 2I 9> coins of, 129; 

and Bindusara, 168 — 69; Deima- 
chus sent by, to the court of 
Bindusara, 354; letter of Bindusara 
to, 160 n; and Subhagasena, 246. 
Antiochus Theos (Antiyoka, Anti- 
ochus II) 206, 207, 217, 238; and 
Asoka, 354; independence of 
Diodotus during the time of, 130. 
Antipater, 138; fight of Eumenes 
against , 150; regent of Mace- 
donia, 149. 

Anuradhapura, capital of Ceylon 
25^ 257. 

Anusamyana, tours of inspection, 227 
Anula, queen of Devanampiya Tissa, 
of Ceylon, 218 — 219, 258* 

Aornos, capture of, by Alexander, 
51-55; Sasigupta at, 65. 

Apadanas, the 164. 

Aparanta, textile manufacture in, 262 
Apastamba, 293, 333, 335. 

Apastamba Dharma sutra, 333, 334. 
Apes, method of the capture o£ 96-97 
Aphamiotai, in. 

Appian, 137, 1 38,139,154,158, i6g;on 
the relations between Seleucus and 
Chandragupta, 151; on the resi- 
dence of Chandragupta, 158 n; 
the Syriake of, 135. 

Arabia, 95. 

Arachosia (Kandahar), 33, 75, 153; 
given by Seleucus I to Chandra 
gupta Maurya, 130, Sybyrtius the 
Satrap of, 89. 

Arachosians, colonisation of Ramba- 
kia with the, 77. 

Arachoti, 152. 

Aramaic inscription, 355 
Aramaic script, 323, 352. 

Aranyakas , the 308. 

Arashtras (Arattas ) Republics, 68, 
337 - 

Arbela, battle of, 318. 

Architecture, 33 >340. 

Ardhamagadhi dialect, 317, 347. 

Aria, 153 ; given by Seleucus I to 
Chandragupta Maurya, 130. 

Ariana, 91 n . satrapy of, 154. 

Arigaon, a city burnt and deserted 
bv its residents. 48. 


Aristobulus, a follower of Alexander, 
83 ; on the changes in the course of 
rivers, 93—945 on the customs at 
Taxi la, 103; on the difference bet- 
ween the sanyasins and the vana- 
prasthas 105; on the fertility of 
thesoii and crops, 91; on the Indian 
sages, 104; on the law relating to 
discovery of deadly substance, 95; 
on the products of South India, 
43; on rain and monsoon, in North- 
west India, 92-3; on the snake, 
98; on the size and shade of a 
tree, 94. 

Aristotle, on Keras J 43; Scylax cited 
b y, 83. 

Aristoxeus, on the visit of Indian 
philosopher to Athens, 81 
Arittha, a nephew of Devanampriya 
Tissa, 218. 

Ariunaka, Arjuna cult, 304 — 5. 
Arrian, 32, 36, 37, 41, 48, 58, 72, 74, 
97 * 99 , io 2 «, 135 , I 39 * 156, i 57 > 
278; extracts from the memoirs of 
Nearchus in the works of, 88; on 
Alexander's invasion, 40; on Ale- 
xander’s march to Pura. 77; on 
Alexander’s interview with the 
sages, 104; on Aornos, 52-3; on 
the army of Porus, 57; on the di- 
vision of the conquests of Alexander. 
78; on the extent of the empire of 
Cyrus in the east, 30; on the equi- 
pment of the Indian foot soldier, 
269; on Herakles, 101; on the hus- 
bandmen in India, 114; on the 
Indians. 101 — 102; on Indian ri- 
vers, 93; on Indian towns 357; on 
ivory works in India, 265; on the 
invasion of India by foreigners, 
31; on leather works in India, 266, 
on the life of elephants, 96; on the 
location of the country of Sambhuti, 
69; on the losses of the Indians and 
the Greeks in the battle of the 
Jhelum, 62; on the Malavas, 39; 
on Mcgasthenes and Porus, 89 — 90 
n; on the nomarchai, 39; on the 
Pandyan queen, 44.; on the period 
between Dionysus and Sandrako- 
ttos. 101; on the position of the 
ruler of Takshaiila, 36; on the ruler 
of Abhisara, 37; on slavery in India, 
uj — no; on the sophists, 116; 
on the submission of the Kshudra* 
kas to Alexander, 73 ; on the system 
of government byond the Beas, 21. 

Arsakes, ruler of Urasa, 36; placed 
under Abhisares, 68. 

Art in India, common elements bet- 
ween the, and foreign art, 351. 

Artaxerxes Mnemon, Gtesias. a phy- 
sician in the court of, 86. 


414 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Arthasastra the 3, 112, 113, 115 116 
164, 179, 1B1, 226, 228; the, a 
work on polity, 336 — 37; assigned 
to the age of Chandragupta Maurya, 
12; authenticity of the, 172; the 
basis of the, 189 — 190; character 
of the, 178, 198; excurses on the, 
190 — 201 ; value of the, I35;mantri- 
parishad in the , 227; omission in 
the, of Kautilya’s part in the Maur- 
yan revolution, 146; reference in 
the, to Udyana’s story, 330 n\ 
Tantrayuktis borrowed from the by 
the Tolkdppiyam , 192: on the du- 

ties of the adhyakshas, 180 — 18 1 ; on 
Anvikshiki, 335; on architecture, 
339 — 340; on arts, 332; on ascetics, 
335 J on the Chakravartikshetram, 
i72;on city administration, 12 1 ; on 
different types of chariots, 188; on 
different types of infantry, 188; on 
the encouragement of industry 
and' trade by the state, 275 — 79; on 
the expenditure of the government, 
184; on foreign policy, 187 — 188; 
on the ideal of good government, 
190; on the king's ownership of 
land, 177; on skin 265-— 66; 
on metallic ores, 2 66, 267; on 
the ndvadhyaksha, 189; on pandya- 
kavata, 252; on pearl necklace, 
268; on popular lores, 338 — 339; on 
the rajju , 224; on republic. 173; on 
royal power, 175; on the safety of 
the king’s person, 176; on slaves, 
275; on Tantrayuktis,336; on trade, 

270 — 71; on textile manufacture, 

262 — 264; on the training of war 
horses and elephants, 122; on the 
units of currency, 279, 280; on the 
validity of royal decree, 174; on 
the Veda, 333; on the watchwords 
of the Mauryan government 360; 
on the worship of Sam karshana, 
306. 

Artisan, the 278; punishment for offe- 
_ nces against, 279. 

Aryamanjusrirnu lakalpa, the, onPanini, 

326; on the patronage of the Bra- 
haman Tarkikas by the Nandas, 324. 
Aryan India, division of into three 
parts, 310. 

Aryan speech, changes in the, 31 1- 
312; taken out of India, 318 — 319. 
spread of, 309. 

A (r) yaput (r) a, a title of the vice- 
roy of Suvarnagiri, 223. 

Ary as ur a, author of the Jdtakamdla , 

196. 

Ashidhasena, 298. 

Mm (v) aka, (Aspasians, Hippasioi, 
Hypassioi), a tribe in North western 
India, 26, 34, 47, 321 ; conquest of. 


by Alexander, 48; exterminated 
by Mahapadma, 17, 18; an Aryan 
state, 321. 

Asoka (Chandasoka, Kalasoka, Ka- 
masoka, Dharmasoka, Piadamsana, 
Piyadassana, Piyadasi, Asokavar- 
dhana, Devanampriya), 1, 11, 100, 
108, 140, 162, 164, i65n, 167, 168, 
176, 181, 182, 187, 192, 199, 202, 
207, 208, 239, 241, 249, 298, 299, 
3 0I > 347* 355* 3 6 °i put to school 
under Pingala Naga, 331, early 
life of, 208 — 10 and n; succession 
of, to the throne, 4, 170; adminis- 
tration under, 178, 223 — 226, 228- 
229; adoption of Buddhism by, 
210 — 212, 303; and the Ajivakas, 
169, 296, 299,346; and the Buddhist 
Saneha , 169, 214 — 216, 285, 301, 
302 — 304; and Devanampiya Tissa 
258; and the fall of the Mauryan 
empire, 247; and the Nirgranthas, 
299; and the southern kingdoms, 
250; art during the time of, 245; 
building activities of, 384, 385; 
chronology of the reign of, 206—207; 
conquest of Kalinga by, 272, 
309; a contemporary of Magas of 
Cyrene, 138; currency system du- 
ring the days of, 282; date of the 
XIII Rock Edict of, 138; the Dha- 
mmavijaya of. 360; extent of the 
empire of, in the south 155 — 156, 
203-204; 219 — 223; imperialism of, 
390; inscriptions of, 3, 20. 171, 1 73> 
200, 204 — -206; language of the ins- 
criptions of, 312 — 319 34G mili- 
tary success of, 261; missions of, 
171, 216 — 219, 273, 274, 318, 354; 
model for the inscriptions of, 3595 
north — western tribes under, 154; 
oral orders of, 226-227; patronage 
of Brahmanical learning by, 324; 
patronage of Dhamma by, 303; 
pilgrimage of 212 — 213. 221; the 
policy of Dharmanusasti of. 22; 
possible additions Qf, to Patalipu- 
tra, 346; propaganda of, in the He- 
llenistic kingdoms, 273; race x>f, 

141 and 1420; religious policy of, 

229 — 234; remission of taxes by, 
in favour of Lumbini, 184; res — 
torationof order by, in Taxila, 167; 
rule of, a great epoch, 3 — 4; scul- 
pture under, 265; silence of Greek 
and Latin writers about, 168; so- 
urces for the reign of, 202 — 207 
stone pillars of, rp2, 265, 358, 361- 
69; traditions about, 214 — 215*1; 
on the Pashandas, 306; on the per- 
formance of mangalas , 306; weak 
successors of, 190, 243 — 248. 
Aiokarama, 215. 



INDEX 


415 


Asokdvadana , the 167; Chandragup- 
ta ignored in the, 134. 

Asokavardhana, see Asoka, 207. 

Asokavardhamvadana , 243. 

Asokavarma, mentioned as a ruler of 
Kanchi, 249. 

Aiokesvara, 219. 

Aspasians, see Asmaka, 34, 47. 

Assagetes (Asvajit ?) a chieftain that 
helped Alexander, 51. 

Assakenians, a tribe in North-W estern 
India, 34, 35, 47; attempt of the, 
to expel the Macedonians from 
N. W. India, 150. 

Assakenoi, a tribe in North Western 
India, 51; subjugation of the, 
by Alexander, 49 — 50; rebellion 
and subjugation of the, 65. 

Assakenus, 15 n, 36. 

Assam, and Asoka, 221 — 222. 

Assyria, 344. 

Astadhyayi, the, 284. 

Astes, a chief in the Pushkalavatl re- 
gion, death of, 47. 

Astomi, 163. 

Astynomoi, officers in charge of the 
city, 120 — 121 and 120 n, 278. 

Aivaghosha, ig6, 318. 

Aivamedha, a sacrifice, 171, 289. 

Athena, figure of the helmeted head 
of, on a coin, 127. 

Asvamitra, 298, 299. 

Athenaeus, a Greek writer, 134, 139, 
168. 

Athens, coins of, 128, 129; visit of an 
Indian philosopher to, 81. 

Attalus, a general under Alexander, 

Atthaka (Astaka) a Vedic Rshi, 
287. 

Atharvaveda , the, 262, 333. 

Audumbara (Kotumbara), 263. 

Augrasainya (Agrammes), son or 
descendant of Ugrasena, 14. 

Augustus. 134. 

Austric speech, 308, 319, 320. 

Avasy aka sutra, the. 298. 

Avanti, 300. 

Avantisundari , 330. 

Avadanakalpalat the, of Kshemendra, 
132/*; mention of Asoka in the 

H 1 * 

Avanti, (Malwa) I36;and theSaiSuna 
gas, 18; control of Chandragupta 
over, 155. 

Avantis the, see Pradyotas, 19, 

Avaddnas , 203; the, on the oppression 
in the provinces, 182; on the succ- 
essors of Asoka, 243 — 44- 

Awadbi, Eastern Hindi 317* 

Ayodhya, the camp of Nanda in, 
* 7 , 2 i. 

Ayuktikas , officers, 227. 


B 

Babylon, (Baveru), 270; death of Ale- 
xander at, 78, 149; exploration 
of, and return of Alexander to, 76- 
78; Harpalus, satrap of 69; Hero- 
dotus on the Persian Governor of, 
j partition of, !39;SeIeucusin, 

I 5 I * 

Babylonia, 344; Alexander’s mint at, 
125, 126. 

Bactria, 33; conquest of, by Ale- 
xander, 46; revolt of, from Syria, 
2. 

Bactrian Greeks 85 ; allegiance of the, 
to Seleucus I, 130. 

Badami, the Chaluyas of, 248. 

Badarayana, author of the Vedanta - 
sutras, 335. 

Bahmanabad, 41. 

Bahrikas (troupes of performers), 179, 

Bairat, Minor Rock Edicts at, 204. 
2! 1-212. 

Balhikas, 146. 

Bahssaha, a disciple of Mahagiri, foun- 
dation of the U ttarabalissahagana 
bv, 298. 

Balkh, 46. 

Bana 196, 208 n; on Pushyamitra’s 
execution of Brhadratha, 189, 246; 
reference to the Vdyu purdna by, 

23* 

Bandhupalita (Samprati ?) 244, 245. 

Bankipur, 379. 

Barabar caves, 265, 313, 384, 385; 
inscription of Asoka in the, 204, 
205. 

Baroda, Yaksha image from, 380, 
381, 3 8 3 - 

Basarh, 383. 

Basarh — Bakhira, Asokan column at, 
361, 362, 374, 377; Hon figure in 
the column at, 369—70. 

Basileus, king, 34, 36. 37, 38. 

Bauddha Pdruatiya vamsdvali, 1 47 n. 

Baudhayana, 164 n, 333; on the 
Asramas 335 — 336; on the vdna- 
prastha , 334. 

Baudhayana Dharmasutra, 321. 

Baudhayana srauta sutras, 349 — 50. 

Baveru (Babylon), 270. 

Bazira (Bir— kot) subjugation of, by 
Alexander. 50 — 51. 

Bear, constellation of the, 92. 

Beards, dyeing of the, in India, 102 
and n. 

Behistun insc. of Darius, 359 * 

Benares, see Kari, 17* 2 7 I > 3 I 3 * 

Bengal and Asoka, 221 — 222. 

Bersaentes, Satrap of Arachosia, 33. 

Besnagar, Garuda column from, 389; 
inscription, 305. 

Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, 33. 



416 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Bhabra edict, (Calcutta Bairat), rock 
ins. 204, 285. 

Bhadrabahu, a Jaina patriarch, 1 6 1 
— 162 and 16 in, 165 249,; migra- 
tion of to Mysore, 297. 299, 341 ; 
return of. to Magadha, 298; Kal- 
pasutra of 142 n. 

Bhaddasala, a general of the Nandas, 
15, 25, 14b; conquest of, by 

Chandragupta, 136. 

Bhadresvara author of the KahavaU, 
136. 

Bhagala, designation of a royal race 
of Kshatriyas, 38. 

Bhagala, a chieftain near the Beas, 
67. 

Bhagavata pur ana , 1 4 1 . 

Bhagu, a Vedic Rshi, 287. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. on the identifi- 
cation of Satiyaputa, 238^; on the 
identification of Sopiiytes, 126 n . 
Bharadvaja, a Vedic Rshi, 288, 
328. 

Bharata, a legendary hero, 171. 
Bharata, author of the Ndtyasastra , 
3^8, 331. 

B (h) arhut, reliefs at, 375, 385, 

389* 

Bhartrhari, author of the Vdkya- 
padiyo, 327, 328. 

Bharukachchha, 270. 

Bhattiprolu, inscription at, 252. 

B havi shy anukir tana the, 19. 

Bhita relief, 383, 384; terracotta 
reliefs from, 343. 

Bhimaratha, 330. 

Bhir mound, Takshasila represented 
by the, 35. 

Bhlshma, 251. 

Bhoj a, author of the Sringdra prakdsa , 
328, 330 

Bhojas, a tribe, 217, 222. 

Bhojapuri dialect, 317. 

Bijjala, 15. 

Bimbisara, 11, 25, 22. 15; father of 
Ajatasatru, 17. 

Bindusara ( Amitrochades, Amitra- 
chates, Aflitrochades, Amitra- 
khada, Amitraghata). 4, 133, 134, 

165, 168, 176, 210, 272, 330, 331, 

34 b* 39 ° ; Durdhara, mother of, 
in Jain tradition, 159 ;m. the dau- 
ghter of Seleucus (?) 208, 209 — 
accession of, 206; and the Ajiva(i) 
kas, iG>; and the Deccan, 168; 
Brahmamc learning under, 32 j.; 
Council of five hundred under, 

167 n; embassy of Dcimachus to 
the court of, from Seleucus. 89, 

314 ; foreign relation of iG8 — 69; 
illness of, 209; last years of, 169 — 

179; mentionedin the Asokavaddna , 

134; mentioned in PatanjalPs 


Aiahdbhdshya. 1 33; military seccess 
of, 261 ; reign period of, 138; request 
of to Antiochus Soter, 160, n ; 
Subandhu a minister of, 329. 
Bismarck, 200. 

Bodhan, 18. 

Bodh Gaya, 241, 375, 384; Bodhi- 
manda at 436, 385. 

Bodhisattvas of the Mathura school, 
379 * 381* 

Bodhimanda, 385. 

B (o)ucephala, a city founded by 
Alexander on the bank of the R. 
Jhelum, 64. 130. 

Brachmanes (Brahmana), 313. 
Brahmagiri, 223, 249, M. R. E, 
at, 204. 

Brahman as, attempt of the, to expel 
the Macedonians from N. W, 
India, 150: influence of the 40, 
Brahmana — mahasalas, 288 — 289. 
Brahmavadins, 335. 

Brahmi inscription, 220, 22,249, 250, 
2 53— 53» 258, 309, 312, 321, 379. 
Brahmi script, 205, 256, 385; deriva- 
tion of the 323 — 324. 

Brahmanism in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 284, 287 293. 

Brajbhakha, 317. 

Brihadratha, 244, 246; execution of 
189. 

Brhatkathd . the 20, 25, 134, 147, 

325; on the origin of the Mauryas, 

1 41, 142; on Panini and Vararuchi, 
326, 329. 

Brhatkathdkosa, Harishena the author 
of, 329. 

Brhaspat*, 244. 

Brhaspatimitra, 283 n. 

Breloer, 112 n, 113, M5andn, 

19 1 ; on the Arthasdstra , 196* 
Buddha (Boutta, Sakyamuni), 35, 
141, 21 1, 213, 214s, 215,231, 260. 
284, 294, 295, 308, 309, 31 1, 313, 
3*7? 321, 324, 325, and Ceylon, 
25G; and the name Vrishala, 140; 
tun ana of the 2oG,209>th e religion 
of the 3; Vijayasimha, a contem- 
porary of, 44; on true Brahmins, 
292. 

Buddha era, 207. 

Buddhism , 284, and Asoka,^ 210- 
212, 230 — 34; conversion of Ceylon 
to 209; Kautdya's animosity to- 
wards 324; monuments of, in South 
India, 452; in the Nanda — Maury a 
period. 299 — 3 ° 4 » an d Sanskrit, 

325, 326; spread of, in foreign 
countries. 304. 

Buddhist canon, 285- 28G. 

Buddhist literature, the 340 4 1 * 
Indian inland trade 269 — 70; on 
the Vedas, 289. 



INDEX 


417 


Buddhist Sangha. 204; second and 
third councils of the, 214 — 16: 
299; 300 — 302; and Asoka, 169 
Buddhists and Chandragupta. 165. 
Buddhist symbols, worship of 
343 — 344 - 

Buhler, 164. 200; on the Rajukas.224 
Bulandibagh, 357, 383. 

C 

Calcutta Bairat rock ins., (Bhabra 
edict), 204, 268, 341. 

Callimachus, 138. 

Callisthenes, 144. 

Cambyses, 315. 

Canki, 289. 

Cape Malan, 77, 

Carians, 33. 

Carmania, 273. 

Caryanda, Skylax of, 82. 

Cathaeans, (Kathaioi) a self-govern- 
ing tribe, 37; country of the, 38. 
Cave architecture in the Mauryan 
period, 384. 87. 

Ceylon, (Ila, Lanka, Tambapanni, 
Taprobane), 43, 250, 253, 257, 

270, 271 ; Asoka’s letter to the 
king of, 243; Aioka’s mission to, 
218; conversion of, to Buddhism, 
209; early history of, 256-259; 
elephants of, 95; fragrant wood in, 
266; and Mahinda, 258; Mega- 
sthenes on, 250, 256; Pali canon 
taken by Mahendra to, 317, 138; 
production of gold in, 95; vaguely 
known to Onesicritus, 92. 

Ceylonese, commentary on the Great 
chronicle of, on the last Nanda, 24; 
legends m the early life of Asoka, 
209 n ; chronicles, 22, 134, 135, 
146; on the third Buddhist council, 
301-2. 

Chabahil, vihara built by Charumati 
221 . 

Chakravala emperors, 253. 
Chakravartin, 10, 156, 255; ideal of 
the, 132, 172. 

Chakravartikshetram, the Arthasastra 
on the, 172, 1 91. 

Chalcolithic civilization, relics of 
the, 342. 

Chalukyas of Badami and the 
Mauryas of Konkan, 248. 

Champa, 208, 269, 270, 308. 

Chanakya, see Kautilya, 1, 146, 148, 
164, 1 66, 167, 324, 325, 330, 337; 
an inhabitant of Taxila, 25; legen- 
ds about, 2 — 3. 

Chandakausika the, 143. 

Chandala language, 308. 

Chandanagari, a sakha of theUttara- 
balissahagana, 298. 


Chanclasa speech, 316. 

Chanda — Siri, (Chandrasn), see 

Chandragupta, 139. 

Chandasoka, 301. 

Chandrabhaga (Sandraphagos), 65, 
3i5- 

Chandrag(k)upta (Sandrakoptas 
Sandrac (k) ottus, Andrakottos, 
Piyadass3na, Chandagupta, 

Chandairi, Piadamsana, Vrishla, 
Xandrammes) 1,4, 12, 14, 22, 23, 
89, 907, 1 o 1, 132, 139, 140, 152, 
155 ^ *65, *65*1, *68, r 75 » 176, 
182, 206, 208, 223, 243, 315, 
358, 390; accession of, 166, 206; 
achievement of Indian freedom 
by 139; ancestry of, 140 — 42; 
and Bhadrabahu, 299; Brah 
manic learning under, 324; 
building of pataliputra and the 
palace by, 345, 346; chronology 
of 136-39; 207ft; civil administra- 
tion under, 157-158; conquest of 
Bhadrsala by, 156; conquest of 
North West India by, 149- 154; 
261; consorts of, 159-160; and 
contemporary religions, 164-65; 
control of, over western India, 
20; defeat of Seleucus by, 130, 

* 5 6 » * 59 * 169, 273, 353*3541 

early career of 142-44; extent of 
the empire of, 155-156; 352; hosti- 
lity of, to non-monarchical states, 
173; influence of Alexander’s 
invasion of India, on the career of, 
79: Jain traditions about the abdi- 
cation of, 165; Justin on the op- 
pression of, 148; Kautilya Chance 
llor of, 1 9 1 ; language of, 313; 
legends about, 23; private life of 
160, 162; literary interest of the 
period of. 163-64; Malwa and 
Gujarat, parts of the empire of, 
18; Maurvan revolution by, 24- 
25; meeting of, with Alexander,- 
12, 14. 137, 142, 144; Mrgasthenes 
sent by Seleucus as ambassador to 
the court of, 89; and the Mysore 
territory, 155, 249, 341; and the 
N. W. route, 271-2; origin of, 
*39* J 4 2 and ft ; palace of, 188; 
personal gifts of, 163; Plutarch on, 
141 ; political organisation of, and 
foreign models, 173-74; residence 
of, 158 and ft; Ros tovtzeff on, 198; 
sabha of, 160-61; sources for the 
reign of, 133- 135; strength of the 
army of, 188; Subandhu, a 
minister of, 329; theft in the camp 
of, 1 17; uprooting of the Nandas 
by, 145-146; war of with the 
prefects of Alexander, 145. 



413 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


*Chandragupta-kathd the, 13, 133, 135, 
143 , r 45 * 

'Chandragupta sabhd , referred to in the 
Afahdbhashya , 133, 160. 
Charakasamhitdy the 194. 


Constantinople, Photius, a patri- 
arch of, 86. 

Coomaraswamy, on Indian art, 351 
Coral trade, 199. 

Courtezans, employment of the, 337 


Chariot, the, in Indian warfare, no. Craterus, a general under Alexander, 


Charpentier, on the Arthasastra and 
the epics, 195. 

Charumati, d . of Asoka, 221. 
Chatterji, Charan Das, on ancient 
Indian coins 281 n. 

Chera (Kerala, Keras), 43, 251. 
Chetas, the, of Kalinga, 246-247. 
China, connection of India with, 319. 
Chinese pilgrims value of the writings 
of the, 82. 

Chitaldroog, Asoka’s inscription in 
the district of, 203. 

Cho(d)las, the, 43 - 44 ; 217, 238, 

250, 251; state of the, outside 
Asoka’s, empire, 219 
Chora-rajju , a source of revenue, 224. 
ChoTarajjukdy rural officer, 224. 
Cinabhumi, 193, 

Cinnamon, production of, in India, 
95 * 

Classical Sanskrit, emergence of 316. 
Classical writers, reference to Chan- 
dragupta by the, 137-39. 

Cleisobora (Krishnapura?j, 101, 305. 
Cleitus, 144. 

Clemens of Alexandria, on Buddhist 
philosophers, 324. 

Clitarchus, 162. 

Coins: — Bajaur Hoard of coins, 
283 n; Daric, a persian gold coin, 
I2 3> I2 4 ; Dharana (purana) a 
silver punch marked coin, 127, 
2 5 ^» 279, 280; diobol, a Greek coin. 


48, 5 2 » 59, 61, 64, 69, 70, 74, 

75, 78, 80. 

Crime and punishment in India, 
according to the Greek writers, 
H7. 

Cunningham on Alasanda, 154. 
Curtius Rufus, Q,. 47, 48, 305; on 
the Agalassoi, 39; on Alexander’s 
subjugation of Massaga, 50; on the 
Ambashthas, 40; on the army of 
the Malavas and the Oxydrakai, 39; 
on Chandragupta and his palace, 
118-119. n; on the colonisation 
of Rambakia, 77; description of 
Sophytes by, 102 n . ; on the dress 
of the Indians, 109 n; on the 
father of Mahapadma, 14; on the 
image of Heracles carried by 
Porus, 307; on the impeachment 
of Alexander by his friends for his 
rashness, 73; on the kingdom of 
Saubhuti, 37; on marriages in 
India, 102; on the number of 
chariots, under the Nandas, 188; 
on the presents to Alexander by the 
king of Taxila, 282; on the Pro- 
shthas, 41; on the reception to 
Alexander at Takshasila, 56; on 
the submission of the Kshudrakas 
to Alexander, 73; on the submi- 
ssion of Saubhuti to Alexander, 69. 

Ctesias, book of, on India, 86-7, 92. 

Cyropaedia, a work of Xenophon, 12. 


129; didrachm, a Greek coin, 128; Cvrus 76, 3^1 n; Achaemenian empe- 


drachma, a Greek coin, 117, 128 
*29; gandaka, 283; gold coins of 
Alexander, 280; gold coins of Phi- 
lip Arrhidaeus, 280; Karsha, 
26 in ; 319; Karshapana(K.ahapana) 

a silver or copper coin, 279, 280, 
28t, 31 9; mash aka, a token coin’ 
279; nishaka, 279; pana, a silver 
coin, 279; punch marked coins, 
123, 123d 280, 281, satamana, 

2 79 , 281 ; signatum argentum,' 
282, Siglori, a Persian silver 
com, 123 i24;Sophytes coins 126, 
*j 7 > ^29; suva r ii a 279; Taxila 
Hoard of coin, 280, and 281; 
Tetradrachm, a Gieek silver 
coin, r25 and n , 128; under the 
Nandas and the Maurvas, 279-282 
Columbus, 80. 

‘Companions’, the, of Alexander, kh. 

59 , 62, 63. ’ 57, 

•Coniaci, (Kumarika), Eratosthenes 
43 , 44 * 


ror, conquests of, in the east, 
30 - 3 1 - 


Daimachus, Hellenic envoy, 135* 
Dakshindrnaza , southern ocean, *56. 
Dames, on the Sattagydians, 31. 
Damila, 322. 

Damir„ 322. 

Damirike (Damiz, Damizakam), 
43, 322. 

Danday a measure, 271. 

Dandamis, (Mandanis), 106. 
Dandadhara , king, 175. 

Dandin, 191, 196, 200. 
Dandopanatasamantas, 34. 
Dantak(p)ura (Dantavaktra) capital 
of the Kalingas, 18. 

Dardic Khasa speech, 315-16* 

Darius I, Scylax sent to India by, 82. 
Darius (Hystapes), Achaemenian 
emperor 30, 350, 351, 35 2 , 353 , 



INDEX 


419 


357, 358; Behistun inscription of, 
359, chronology of the inscrip- 
tions of, 200; dark coins of, 
123; empire of in India, 31-32; 
overthrow of, by Alexander 318; 
tribute to, from the Indians, 84. 
Darius III, 33. 

Dasaratha, gift of caves by, to the 
Ajivakas, 169, 244-45, 283^; 296, 
346; epigraph ic records of, 134. 

Das as, 112. 

Dasona, 244. 

Dasikharbatika, a £akha of the Godasa 
gana, 298. 

Dattaka, codification of the courte- 
zan’s art by, 337* 

Decourdemanche, on the origin of 
the punch — marked coins, 1237*. 
Deimachu(o)s, sent on an embassy 
to Pataliputra by Seleucus, 89, 
168, 354. 

Demon, father of Kleitarchus, 89. 
Delhi-Mirath, Asokan column of, 
205, 361. 

Demetrius, 198; coins of, 130. 
Deopatan, city founded by Deva- 
pala, 22r. 

Derdai (Daradas, mod. Dards), 
Megasthenes on, 85. 

Devadharman, 244, 283/z. 
Devanamp(r)iya, an epithet of 
Asoka, 140, 175, 208, 217, 218, 
233 < 235, 238, 354, 359* 
Devanampiya Tissa, king of Ceylon, 
257; and Asoka, 218, 258. 

Devapala, m. Charumati, 221. 

Devi, wife of Asoka, 209. 

Dhammapada , the, and the ethical 
ideas in Asoka’s edicts, 230. 
Dhamma-paliyaya (Dharmaparyaya) 
285. 

Dhamma, principal queen of Bin- 
dusara, 167. 

Dhana Nanda, the last prince of 
the Nanda dynasty, 23. 

Dha(r)mma 169, 171, 211, 212, 

250; standard of equity, 174; 
content and propagation of, 233- 
243; seven expositions of, 285-86; 
elaboration of, in the P. E. 213- 
214; propagation of, by Aioka, 
187, 232, 303; propagation by the 
Rajukas , 225. 

Dhammaguna, moral virtues, 234. 
Dhammaniyama, 240. 

Dharma courts, 185, 186. 
Dharmaguptaka, Buddhist school, 
3 ° 3 - 

Dharmamaharndtras , 22, 225. 
Dharmanusasti, policy of, 22. 
Dharmasoka, see Asoka 165, 301. 
Dharmastambhas, 362. 

Dharmasthiya, 185. 


Dharasutras , the 333, 334. 

Dha (r) mmavijaya, conquest by 
law, 3, 229 and 7?,. 303; basis of, 
390; nature of the, 360; in W. 
countries, 354. 

Dharmayatras, 241. 

Dhavala, 248. 

Dhauli (Tosali), 203, 204, 205, 313; 
362, a centre of provl. admn. 223, 
225; elephant carving at, 346, 
369, 370 , 371 , 376 , 377, 382, 388. 
Uhundiraja, a commentator, 134, 

1 40. 

Didarganj (g) Yakshini image, 070, 
380, 381, 382, 388. 

Digambaras, 286. 

Diodorus Siculus, Greek author, 
14, 41, 91, and 103, m, 135, 
I 47 > r 88, 278; on the Ambashthas, 
40; on Alexander’s capture of 
Massaga, 50; on the army of the 
Malavas and the Oxydrakai. 39- 
40; on the foundation of PatalT- 
putra, 158 tz., on Gangaridae and 
Prasii, 16; on Hermatelia, 4r; on 
the husbandmen in India, 114, 
Ir 5 > on India’s agricultural and 
mineral resources, 261-62; on 
Indian metal works, 267; on the 
kingdom of Saubhuti, 37-8; on 
marriage and occupation rules in 
India, 102, 116; mention ofXand- 
rames by, 23; on the number of 
chariots, under the Nandas, 188; 
on Porus, the Elder, 37; on the 
reason for the practice of sati 
103; on the strength of the Nanda 
army, 16: on Tauala, 41. 

Diodotus, I, independence of, during 
the time of Antioclius Theos, 130. 
Diodotus II, coins of, 130, 280. 
Diogenes, Cynic philosopher, 106; 

Onesicritus a follower of, 88. 
Dionysius, envoy from Philadelphus 
(Ptolemy II), 89, 135, 168. 

Dionysus, 31, 39; supposed founder 
of Nysa, 48; legends about, 100, 

IOI ; worship of, 106, 306. 

Dipauamsa, the 203, 206, 208; on 
Asoka’s religious quest; 210; on 
the third Buddhist council, 214- 
216. 

Dip*, 233. 

District administration under the 
Maury as, 18 1. 

Diiyavaddna , the 23, 168, 171, 246, 

247, 33 1; ° n Asoka’s accession, 

20 gn; on Aioka’s adoption of Bu- 
ddhism, 210; on ASoka’s pilgrimage 
213 and n ; on the mother of Asoka, 

208; on the Nirgrantha religion in 
Bengal, 299; on Pushvamitra, 

246; on the revolt in Taxila, 167; 



420 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


on Samp(r)a( 0 di, 245; on the suc- 
cessors of Asoka, 244. 

•Dotted Record’ of the Chinese, 206 
Dr (a) mil (z), 321. 

Dravida. see (Familakam), 43; ori- 
gin of the word, 321 
Dravidian language, growth of the, 
320-22. 

Dravidian speech, 308. 

Drona, 251. 

Dundubhi(s) sara, a missionary, 216, 
217. 

Durdhara, mother of Bindusara, 

i59> * 6 5- 

Dushtamatyah, wicked officials, 167 
Dyrta, a city in North-western India, 
55* 

E 

Eastern Prakrit, vehicle of religious 
culture, 316, 317. 

Ec(k)batana, 30, 159, 357, 358. 
Egypt, notions about the State in, 
197; trade of India with, 273* 
Ekachchhatray 2 1 . 

Ekrdty 10, 11, 2 1, 156; Mahapadma 
an, 16. 

Elephant, the, in Indian warfare, 
no; Greek writers on the, 95-96. 
Elephant device on Greek coins, 
129, 130. 

Embisaros (Abisares), Abhisara, 
king of, 37. 

Embolima (Amb), a city in North- 
western India, 52. 

Enotokoitai, the, 163. 

Epics, the, and the Arthafastra, 195. 
Episkopoi, 160. 

Eratosthenes, President of the Alexan- 
drian library, 33; description of 
India by, 43 ; on rains in N.W. India, 
92-93; on the size of India, 91-92. 
Eronnaboas (Hiranyavaha), 315, 
Ethiopia, 95. 

Eucratides, coins of, 130, 13 1. 
Eudemo(u)s, 139, * 47 , 15*; and 

Porus, 149, 150; continuance of, 
in India, 79 ; put in charge of the 
Indian province, 77-78. 

Eudoxus of Cyzicus, 273 n. 

Euergetes II, king of Egypt, 273 n. 
Eumenes, 103, 15 1; fight of against 
Antipater, 150. 

Eurvmedon, Persian defeat at, 32. 
Euthydemus, I dispossession of 
Diodotus II by, 130; coins of the 
house of, 131. 

F 

Foreign ideas, influence of, in the 
ArthaJastra, 198. 


Foreign models, in the administration 
of justice, 186. 

Forts, F. W. Thomas on, 189. 

G 

Ganana, Accounts Department, 226. 
Ganapatha, 199. 

Gandhara, (K’ien-t’-io) 30, 220, 

308,310; kingdom of, 35-36 Kaspa- 
pyros, a city in, 83; merchants 
from, 269; oppression in, by 
wicked ministers, 182; people, in 
the army of Xerxes, 32; Pushkala- 
vati, the capital of, 51; Virasena’s 
rule in, 246; wollen goods from, 

263- 

Gandhara art 323. 

Gandharas (Gandharians), 225; one 
in the seventh satrapy, 30-31; a 
tribe in North-west India under 
Asoka, 154, 222, 223. 

Ganga, author of a schism among the 
Nirgranthas, 298. 

Gangaridae(i) (Gandaritai, Gandari- 
dai) 12, 21, g6n, 350. 

Garuda the vahana oi Vishnu, 344 
Ganikadhyaksha, see striadhyaksha 
mahamatras, 226, 337. 

Gargi Samhitd 245. 

Garuda column from Besnagar, 
389. 

Gathas, the, 164. 

Gaugamela, battle of, 318; Indian 
contingents at, 33, 34. 

Gaur (a) (e)ians, the, a tribe m 
North-Western India, 34, 47 ? 49 * 
Gautama, the Buddha, 10. 11. 
Gautama, 274, 293, 333 * 

Gautama, grammer of, 328. 
Gautamiputra, a devotee of Vasudeva, 
305. 

Gavimath, Minor Rock Edict at, 
204. 

Gaya (Sambodhi), 211. 

Gaza, battle of, 150. 

Geiger, on Alasanda, 154. 

Gedrosia ( Gedroseni, Southern, 
Mekran ), 76, 77, 80, 152, 153* 

273; given by Seleucus to Chandra- 
gupta Maurya, 130. 

Geography the, a work of Hecataeus 
of Miletus, 83. 

Geography , the, of Strabo, 9m. 

Ghasundi inscription, 305. 

Ghoshal U. N. 11411, 178;!. 
Girivraja-Rajagriha, old Magadhan 
capital, 11, 17. 

Girnar, 20, 313, 314; Asoka’s inscrip- 
tion at, 203, 204, 205; inscription 
ofRudradaman at, 171, 182, 192, 

199? 208. 



INDEX 


421 


Glauchukayanas (Glausai, Glaugani- 
kai), a trible subjugated by Ale- 
xander, 64. 

Glauganikai, see Glauchukayanas, 
38, 64. 

Go-adhyakhas, see Vachabhumikas , 228. 
Godasa, a disciple of Bhadrabahu, 
foundation of the Godasagana by, 
298. 

Gold, Herdotus on the supply of, 85 
Gold digging ants, 85. 

Gond, a Dravidian tribe, 309. 

Gopa , the, 181. 

Gorgias, a general under Alexander, 
59 - 

Gotiputta, 217. 

Govindaraja, a subordinate of Seuna- 
chandra, 248. 

Grama ni y 181. 

Gramavriddhas, village elders, 81. 
GrdmikaSy (village headmen), 10. 

Great Decease of the Buddha, 136, 
Grdhrakuta, see Kalugumalai, 252. 
Greece, 80, 81. 

Greek ambassadors to India, 89-91. 
Greek writers on Brahmin philoso- 
phers, 291. 

Greek writings, value of the, on 
India, 81-82. 

Grhya siitras, the, 284, 333, 343. 

Guilds, maitenance of troops by, 189. 
Gujurat, 18, 171. 

Gunjas, see ratis, 279. 

Gupta age, the, 26. 

H 

Haihayas, the 19, 26; exterminated 
by Mahapadma, 17-18. 

Hairwashing ceremony, no, 162. 
Hannibal, 318. 

Harappa, script of, 323, sculptures 
at, 342. 

Haraprasada Sastri, 247 n. 

Harishena, author of the Brhatkathd - 
kosa y 329. 

Harmatelia, a city ruled by Ambigc- 
rus, 41. 

Harpalus, satarap of Babylon, 69. 
Harsha, 158. 

Harsha-chanta , the, of Bana, 246. 
Haryankas the, 348, 352. 

Haryanka kula, Bibmisara of the, 11. 
Hasdrubal, 318. 

Hathigumpha inscription of Khara- 
vela 18, 20, 202, alleged reference 
to a Nanda era in the, 12; men- 
tion of Nandaraja in the, 13. 
Hecataeus of Miletus, value of the 
works of, 83. 

Hegesander, 134, 168, 169. 

Heliodorus, ambassador of Anti- 
cidas, 305. 


Hellenic influence, 2; on Chandra- 
gupta, 198, 199; on the Mauryan 
court, 354-56. 

Helots in. 

Hemachandra, 134, 136, 148, 164. 
Hephaestion, a general under Alexan- 
der, 46-7, 51; colonisation of Ram- 
bakia by, 77; and the subjugation 
of the Malavas, 70; and Patala, 
75; and the younger Porus, 65-6; 
return, of, 69, 70. 

Heracles, 39 , 53 , 54 , 250, 3 ° 6 ; alle- 
ged foundation of Pataliputra by, 
158 n; legends about, 100, 101; 

Megasthenes on, 90; libation to, 
by Alexander, 69; and the Pantf- 
yas, 44; story of, 164; worship 
of 106, 305. 

Hercules, 31, 52-53; image of, in 
front of Porus’ infantry, no; the 
Sibis traced their descent from, 70. 
Herodotus, 32, 82, 83, 116 n ; “Indi- 
ans” of, 31; on the conquest of the 
Indians by Darius, 83; on the 
extent of the empire of Darius in 
India, 31; on the tribute paid by 
“India”, 29; period between, and 
Alexander, marked by a set back 
in the Greek knowledge of India, 
87; references to India and 
Indians by, 84-86. 

Herzfeld, on the Sattagydians, 30- 
31 ; on Hidu, 31. 

Hcrtel, 193. 

Hidu (Hindu), “Indians” of Herodo- 
tus, 31. 

High Hindi, 317. 

Hiilebrandt, 193; on the Arthaidsatra 
and the epics, 191, 195. 
Himavatkuta, 147 
Hinayana Buddhism, 316. 

Hippalus, 273 «• 

Hippasioi, see Asmaka, 47. 

Hiranyavaha (Eronnaboas), 315. 

Hiuen Tsang, Chinese pilgrim, 30, 
221, 222; on Asokan stupas, 219, 
220; on Mahendra, 209/1; on 
Purnavarman, 248; on the trea- 
sures of king Nanda’s precious 
substances, 24; visit of, to the 
stupa of Kanakamuni, 2 1 3. 

Holdich, on the location of Nysa, 35. 
Horse, the, in Indian warfare, 109- 
1 10. 

Hultzsch on Asoka’s claim of Gods 
mingling with men, 234; on the 
Asokan edicts and Dhammapada , 

230; on the extent of Asoka’s 
empire, 203-204. 

Hunas, the, 146, 147. 

Hunting dogs, the Greek writers on 
the, 98. 

Huvishka, 283. 



422 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Hwen (Hiuen) Thsang, on the origin 
of the fsakya-Mauryas, 142 n. 

Hydaspes, the 28, 35, 39; the ruler of 
Ahhisara and the battle of, 36. 

Hylobioi (Vanaprasthasj, the most 
honoured among Sarmanes, 107, 
108, 163 and «, 334. 

Hyparch, a provincial official under 
the Nandas, 22, 24, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 41. 

Hypasioi, see Asmaka, 47. 

I 

Iamb (o)ulus, Greek author, recei- 
ved at Pataliputra, 169, 354. 

Ikshvaku (okkaku) king, 290. 

Ikshvakus, the exterminated by 
Mahapadma, 17. 

Ila, see Ceylon, 253. 

‘‘India” (Indus valley), tribute paid 
in gold-dust by, 29* 

India, size of, according to Greek 
writers, 91-92. 

Indian Dionysius, Megasthenes on, 
90. 

Indian Philosopher in Greece, 319. 

Indica, the, of Megashthenes, 90-91, 
164; value of the, 135 

Indo-Aryan language, changes in 
the, 320. 

Indo-China, 100, 

Indo-Greeks, coinage under the, 
283. 

Indradatta, a grammarian, 328. 

Indrapalita, 244. 

Industry under the Nandas, and the 
Mauryas, 260-69. 

Ipsus, 151. 

Inquiries, a work of Hecatacus, 83 

Iravati, (Hydraotis, Parushpi, Ravil, 
28. 

Isila (Siddhapura), a subordinate 
division of Suvarnagiri, 223. 

I-tsing on the image of Aioka in 
monastic robes, 243. 

Ivory works, 265. 


j 


Janapada (Rashtra) an adminis- 
trative division, 21, 22, 120, 224, 


Janapadakalyani, mother of Asoka 
(?) 208. 

Janussoni, 289. 

Jatakas, the, 224, 274, 275, 308; on 
the different kinds of silpas, 349; 
on the units of currency, 279; on 
the voyages of the Indian mer- 
chants, 270. 

Jdtakamala , a work of Aryasura, 196. 

Jatilakas, the 164. 

Jatilian, minister of Ghandragupta, 
164. 

Jatinga Ramesvara, Minor Rock 


Edict at, 204. 

Jaugada, Asoka’s inscription at, 
203, 204, 205, 303. 
Jayaskandfidvdra , camp of victory, 

1 58* 

Jayaswal K. P. 191; on the two scul- 
ptures at Patna, 345 an< ^ n ' 

Jett ha, (alderman) 274. 
jewellery in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 268. 

Jhelum, battle of the 57 “64* 
Jnatrkaputra, see Mahavira, 296. 
Johnston E. H., 1 9 1 > on the Artha- 
sdstra, 196. 

Jolly, on the Arthasastra , 191, 192, 


193, 194, 195 ; 

Junagadh Rock inscription of Rudra- 
daman, 134* mention of Chan- 
ragupta in the, 139* 

Justice, administration of, 185-187. 

Justin, 13, 23, 41, I 35 > i 5 i j 188 > on 
the meeting of Chandragupta 
with Alexander, 133, i 44 i on 
Chandragupta^ overthrow of 
the existing government, 1 44" *455 
on the Mauryan revolution, 24; 
on the oppression of Chan- 
dragupta, 148, I57 _ 58- on the 

origin of Chandragupta, 14G on 
‘the royal harlot*, 50, reference 
by, to the feats of Chandragupta, 
143; sources of, on Chandragupta 

* 43 - 


Jacobi. 1 91, 193, on the Arthaldstraj 
195; on the Samacharis , 161 n. 

Jaina canon, the 286. 

Jainism 248; Kautilya’s animosity 
towards, 324; patronage to, 245, 
246; and Sanskrit, 325, 326; in 
South India, 252. 

Jain literature, 340-41. 

Jalauka, a son of Asoka, 219, 245. 
Jamadagni (Yamataggi), 288. 
Jambudvipa, 233. 

Jambukola, 218. 

Janaka king of Mithila, 19. 


K 

Kabir, 317. 

Kabul, (-kophen) part of the empire 
of Cyrus, 30. 

Kahdvali , of Bhadre£vara, 136. 
Kaiyata, 328, 329. 

Kakani, 213 n. 

Kakavarna, 301. 

Kalanos, (Kalyana ?) engaged m the 
study of nature, 105, 106. 

Kdldpa, a work on grammar, 3 28 * 
Kalasoka, (Asoka), 301. 



INDEX 


423 


Kalatiai, a people in North West 
India, 83. 

Kalhana, historian of Kashmir, 219, 
244; on Jalauka, 245. 

Kalidasa, 334. 

Kalinga, 11,20, 205, 212; the Chetas 
in, 246; Asoka’s conquest of, 155, 
210-n, 219, 309; Asoka’s re- 
morse after the war against, 229; 
231; independence of, till the days 
of Asoka, 168; part of the Nanda 
empire, 260. 

Kalinga edicts, 167, 205, 212, 233. 
Kalingas, the, 26; exterminated by 
Mahapadmananda, 17, 180. 
Kallatiai, a tribe in the Persian em- 
pire, _8q. 

Kallil Attiraiyanar, 253. 

Kalpadruma , 344. 

Kalpaka, 15. 

Kalpasutra , the, of Bhadrabahu, 142 
n., 1 61, 164, 298, 333, 341. 

Kalsi, Asoka’s inscription at, 204, 
3 * 3 - 

Ka/ugumalai (Grdhrakuta), 252. 
Ka/uvaki, w of Asoka and mother of 
Tivala, 214. 

Kalyani, in S. W. Ceylon, 256, 
Kama nd aka, Nitistira of, 146. 
Kamandakiya Nitisdra, 195. 

Kamartipa, (Suvarnakudya) (Assam) 
221, 263; fragrant wood in, 266. 
Kamasdstra, 194, 337~33 8 - 
Kamasoka, see Asoka, 301. 

Kdmasutra the, of Vatsyayana, 194* 
and the Arihasdstra , 195. 
Kambojas, a tribe in N. W. India, 
146, 154, 217, 222, 225; a repub* 
lie, 173. 

Kanakamuni, see Konakamana, 213* 
Kanauj, 245, 300. 

Kanchl (puram), Asoka’s stupas 
near, 222; Asokavarma, a ruler of, 
249 * 

Kantakasodhana courts, 185, 186, 

187. 

Kanvas, dvijas, 140. 

Kanva period, 13 1. 

Kapila, son of Piahlada, on jnana, 

„ 33 . 6 - 

Kapilavastu, 269. 

Kapisi (Ka-pi-shin, Ki-pin, Kophen), 
30 . 

Karmakaras, 112. 

Kannanda, 334. 

Karmania, journey of Craterus to, 
80. 

Karri plain, battle of the Jhelum in 
the, 61. 

Kasakrtsna, 335. 

Kaseyas, the, exterminated by Ma- 
hapadma, 17. 

Kashmir, and Aioka, 219-220. 


Kasi (Banares) 21, 263, 270, 310 
313, and the Saisunagas and the 
Nandas, 17; textile manufacture 
in, 262. 

Kasika commentary, 260. 

Kaspapyros (Kaspatyrus), city of 
Gandhara, 83. 

Kassapa, a Vedic Rshi, 287. 

Kassapagotta, a missionary, 216. 217. 

Kathaians (Kathas, Kathaioi, Catha- 
eans, Kshatrasreni), 38, 66; 6g, 
173; marriage among the, 102; 
sati among the, 103. 

Kathdsaritsagara , 17, 328. 

Kathdvatthu , the Abidhamma treatise, 
composed by Moggaliputta Tissa, 
215, 230, 302. 

Katyayana alias Vararuchi, a scholar 
and grammarian of the Nanda 
period, 25, 178 n, 308,325, 326, 
327, 328, 329 , 33 °* 33 ° n > 33 G 333 ; 
340 ; on the Chola and Pandya coun- 
try, 44; reference of, to Vyadi, 335. 

Kausambi, (Vatsa) 203, 216, 269, 
300, 239; Asoka’s instruction to 
the Mahamatras of, 302-303; 
M. P. E. at 204; textile manufac- 
ture in 362. 

Kausambika, a sakha of the Utta- 
rabalissaha gana, 298. 

Kaushitaki Brahma na, 310. 


Kautilya (Chanakya), 3, 4, 25, 135, 
164, 171* * 74 > * 75 > * 77 * 182, 
187, 188, 189, 190, 192* * 93 * 

196, 198, 199, 226, 252, 265, 267, 
268, 270, 271, 273-279, 308, 332, 
333 ; 335 ; 337 , 33 », 339, 34°, 3.6o; 
animosity of towards Buddhism 
and Jainism, 324; and Bindusara, 
166; warlike activities of, 167-68; 
Chancellor of Chandragupta 
Maurya, 1 91 ; Chancellor of the 
Mauryan empire, 161; going of, 
to Pataliputra, 325, hostility of, 
to non-monarchical states, 173 J 
the Indian Bismarck, 200; inno- 
vation of, in the administration 
of justice, 186, 187; part of, in 
the Mauryan revolution, 146-47* 
148; share of in the building up of 
the Mauryan administrativesystem, 
179; Steinon, 196; on thepcrsonal 
safety of the king, 119; ° n the 
state dept, to look after foreigners, 
354; on the sources of income of 
the government, 183-84; on 
Tamraparnika, 4 2 j 
K autumbini, a sakha 01 the 
TTnarabalissaha £ana, 298. 


Kavi, a minister, 330. 

Kdtydlanka rasutravrtt ; , ofVamana, 330. 
Kavyas, during the Nanda-Maurya 
period, 330-331 



424 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Keith, 191. 

Kekaya, 31O 
Kera (Chera), 43. 

Kerala. (Chera), 43, 45, 251. 
Keralaputa (Ketaiaputa) 238, 
250; outside Asoka’s empire, 219. 
Khallataka, 167 
Khalsi, 251. 

Kharavela, Hathigumpha inscrip- 
tion of, 13, 20, 202. 

Khariboli Hindi, 317. 

Kharoshthi script, 205, 220, 233; 
origin and evolution of the 323, 
35 *- 

Khasa, 146. 

Khaiarajya, 167, 

Khotan, and Aioka, 229. 

K’ien-t’o-lo, see Gandhara, 30. 

King, ministers and council of the, 
176-177; and ownership of land, 
177 and n; powers and duties of, 
174-76. 

Ki-pin see (Kapisi), 30. 

Kikatas, an Anarya clan, 9, 146, 
147 «. 

Kleitarchus, a follower of Alexander, 
68—9, 111; on Alexander’s en- 
counter with monkeys, 96. 
KJeisobora (Krishnapura), a city of 
the Sursaeas, 305. 

Kod (t) umbara (Hudumbara), 
woollen goods of, 263. 

Koinos, a general of Alexander, 50, 
52, 56, 61; exhortation of, to 
Alexander to return home, 67- 
8; left behind by Alexander at 
the Chenab 65; death of, 69. 
Kokala, a place in the country of 
the Oreitai, country of the 
Oreitai, 76. 

Kol, 309, 313, 321. 

Konakamana (Kanakamuni, Kon- 
gagamana) a legendary Buddha, 
Asoka’s visit to the stupa of, 
212— 213. 

Konkan, 271. 

Kophaios, a chieftain that helped 
Alexander, 51. 

Kophen see Kapisi, 30. 

K ot, 238. 

Kosala, 21, 3ro, 313; Buddhism in, 
299, Kingdom, 280. Sravasti, 
capital of, 269. 

Kosasla devi, 154. 

Kosambi (Kosam) a centre of pro- 
vincial administration, 223; Asoka 
column, 361. 

Kosambi, on the Taxila Hoard, 
280 n , 28 ih. 

Kosar (Satyaputras?), 254, 255, 251. 
Koshtha, temple, 338. 
Koshthdgdradhyaksha , Superintendent 
of warehouses, 177. 


Kotikapura, 161. 

Kramrisch, on Mauryan sculpture, 

3 ^ 7 - 

Krishna and Heracles, 10 1. 
Krishnala a unit of weight, 279. 
Krishnpura (Cleisobora ?) a city of 
the Surasenas, 101, 305. 

Karoshtiya> 328. 

Kshanika, a doctrine, 298, 299, 
Kshatri (vas) (Xathroi) 40; submi- 
ssion of the, to Alexander, 74. 
Kshalriyasraiii (Khathoi), a repub- 
lic, 173. 

Kshemendra, epitomiser of the 
Brihatkatha, 20, 141. 

Kshudrakas (Oxydrakai), 39, 40, 70; 
subjugation of the, by Alexander 
73 ; Visit to Alexander, by the 
leading men among the, 121. 
Kotivarsiya, a sakha of the 
Godasagana, 298. 

Kotuhalasalas, 294. 

Kukura, a republic, 173. 
Kukutarama, 215 n. 

Kumara, a title of the Viceroys of 
Tosali and Ujjeni, 167, 223. 224* 
Kumarika (Coniaci), 44. 

Kumrahar, 357, 357, 383; ruins of 
Maurya buildings at, 159 
Kunala, a son of Asoka, 214, 215 n, 
244, 245; and Khotan, 220. 

Kuni Vadava (Kunaravadava), 328* 
Kuntala, and the Nandas, 20. 

Kuru, a republic, 17, 173, 310. 
Kurukshetra, 19. 

Kurundogai , the 255. 

Kushana, 199. 

Kushans, coinage under the, 283. 
Kutadanta, 289. 

Kuvanna (Kuveni) and Vijaya, 256. 

L 

Laghman , Asoka’s inscription at, 
204, 205. 

Laghuparibhdshdvrtti, 327- 
Lagos, father of Ptoleinv, 48, 51. 
Lae(k)edaemonians, and the helots, 
in. 

Land, ownership of and tax on, in 
India, according to Greek writers, 

1 14— 1 15. 

Lanka (Ceylon) 257. 

Las Bela, the land of the Oreitai, 77- 
Latage, feeding of monkeys at, 97. 
Later Nandas, 23-26. 

Lauria,, gold tablet, 343* 
Lauriya-Araraj, Asokan column 
at, 205, 313, 361, 362. 

Lauriya Nandangarh, column at, 
205, 36 1, 362, 364, 365, 3b8, 

37 1 j 377 J h° n figure on the column 
at, 370. 



INDEX 


425 


Law of deposits in India, Greek 
writers on, 112, 113. 

Learning 1 Sanskrit) linger the Nandas 
and Mauryas, 324- 25. 

Legends, of the Greek writers, 100- 
101. 

Leonnatus, 77; victory of, against 
the Oreitai, 76. 

Libya, 83. 

Lichchhavis, 19, 39. 

Lichchhivxka, a republic, 173, 

Life of Apollonius of Tyana, by 
Philos trains, 83. 

Luders H. 313; on the Satiya- 
putas 251. 

Lohanipur, images from 379, 388. 
Lokayata, 288, 335. 

Lomasa Rishi cave, 376, 377, 385, 
386. 337. 

Louis XIII, 15. 

Lumbinivana, 184, 213. 

Lysimachus, a general under Alexan- 
der, later king of Thrace, 59. 

M 

Macdonald, on the marriage compact 
between Seleucus and Chandra- 
gupta, 154; on the Sophyte’s coins, 
127; on the two classes ofimita- 
tionr of Athenian coins, 128, 129. 
Macedon (Madhuka or Madhu- 
dana), known to Indians, 132 n . 
Machatus, father of Philip, 56, 78. 
‘Machiavellian’ nature of the mandala 
theory, 188. 

M’Crindle on the attainments of 
Alexander’s men, 80 
Madhyadesa, 260, 310. 

Madhyamika, march of a Greek 
army to, 355. 

Madhuka, identification of, 132m 
Madra, 310. 

Madraka, a republic, 173* 

Madura, capital of the Pandyas, 
250, 252 > textile manufacture 

at, 262. 

Magadha, 21, 136, 141, 280, Buddhism 
in, before the days of Asoka, 299; 
empire, 172, 173; extent of the 
empire of, during the time f >f 
Alexander, 87; empire under the 
Nandas, the, exposed to a two- 
fold danger, 132; factors for the 
greatness of, 9-10; famine in, 
165, 297; language in, 3*3* 3*4; 
veneration of Alexanders altars by 
the kings of, 68. 

Magadhi canon, 286. 

Magadhi dialect, 205, 317. 

Magas of Gyrene (Maka), 166, 206, 
207; 217 Asoka a contemporary 
of, 138. 


Masgadesako, an order of amana 
294. 

Mag trad us!, on order of Sramana, 
205. 

AIchd ; harata, 166, 195, 199, 284, 

3o3. 349, 366. 

Mabahharata battle, date of the 323 
A Zahdbkd'hya* the. of Patanjali, 133, 

3 °?> 33 °j 331 * 
Alahfior am; atnsa, 13, 23. 

Mahagiii, succour of Sthulabhadra, 
298. 

Mahakosala, 309. 

Mahamatia, 10, 15, 22, 115, 183, 
200, 214:3 provincial officer, 223; 
a 1 ranking official, 225-226; 
C j. ncil of the, 226. 

Mahamatras, of morality, 236; occu- 
pied with the welfare of the 
Ajivakas, 297. 

Alaka.ralrna , tlie Secretaries, 170. 
Mahapadma Nanda (Pati (Ugra- 
sena, Agrammes, Xandrames), 
13-20; 132, 142; contemporary 
of Alexander, 14 1; political 
unity of N. India under, 260; succe- 
sors of, Sudra according to the 
Puranas, 140; titles of, 350; 351. 
Aiahapcrinibhana Suita , on the 
Moriyas, 14 1 — 142. 

Mahasanghika, 300, 301, 303. 
Mahasangiti, 300. 

Mahasetthi, 274. 

Mahasthan inscription, 83, 222,283. 
Aiahdiamsa , the 154, 203: on the 

antiquity of the Pandya kingdom, 
44 the early history of Ccvlon, 
257-59; on the adoption of Bu- 
ddhism by Asoka, 210; on Asoka’s 
message to the kingof Ccvlon, 243; 
on the third Buddhist Council, 
215, 216. 

Aiahdiamsa Tlka the, 134, 161, 
167; on the Mauryan Revolution, 
147, 148. 

Mahavlra (Nataputta .Jnatrikaputra), 
10, 286, 298, 313, 325; founder 
of the Nircrantha order, 296; 
liberation of, 136. 

Mahayana Buddhism, 231. 

Mahrsvaa, (MahLhmatij, 18 
Mahindra ^Mahendra^, a son of 
A/oka, 200,209 n; brother or Aioka, 
222; Pali canon taken by, to 
Ceylon, 317, 318; stupa of, near 
Madura, 222; and Ceylon, 218- 
si 9, 258; nirvana of, 259. 
Mahisasaka, Buddhist school, 303. 
Mahisha, textile manufacture in, 262. 
Mahishmati, the capital of the Hai- 
hayas, 18 . 

Maithilas, the, exterminated by 
Mahapadma, 17, 19. 



426 


age of the nandas and mauryas 


Majjhima, a missionary, 216, 217. 

Majhimanikaya 35; on the perfor- 
mance of sacrifices, 290-91. 

Maka, see Magas of Cyrene, 206, 
207, 217* 

Makara, the tahanaof Ganga, 344. 

Makkhali Gosala, a Tirthika teacher 
and founder of the Ajivaka order, 
295. 

Makran, rounding of the coast by 
Nearchus, 80. 

Malakonda, natural cavern at, 252. 

Malakuta (Pandya), Capital, stupa 
near 222. 

Malayaketu, 146. 

Malay Archipelago, 270. 

Malay peninsula, 270. 

Malava (Malloi) a people of the 
Punjab, 39, 40, 70, 262; presents 
of the, to Alexander, 267; subju- 
gation of the, by Alexander, 71-73. 

Malay agiri, 340. 

Malaysia 100 

Maler, a Dravidian tribe, 309. 

Mallaka,a republic, 173. 

Mallanaga, 148. 

Mafias, the 39 

Malloi, see Malava, 39, 40, 70, 262. 

Malwa, (Avanti), 18, 155. 

Mamulanar, 253, 254, 255, 256. 

Mana, a unit of weight, 279. 

Mandala theory, 187-188, 200. 

Mandanis, see Dandamis, 106; Me- 
gasthenes on, 291 

Mandhata, (Mahismati?), 18. 

Mamgalas, Asoka, on the perfor- 
mance of 306. 

Manibhadra Yaksha, statue of, from 
Pawaya, 380. 

Maniyattappo (a Jatilian) , a minister 
of Ghandragupta, 161. 

Ma njusrxmulakalpa , on Bindusara, 
330; on Katyayana, 329. 

Mansehra, M. R. E. at, 204, 205, 
238, 312; language of the inscri- 
ption at, 314. 

Mantrxparishad, 227. 

Manu, 164 n; on units of weight, 
279 - 

Marco Polo, on raised beds, as pro- 
tection against reptiles, gjn, 

Mdrkandeya Parana the, on the 
Mauryas, 141. 

Marshall excavation of, at Taxila, 

125. 

Marriage, 117, 1 1 7 n; and occupa- 
tion rules in India, according to 
Greek waters, 116. 

Martikhora, (maneater), descrip- 
tion of the, by Ctesias, 87. 

Mashudana, identification of, 132 n. 

Maskarin, a class of Parivrajakas, 295. 

Maski, Minor Rock Edict at, 204, 
207, 313. 


Massaga, (Masakavati), capital of 
the kingdom of the Assakenians, 
35, 55; capture of, by Alexander, 
49 - 50 ; 

Mathura (Methora), 44, 203, 314, 
3i7» 345^ 3 8 3; capital of the 

Surasenas, 19, 101,305; Buddhism 
in, before Asoka, 299, 300; Kushana 
school of art of, 308; sculptures 
at, 379- 3S1, 382; 

Mathura stone-pillar inscription, 283, 

Mathuri Vrtti , a work, 328. 

Matsya, 310 

Matsya Parana, 23, 

Maury a, origin and derivation of the 
word, 140-41. 

Maury an art, animal figures in, 
369 — 378; characteristics of, 347- 
48; isolated existence of, 390-91; 
remains of 346. 

Mauryan bureaucracy, 178-179. 

Maury an court, ambassadors to, from 
the Hellenistic kingdons, 89-91; 
influence of the Achaemenids in 
the, 355-59; and the Syrian court, 


Mauryan empire, establishment of 
the 2-3; fall of the, 247-48; 
military organisation in the, 2129, 
188-89; southern limit of, 249; 
foreign policy, 156-57; govern- 
ment, central offices in the, 1 79 “ 
1 8 1 ; polity, features from foreign 

models, 173, i 75 > J 7 8 > i8 9 - 90 , 

Mauryan Pillared Hall, 346. 

Mauryan Revolution, course of, 
24-25 

Maurya putra, 142 n. 

Mauryas alleged sculptures of the, 
378-384; income and expendi- 
ture under the, 179? 183-185, 

industry under the, 260-69; rule 
of the, in Kuntala, 248; superses- 
sion of the Nandas by, J 45 * 4 8 * 
trade under the, 269-279; the, 
in the Sangam literature, 253, 


254 > 253 . 25 6 -, „ 

Mauryas of Konkan, 24b* 249* 


Mediterranean art, 342. 
Megasthenes, a Greek ambassador 
to the Mauryan court, 19*’ * 3 2 > 89 > 9 1 

n, 1 16 n, 1 17 ”, 135. 152 , 161, 164. 

1 7 1 , 261, 2C7, 353 > 356, 360; 
Kautilya, Stein on, 19 6 ; anc * 
Porus, 89-9071. ; valueof theaccoun 
of 89-91 ; on the absence ot 
famine and scarcity in India, 
04 ; on tile administrative 
organisation in the Mauryan 
state, 120-22; on the agronomoi, 
224,272, 278; onthe Andhras, 43 » 
on the artistic skillof the Indians, 
102; on Ceylon, 256; on the city 
admin istration at Pafiliputra, 



INDEX 


427 


120-121; on the department to 
look after foreigners, 354; on the 
Derdai, 85; on the fighting class, 
188; on food and drink among the 
Indians, 116-117; on the foreign 
policy of the Indian kings, 156; 
on the foundation of Pataliputra, 
158 n ; on the hunting of elephants, 
96; on the Hylobioi, 163 and n; on 
the Indian elephants, 95, 96; on 
the Indian monkeys, 97; on 
Indian philosophers, 106-107, 
287; on the Indian physicians, 107; 
on the Indian rivers, 93 and 
on Indian women, 107; on the 
kingdoms of South India, 249-50 ; 
on the laws of the Indians, 108 and 
n ; on laws in India, 164; on law 
deposits in India, 112-113; 
on the length of India, 92; on the 
length of the royal road from 
Patalfputra to the north west, 
91 ; on Mandrmis, 291 ; on marriage 
and occupation among the Indians, 

1 16; on the military organisation 
in the Mauryan state, 120, 122; on 
the mineral wealth of India, 95; on 
the Nirgranthas, 296-297; on the 
Oxydrakai and Dion vs us, 306; on 
Pandaia, 10 r; on public spectacles 
attended by Chandragupta, 162; 
on the race^ in India, 100; on the 
role of Indians in foreign warfare 
31; on rural administration in 
the Mauryan «tate, 120; on the 
safety of the king’s person, 176; 
on the sages, 104; on serpents in 
India, 98 ; on the setting of the Bears 
in South India, 43; on seven 
tribes or classes in India, 1 1 3- 1 1 5 ; 
on slavery in India, 111- 
r 12; on Indian social erganisa 
tion, 105; on the Sramanas 293, 
294; on the strength of Ghandra- 
gupta’s army 188 ; on the supply of 
gold , 85 ; 1 03 ; on the t igrrs in the 
court tiy of the Parsii, 99; on the 
trade of South India, 42; on 
some wild animals, 09, on the 
worship of Heracles. 305; use 
of the legends about Dionysus and 
Herakles by, 100-101; 

Meghaksha (Meghanada) king of 
the Persians, 146. 

Meleager, a general under Alexander 
59 - 

Memphis, Indian figures at, 218. 

Menander, 198. 

Meros, Mt./Koh — i— M0H43, 48.49. 

Merutunga, author of the Vichdrasteni 
136. 

Metal works, 266-67. 

Methora see Mathura, iox, 305. 


Metronymics, use of, 15 n. 

Meyer, J.J. 112 kt, on th cArtkasds- 
stra , 1 91, 192, 195. 

Miletus, Hecataeus of, 83. 

Milinda Panho the, 13, 15; stories 

about Chandragupta in the 134; 
on Chandragupta’s overthrow of 
the Nandas, 145-46. 

Minor Rock Edicts, the 204, 206, 
2 1 1, 233, 244- 

Midland dialect, 315, 316, 317. 
Mineral science (dhatusdstra) , 339. 
Mithila (Janakpur), 19 
Modubae, see Mutibas, 43, 

Moeres (Moriya or Maurya), a 
king of Tauala, 41. 

Moggaliputta Tissa, religious mi- 
ssions of, 203, 216-217 

and 216 n; 250; and Asoka, 303- 
304;compesition of the Kathavatthu 
by. 250; and the Third Buddhist 
council, 301-302. 

Mohen-jo-Daro, script of, 323, 324; 
sculptures at, 342; weights in, 
282 n . 

Mohur, 254; rebellious chiefiains 
of. 255. 

Moksha , divorce, 185, 

Monahan, 113B, 120 n, 159 n. 
Monivanagara, perhaps identical 
with Pipphalivana. 143. 

Monkeys, Greek writers on, 96-97. 
Moriya (Morieis, Meroes, Moeres) 
141, 142 n; and mora, 143 n. 
Moriyar, 155, 253, 254. 

Mousikanos see Musicanus, 2Q, 40, 
41, 45. 150 

Africhchhakatika of Sudraka, 318 
Muchukarna ? see Musicanus, 74. 
Aludrardkdiam^ of VKakhadatta, 142 
134, 1 44«, 147, 1 71, 182, 

208; on the origin of Chandra- 
gupta Maurya, 141, 142; account 
of the Mauryan revolution in 
the, 2- v 146—47. 

Miilakadeva, a missionary, 216. 
Multan. 83. 

Mura, 140. 

Musl'ika, a district in Kerala, 45. 
Musicanu to) s (Mousikanos Muchu- 
karna ?), the greatest king in 
the looser Indus, 40; attempt of, 
to expel the Macdonians from 
N. \V. India, 150; enmity of, with 
Sambos. 41; gold and silver 
‘mines’ in the country of, 29; pe- 
culiar usages in the kingdom of, 
in; rebellion and execution of, 

74 — -73; Onesicritus on the coun- 
try of, 43. 

Mutndvn. king rf Ceylon, 257. 

Mutibas 'Modubae .a tribe, 43, 321, 
Mycale, Persian defeat at, 32. 



42 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


N 

Nabhakas, a tribe, 217, 222, 223. 

Nabbapanktis (Nr.bhitis), a tribe, 

2 17, 222, 223. 

Nat as, the in Ceylon, 254, 256. 

Nagadvipa (northern Ceylon), 256. 

Nagaraka , city magistrate, 1G1, ig8. 

Nagaraso bhin t , 10 

JVagarjiyaiahd:aKas, the Mahama- 
tras as, 225 — 226. 

Na^arjuni rave, the 385, 386. 

Nagoji, 328. 

Nakshi-Rustam, inscription of Darius 
at, 359- 

Nalanda, 269. 

Nanaghat cave inscription, 305. 

Nandas, the 1, 4, 11-20, 132, 168; 
administration under the, 21*23; 
and Chandragupta’s extraction, 
140; extent of the Empire 
of the, 26-27 1 industry 
under the, 260-69; language of 
the, 313; Magadha under the, 
172; power of the, heard by Ale- 
xander, 67; in Tamil literature, 
253-55; trade under the, 269- 
279; traditions about the rule 
of the, in the Karnataka, 249; 
overthrown by Chandragupta, 

135. '4 2 > H5-47, *54, >5 6 - 

Nanda era, 12. 

Nanda-Maurya period, early for- 
eign coins in India in the, 123- 
I 3 I * 

Nandaraja, 12, 13, 20. 

Nandrum, 12, 144. 

Narada, on the validity of royal 
decree, 174. 

Ndradasmrti, the, 199. 

Naramedha, 289. 

Natabhata, monastery of 300. 

Nataputta, see Mahavlra, 1427*, 296. 

Natural Hut -ay, a work of Pliny the 
FJder, 91 n , 272. 

Jd ! yasar>tra 9 of Bharata, 331. 

“NauNand Dehia” (Nander), 18. 

A Jvadhyaksha, 1 89 . 

Nava Nandi, meaning of, 20, 

Nearchus, commander of the naval 
squadron of Alexander, 69, 70, 
75s 76, 78, 80, 99, 1 13; and the 
subjugation of the Malavas, 71; 
memoirs of. fd; on the arms and 
outfit of the Indian soldiers, 109- 
1 1 o : on the di e< 1 of Indians, 1 08- 
109: on the hunti"" rf elephants, 
96; on Indian rivers, 03; on the 
Indians dyeing their beaids 102 
on Indian sages, 104, 105; 
on Indian women, 107; on the in- 
fluence of the Brahmanas, 40; on 
the laws of the Indians, 108 and 


n ; on the making of fine webs, 
94; on the setting of the Bears, 43; 
on the size of India, 92; on the 
size and shade of a tree, 94; on 
the skill of the Indians in arts, 
no-111; on the skin of the gold 
digging ants, 85; on snakes in 
India, 97-98; on the tribes in 
north-western India, 108-109. 
Necho, an Egyptian king, 83. 

Nepal and Asoka, 22 1 ; wollen goods 
fic-m, 263. 

Nicanoi, a satrap under Alexander, 
51 ; placed in charge of Alexanderia 
46 ; Philip in charge of the satrapy 
of, 78; governor of the Assakenoi, 
slain, 65. 

Nigali Sagar, Asoka’s inscription at, 
204, 205, 221, 361. 

Kigali Sagar, stupa of Kona Kamana 
at, 212. 

Nighandu, 2G8 

Nigantlia Nataputta, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Nigrodha, son of Sumana, 210. 
Nijhati, conversion, 240. 

Nikaya, 228. . 

Nikaia, (i)a city founded by Alexan- 
der, on the site of the battle of the 
Jhelum, (2) 64; embassy ofAmbhi 
to Alexander at, 46. 

Nike, 126. 

Nipishta, 233. 

Nitisara of Kamandaka, on the 
Mauryan revolution, 146. 
Nirgranthas, ( Niganthas ) 21571, 

225, 295, 296-299; in Ceylon, 

257- 

Nirvana, 230, 294, 300, 30, 303. 
Nomarch, a provincial official under 
the Nandas, 22, 34, 37, 38, 4°, 4 1 * 
Nomarchai, 39. 

North-west India, physical aspects of, 
27-30. 

Nyaya (reason), exaltation of, 174 
Nysa, hill state of, 35. 69, 121; sub- 
mission of the city of, to Alexander, 
48-9. 

Nysa, the nurse of Dionysus, 48. 

O 

Ohind, 55. 

Oldenberg, 209 n. 

Omphis, see Ambhi, 46. 

Onesicritus 38, 1 i6n; pilot of Alexan- 
der s ship, 69; pil Qt of Nearchus s 
fleet, 88; the existence of Ceylon, 
known to, 43, 92; sent by Ale- 
xander to the sages, 104, 105-00, 
on the banyan tree, 94; on tne 
choice of kings among the Kathai- 
ans, 102; on the country of Mou- 



INDEX 


429 


sikanos, 45, r 1 1 ; on elephants, 
95-96; on longevity and marri- 
age in India 102; on the serpents 
kept by Abisares, 9 3 and n ; 
on the size of India, 92 ; on sla- 
very- in India, 112; on Taprobane, 
43- 

Opiai, a people in the North West 
India, 83. 

Ora (Udagram), subjugation of, 
by Alexander, 50-51. 

Oraons, a Dravidian tribe, 390. 
Oreitai, country of the, 76, Apo- 
llophanes, Satrap of, 77; Las 
Bela, the land of the, 77. 

Orobatis, a city fortified by the 
generals of Alexander, 51, 

Ossadioi (Vasati), 40, 74. 
Ottorakorrhas (Uttarakuru), 315. 
‘Owl* figure of the, on the Greek 
coins 123 , 129. 

Oxyk(c;anos (Portikanosl, a chief- 
tain, 41; submission of, to Alexan- 
der, 74. 

Oxydrakai (Oxydracae, Sydracae, 
Sudracae, Syrakousai) see, 
Ivshudrakas, a people in the Punjab, 
39, 70. 101, 121, 306. 

Oxyartes, father or Roxana, and 
satrap of Paropamisadai, 74; 78. 

P 

Pabbajja, 243. 

Padaeans, a nomad tribe in north- 
west India, 84. 

Padmavati, Queen, 214 n. 
Pakshilasvamin, 148. 

Paktiyaka (Pashtu country), Indian 
tribes of, 85. 

Pakudha Kachchayana, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295. 

Palaka, son of Pradyota of Avanti, 
20, 

Palasimundu, 193. 

Pali, 313-314, 316-17. 

Pali(m)bothra (Pataliputra), 16, 
IOL 1 35, n 158, 168, 315, 354. 
Palidas. 217. 

Palkigundu, Minor Rock Edict at, 
204. 

Pamukha (President) 274. 

Pancalas, a republic, 17, 18, 173, 
310. 

Panchayat, 12 1. 

Panchyats of castes, 185. 

Pandae fi) a, daughter of Herakles, 
164, 250; Megasthenes on, 101 
Pandion, i^n 

Pandukabhaya, king of Ceylon, 257. 
Pandya Ka (pHata, 42, 251. 

Panclva (Malakuta), 222, 250; 251, 
271; country, 44; state, Megasthe- 


nes on, 1 01, outside Asoka’s em- 
pire, 219. 

Pandyas, the 44, 217, 238. 

Panini, 208, 308, 316, 329, 331, 334; 
author of a Prakrit grammar, 
340 ; a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25, 26 ; 326-27 ; the 

Astadhyayi of, 284; Bliagala known 
to, 67; the Brihatkathd on 326; 
mention of Subhuta by, 69; on 
the Malavas, 39; on the Maskarin 
295; on the N. W. trade route, 
269; on the sufHx vun, 304, 305. 
Panya-samstha, market place, 277. 
Paradas, 2237*. 

Parangorranar. 253. 

Parasamudra, 193. 

Parasarya, 333. 

Pargiter, on the identification cf 
Mahhhmnti, 18, 

Paribbai:.».a, see Pari vraj aka, 294. 
Paiibhapka-aianiu, 294. 

Parikshit, 1 1 . 

ParinJas, a tribe, 222, 223. 
Pariiiiivana of the Buddha, 136, 206 
and n. 

Pa rj is hi a Parian, the, of Hemachan- 
dra, r 34 , 147, i6i«; on the 

accession of Chandragupta, 136, 
143, 147-48; on the home of 
Kautilva, 148. 

Panvraiaka (Paribbajaka) an order 
of ascetics, 293-294, 335; in 

Bengal, 299. 

Parkham, Jain image of, 379-380, 
381, 383; Yakshas, 388. 

Parmenio, the army of, 33. 
Paropamisadae (i), 149, 152, 153; 
Alexandria the capital of, 78; 
change in the satrap of, 74; given 
by Seleucus I to Chandragupta 
Maurya, 130. 

Parthia, revolt of, from Syria, 2. 
Parvata, 146. 

Parvataka, 146, 147 and n. 

Parvatesvara ($ailesvara), 146. 
Parushni (Iravati, Hydraotis, Ravi), 

28. 

Pashamdas, religious secs, 306. 

Pasni, a harbour, 77. 

Patala, Alexander at, 76; sub- 
mission of the ruler of, to Alexander, 

75; Patalene, see Tauala, 41. 
Pataliputra (Patna, Pali(m)bot- 
(h)ra(i), Pupphapura), 14, 16, 

24, 1 17, 1 18, 143, 145 * 

and n, 155 n, 157, I 5 8 " 59 > 

182, 203, 204, 205, 218, 221, 245, 

254* 255 * 269, 272, 273, 3*2, 318* 

329* 33 *» 34L 347* 352; alleged 
foundation of, by Herakles, 101; 
foundation of, by Udayi, 138/1; 
origin and growth of, 1 1 ; capital 



430 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURY AS 


of Magadha (the Maurva), 21, 
223; architectural magnificience 
of, 339-340; building of, by 
Chandragupta, 345, 346 ; city 

administration of, 120-21 ; connec- 
tion o£ with the Hellenic countries, 
355; courtezans at, 337; Curtius 
on the king and palace at 1 18-1 19 
n; description of, 356-358; forei- 
gners in, 157, 354, 355; hair-wash- 
ing ceremony at, 162; Iamboulus 
at, 3545 the influence of the 
Buddhist community at, over 
Asoka, 302 ; length of the road 
from to the north- wc^t, to 91; 
meeting of the council of Nirgran- 
thas at, 297, 298; the people of, 16; 
Rajasekhara on the court of learn- 
ing at, 325 ; royal place in, 158- 
159 and 159 «; third Buddhist 
Council at, 285 ; under the Nandas, 
25-26; Upavarsha a resident of, 
335i women in the palace at, 119; 
a wooden palisade round, 192. 

Patan, a city founded by Asoka, 221, 

Patahjali, author of the Mahabhashya , 
133, 160, 166, 208, 289, 307, 308, 
325, 326, 327, 330, 331; Chandra- 
gupta known to, 139 ; comm- 
entary of^ 26; on the introduction 
of images, 184; on Katyayana, 
329; on the Maskarin, 295; on 
some grammarians, 328; on the 
suffix run. 304; on women studying 
Mimamsa, 335. 

Patheyya monks, 299, 300. 

Patna statues, (Yakshas), 378, 379, 
380, 382. 

Patrocles, admiral of Seleucus* 89; 
on the size of India, gi. 

Patronymics, use of, 15ft. 

Paura , 120. 

Paurava (see Porus), the, 36, 37, 56, 
57, 64, 65, 78, 139. 

Paura vas (Purus), ancestry of the, 
x 47* 

Pauraiyavaharikas , 226. 

Pautaiadhyahsha , ‘Superintendent of 
weights and measures’ 278. 

Pawaya, Yaksha statue from, 380. 

Pearl-fishing, Megasthenes on 95. 

Peri plus 193; on the coral trade of 
India, 109. 

Peithon, son of Agenor, satrap of the 
lower Indus valley, 74, 78; and 
tile subjugation of the Ma lavas, 
71; suppression of the revolt of 
Musicanus by, 75; transferred to 
the vest of the Indus, 79. See 
Pith on. 

Penal code, severity of, under Chan- 
dragupta, 158. 

Perdiccas, a general under Alexander, 


46. 47, 5, 59; and the subjugation 
of the Mala vas, 71, 72. 

Persepolis, 32, 368; Alexander’s 

behaviour at, 353; Hall of hundred 
columns at, 357. 

Persia, 198, 273; advance of, to the 
Indus, 30-34; conquest of, by 
Alexander, 1 ; influence of, on Asoka 
233- 

Petenikas, a tribe, 222. 

Peucelaotis (Pushkalavati), 35, 47, 51. 

Phegeus (Phcgelis), a chief in the 
Punjab, 38. 

Philadtlphus (Ptolemy II), 168. 

Philip, son of Macliatus, a comman- 
der under Alexander, 51, 69, 70. 
appointed satrap of Taksha- 
sila, 56; the Malavas and the 
Kshudrakas attached to the sa- 
trapy of, 73 ; satrap of Takshasila, 
65, 78, 79; southern boundary of 
the satrapy of, 74; murder of, 77. 

Philip Arrhidaeus, gold coins of, 280; 
a tatradrajham of, 125. 

Philippus, 139, 149, 151. 

Philosophers, Indian, Greek writers 
on the, 1 06- 1 08. 

Philosophy in the Nanda Maurya 
period, 334~33 6 * 

Philostratus, author of Life of Apo- 
llonius of Tyana, 83. 

Photius, abridgement of the work of 
Ctesias by, 86. 

Phrataphernes, Satrap of Parthia, 
6 5* 

Phylarchus, 134, 139, 169. 

Piadamsana (Priyadarsana), see 
Chandragupta, 139* 

Pillar Edicts, 234; elaboration of the 
principles of Dhamma in the, 

213. 

Pimprama, the stronghold of the 

Adraistai, 38; submission of, to 

Alexander, 66. 

Pingala (Naga), 325; Asoka put to 
school under, 331. 

Pipphalivana, the republic of, 142. 

Piprahva stupa, gold tablet found 
at, 343* 

Pithon, 149, 151 ; Antigonus favoured 
by, 150. See Peithon. 

Pi(e)tinikas, a tribe, 217, 222, 223. 

Pivadasi, see Asoka, 207, 208. 

Piyadassana, 208, see Asoka 

Plataea, Persian defeat at, 32, 354. 

Plinv the Elder author of the Natu- 
ral History, 86, 89, 91 ft, *35) I 5°) 
151, 153, 153ft,; on the coral trade 
of India, ioq; on the destruction 
of Kapisi by Cyrus. 30; on Diony- 
sius the envoy, 168; on the first 
Indian Grand Trunk Road, 272; 
on the Prasii, 16; on the Pandyas, 



INDEX 


431 


44; on the strength of Chandra- 
gupta’s army, 188. 

Plutarch, 41, 135, 139, 156, 166, 337: 
life of Alexander by, fid; on Alexan- 
der's capture of Massaga, 50; on 
Alexander’s interview with the 
sages, 104; on Alexander in 
Persia, 352-353; on the altars of 
Alexander, b8; on ‘Andrakottos’ 
141; on (Jnandragupta and Sel- 
eucus, 152; on the chariots under 
the Nano as, 188; on the dislike of 
the Nanda ruler by Ghandragu- 
pta, 143; on the Mauryan revo- 
lution, 240; on the meeting of 
Chandragupta with Alexander, 14, 
133, 144; on the Nanda army, 16; 
on “Taxiles” 35. 

Pokharasati, 289. 

Polibothra, see Pataliputra, 273. 
Political outlook in India, 350- 
35 2 : 

Polybius, 138; on Antiochus and 
Subhagasena, 246. 

Polygamy, in Taxila, 103. 

Pompeius Trogus, 133; the account 
o£ epitomised by Justin, 13, 
Popular lores, 33 8 ~339* 

Popular worship, 338. 

Porphyry, 138. 

Porus, (Paurava, Purushottama, the 
Elder) 15 n, 36, 37, 51, 52, 67, 

68, 79, 132, 139; and Ambhi, 46 ; 
answer of, to Alexander, 56; 
Arrian on, 89-90 n ,; and the battle 
of the Jhelum, 57-64, 126; the 
country west of the Peas commi- 
tted to his charge, 68; fight of the 
Kathains against, 66; the Glau- 
chukayanas, placed under the rule 
of, 64; image of Hercules (Herac- 
les) in front of the infantry of, 
no, 3°5? 307> installation of, by 
Alexander, 149; and Parvataka, 
147; satrapy o£ under Alexan- 
der, 78; sent home to recruit 
fresh troops, 65. 

Porus (Paurava;, the younger, 37; 
Hephaestion sent to reduce the 
territory of, 65-6. 

Poseidon, sea God, sacrifice to, by 
Alexander, 75. 

Posidonius, 273 n. 

Potali (Potana, Podana), capital of 
the Astnakas, 18. 

Pottala, see Tauala, 41. 

Prachya (Prasioi), 315. 

Prachya dialect, the court language 
of the Maury as, 312. 

Prachya tract, 310. 

Pradesa, 22 yn. 

Pradesikas, (Pradeshtri), district 
officer, 22, 18 1, 182, 227, 227 


n ; presided over the Kantakaio - 
dhatia courts, 185. 

Pradyota, the son of Palaka, 20; 

capture of, by Udayana, 330/1. 
Pradyota, line o£ 19, 20. 

Praesu (Prosh^has), 41. 

Prahlada, /. of Kapila, 336. 

Prakrit, 311, 312. 

Prakrit dialects, script of, 323; of 
the east, tlic language oi the court 
of Asoka, 312 ; use oii 192 -193; 
the vehicle of expression by tile 
Buddhists and Jains, 340. 
Prdkrtaprakasa , the 340, 

Pranaya (benevolences), 184, 192, 

J 99* 

Prasenajit, a king of the Iksvaku 
clan of Kosala, 17. 

Prasii (Prasi(o;ai, Prachyas), the 
eastern peoples, 9, 16, 19, 21, 23, 
24, 96n, 97, 141, 144, 145, 150, 
*53* ^5, l 57, ijS, 17^, 188, 315, 
350; Alexander's idea of the 
conquest of, 87; Chandragupta 
from the, 143; tiger in the country 
of the, 99. 

Prasna Upanishad, 22. 

Pratisakhya of Katyaysna, 329* 
Piatisdkhyas , age of the, 327. 
Pratishthana, 223, 269. 

Pratwcdakas , (reporters), 227, and n. 
Princes, discipline and training of, 
176. 

Prisoners, annual release of, by Asoka, 
2*9, 2 39* 

Prithu, a legendary hero, 171. 
Pnyadarsana, 1 75. 

Priyangu, 330. 

Provinces, administration of the, in 
the Mauryan empire, 182-183. 
Proshthas (Pracsti), a tribe, 41. 
Pseudo — ‘Callisthenes, 147. 

Ptolemy, son of Logos, 51, 177; a 
general under Alexander, 48; 
and the capture of Aornos, 53-55; 
and the subjugation ol the Maiavas, 
71; afterwards king of Egypt, 59; 
Ptolemy II (Phiiadeiphusj, of Egypt 
(Turumaya,), 89, 168, 206, 207. 
Pulindas, a Kol tribe, 321. 

Pundra, textile manufacture in, 263. 
Pundravardhana, 16 1. 
Puiidravardhanlya, a sakha of the 
Godasa gana, 298. 

Punishments, 224; mitigation of, 
225. 

Punjab, river system of the, 28-30. 
Pupphapura, see Pataliputra, 143. 
Pura, the capital of the Gedrosians, 
77* 

Puranas, on Mahapadmananda, 
13.14; on the successors of 
Asoka, 244; 



432 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Puranadhishfhana, ( Pandrethan, ) 
219. 

Purana Kassapa, a Tirthika teacher, 
295- 

Purana literature, 333. 

Puranic accounts, 135. 

Puri, capital of the Maury as of 
Konkan, 248. 

Purna\ arman, a descend ant of Asoka, 
248. 

Purohita, 175, 176. 

Purus (PauravasJ, 37, 147. 

Purushas, (PulisasJ, agents of the 
king 200, 224-225, 227. 
Puru&hamedha, 289. 

Purushapura, (Peshawar), 223. 

Pun, a Nanda, interpretation ofj 20. 
Puslikaiavati (Peuce laotis), 35, 47, 
272; submission of, to Alexander, 
5i* 

Pushpadanta, a Sivagana, 329. 
Pushpapura (Pataliputra), 209, and 

n * 

Pushyadharman, 244. 

Pushyagupta, the Rashtriya of Chan- 
dragupta in Surashtra, 155; 160; 
construction of the Sudarsana 
lake by, 182. 

Pushy (p) ami tra, generalissimo of 
Brihadratha, 246, 247, son of 

Pushyadharman, 244; does away 
with Brihadratha, 189; 

Pygmies, a people in north west 
India, 83. 

Pyrrho, founder of the Sceptic system, 
in India, 81. 

Pyrrhus, Indian mahouts in the army 
of, 318 

Pythagoras, 106; influence of Indian 
ideas on, 8t. 

Pythias of Lydia, 358. 

Q 

Quetta, 153. 

‘Queen's Edict’, 205. 

R 

Radhagupta, chief minister of Bin- 
dusara, 167. 

Raghu: amsam, the, 334. 

Rahula, 285. 

Raichur, Asoka’s inscription in the 
district of, 203. 

Raja, a title of the head of the repub- 
lic, 173; a title of the Sanghas of 
the Kurus and and the Panchalas, 

21. 

Rajadharrnakaustubha, the Vishnu - 

dharmottara quoted in, 140. 

Rajagriha, 269, 270; the council at, 

284; remains of, 349. 


Rajapatha , 270. 

Rajasdsana , and dharma, 198-199. 
Rajasekhara, 318; on the court of 
learning at Pataliputra, 325; on 
Upavarsha, 335. 

Rajasuya, a sacrifice, 171. 
Rajavalikathe, on Bhadrabahu, 161, 
Rajuka. , an officer of the highest rank, 
22, 224, 225, 226, 227. 

Rajju , a source of revenue, 224. 
Rajjugrahaka , rope-holder, 224. 
Rakshasn, the Nanda minister, 15, 
146. 

Rama, a legendary hero, 171. 
Rdmdyana , the, 19, 105, 208, 308. 
Rambakia, a village, colonisation of, 
by Hepliaestion, 77. 

Rampurva, 267, 370, 373, 377, 
Asokan column at 204, 205, 361, 
362; 365, 366, bull on the column 
at, 37°, 37=> 376, 377, 3 &> 3 8a ; 
lion on the column at, 372. 

Rapson, on coinage in ancient 
India, 279; on the coins of Sophy* 
tes and Seleucus I, 127-28; 

Rashtra (Janapada), 224. 

Raditnka (Rathika), 222, 223, 225. 
Rashtriya , 22, 223. 

Ratis (guhjas), a unit of w eight, 127, 
279, 280, 281, 282 n. 

Rawlinson, on the Sattagydians, 

30-31- 

Republics (Sangha), in the Mauryan 
period, 173 ; tribes in N. W. 
India, 70-73 weakening of the, 
by Chandragupta, 337. 

Rhodes, Demon, a historian of, 89. 
Rigveda , the, 262, 264, 265, 279, 288, 
289, 343, 350. 

River-gold, 95. 

Rituals, Asoka on the performance of, 

233, 236, 237 

Rock Edicts, 204, 212, 213, 222, 233, 

234, 250; V and XIII, 154, 206- 
207, 2 io-i 1, 217. 

Rohana in S. E. Cevlon, 256. 

Rostov tzeiF, on Chandragupta, 198; 
on the Hellenistic view of me 
ownership of land, 177-178 n. 
Roxana, fasourite wife of Alexander, 

74* 

Royal decree, validity of, 1 74. 

Royal hunt, suppiession of. by Asoka, 
239, 241. 

*Ro\al Road’, 272. 

Rudradaman, 233; Girnar inscrip- 
tion of, 134, 139, 155, 171, 199, 

208. 

Rummindel, 221, 313, Asoka’s 
inscription at 204 : 205, 213, 

column at, 361, 362, 365. 

Rupnath, Minor Rock Edicts at, 

204, 233; column at, 363. 



INDEX 


433 


Rural administration in the Maur- 
yan state, 120. 

S 

Sabaragae see Ambashthas, 40. 

Sabbakami, Thera of Vaisali, 300. 

Sabus (Sabbas), see Sambos, 41. 

Sages, Greek writers on the, 104- 
106. 

Sahadeva, a missionary, 216. 

Sahajati, 269. 

Sahalya (Sahalin, Sukalpa), eldest 
son of Nanda, 23. 

Sahasram, Minor Rock Edicts at, 
204, 362. 

Satiyaputa, (Kosar ?) 255; identi- 
fication of the 238 n. 

Sailesvara, see Parvatesvnra, 146. 

Saisunaga, 11, 280 «, 348. 

Saisunagas, 15, 16, 18, 19, 35 2, 

Sakas, 146; driving away of the 
Greeks from Bactria by, 13 1; end 
of the rule of, 136. 

£aka(d)tala, the minister of Nanda, 
14, 147; father of Sthulabhadra, 
297- 

Saketa, march of a Greek army to, 

, 355-. 

Sakuni ofGandahra, 142. 

Sakya-Mauryas, origin of the, 142 n. 

Sakyaputra, 142 n. 

Salamis, Persian defeat at, 32. 

Salatura, Panini connected with, 

. 325- 

Salisuka, 244, 245, 246, 283 n. 

Salva, 310 

Samacharis, Jacobi on the, 161 n. 

Samaharta, collector-general, 179 ; 
181, 183, 198. 

Samdjas„ 162, 237, 238. 

Samapa (near Jaugada), a centre of 
provincial administration, 223 j 
225. 

Samaprabharam, 289. 

Samatata, Asoka’s stupas in 222. 

Sampadi, 215 n, 244. 

Sambhutivijava, a Nirgrantha, 297* 

Sambodhi, (Gaya) Asoka's visit to, 
21 1. 

Sambo(u^s (Sabus, Sabbas\ a king 
in the Punjab, 41; country of the, 
105; abandonment of his city by, 74. 

Samagraha , work of Vyadi, 327. 

Samkarshana, worship of, 305, 306. 

Samp(r)ad(t )i(Bandhupalita, 
Vigatasoka), 244, 243, 283 n; 
conversion of, to the Nirgrantha 
faith, 298. 

Samaxus, attempt of, to expel the 
Macedonians from N. W. India, 
150. 

Sammapasa, 289. 


Samsthddhykiha , market superinten- 
dent, 277, 278. 

Samudra, a merchant prince 210 n. 
Samyamyapatha , roads leading to 
market towns, 271. 

&amyaprasa, 289. 

Sanavasa, the teacher of Upagupta, 
300. 

Sanchi, 215 «, 216, 345, 347, 37 G 
374. 375. 377; Asoka’s bene- 
factions to, 15* 210; Asokan 

column at, 361, 364; illustration of 
the avadanas at, 203; Minor Pillar 
Edicts at, 205; reliefs at, 389; 
stupa at, 379. 

Sandracottus, see Chandragupta, 

24, 101, 139, i5 2 > 168 315. 

Sandraphagos (Chandrabhaga), 315 
Sangaios (Sanjaya ?), installed m the 
place of Asies, 47* 

Sangala 68; capita] of the Kathaians, 
captured by Alexander, 66' 
SangDm period, 251 
Sangam, Tamil academy, 112 
Sangha, Buddhist, the 3; and Asoka, 
211,214,214,215,242, 243,245, 
285; and the Mahamatras, 225. 
Sangha, Corporation, 21, i73> 2 74- 
Sanghamitt(r)a, a d. of Asoka, 209, 
209 n, 218, 259. 

Sanjaya Belatthiputta, a Tirthika 
teacher, 295* 0 

Sankara on Purnavarman, 240. 


Sankasya, 300. 

Sankhayana S rauta Sutra, 200 
Sankissa, Asokan column at; 301; 
elephant on the column at, 370, 

371, 37^ 377* c 
Sanskrit grammar, 326-329. 

Sanskrit learning, under the Nandas 
and the Mauryas, 324-26. 
Sannidhata, the 179. r 

Sarmanes (see Sramanas), 107, 63, 

Sarnlth^, 3 346, 356, 375, 377, 383; 
Asokan column at, 361, 3 62 * 3 b 4« 
063, 366; elephant at, 375; Minor 
Pillar Edicts at, 205, 302; mono- 
lithic rail at, 384-385; quadri- 
partite at 37° 74* 

Sarre, on the Sattagydians, 3*- 
Sdrvabhauma, 350. 

Sarvarthasiddhi, *4®* . » 1 

Sarvastivada, a Buddhist school, 


£asigupta (Sisikottos), 
mercenary leader, 46; 


an Indian 
and Chan- 


ragupta, H 2 fl * 

idhanus, 244* 
idharman, 283 n. 
ivahanas, the, 246-47; tltI( ; 
iyadassana taken by the, 208, 
, in Taxi!'*. 103. 


434 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Satiyaput(r)a, 43-44, 238, 250, 251; 

outside Asoka’s empire, 219. 
Satputes, 251. 

Sattagydians ( ‘Thatagus’ ), people 
in the seventh Persian satrapy, 

3<>3*, 33- 
Satihavahas , 274. 

Saubhuti, ( Sophy tes, Subhuta, 
Sopeithes) 69, 37; coins of, 126- 
127, 129; gold and silver “mines” 
in the country of, 29; Hellenistic 
i nfluence on the coins of, 80 ; hun- 
ting dogs in the country of. 98; 
inspection of two month old babies 
tn the kingdom of, 102. 

6aunaka, author of the Rig K da- 
prdsisakhya , 329. 

Saura Bhagavad, 328. 

Sauraseni apabrahmsa, 317, 318. 
Sauvira (Sophir or Sphir), 269. 
Savaras, a Kol tribe, 321. 
Sayambhava, a Nirgrantha, 297. 
Schwanbeck, on the use of the Indica 
by subsequent authors, 91. 
Sciapodes, a people of North-West 
India, 83. 

Scriptures, seven texts from Buddhist 
212, and n. 

Scylax, a book on India by, 82-83. 
account of the voyage of, by 
Herodotus, 87. 

Sehwan (Sindimana?), 41. 

Seleucids, 2, 172, elephants on the 
coins of the, 375. 

Seleucus, a general under Alexander, 
59> 61, i 37 -' 38 > *5*> *53. 

271; allegiance of the Bactrian 
Greeks to, 130; and Ghandragupta, 
63, 79. 89, 130, 15**153, 156, 

*59> 219, 273, 353-354; coins 

of, 127; 129 Deimachus sent to 
the court of Bindusara by, 89. 
Semiramis, 76. 

Senapati , commander-in-chief, 189. 
Senart, 230; on Asoka’s adoption of 
Buddhism, 210 n. 

Seunachandra II, Yadava, Govin- 
daraja subordinate of, 248. 

Seven Pillar Edicts, the, 205, 216, 
228, 229, 232, 233, 236, 240. 

Seven ‘tribes’ in India, according to 
Greek writers, 116. 

Sextus Empiricus, 81. 

Shad puny a, six fold policy, 187. 
Shabazgarhi. 203, 204, 205, 312-15. 
Shama Sastri, Dr. on the Arthasastra , 
190, 1 91, 200. 

‘Shekel’, a weight, the siglos based 
on the, 124. 

Sibis, (Sivas, SiboP, a republican 
tribe in the north-western India, 
subjugation of the, by Alexander, 
38-39> 4°> 7o; country, 262; 


Dionysus considered a Greek re- 
presentation of, 101. 

Siddapura, Minor Rock Edicts at, 
204, 223, 249* 3*3- 
Sjla, Asoka’s stress on, 240. 
Silappadtkdram , the on Madura, 250 
Simhasena, 160 and n 165. 
Sindhavas, 40. 

Sindi(o)mana (Sehwa?), capital of 
Sambos, 41, 74. 

Sin-Kiang, the city of Khotan, 318. 
Sir William Jones, on the Greek 
names of Chandragupta, 139, 

Siri Dhammasoka (Asoka) 241. 
Sisikottas, see Sasigupta, 46, 142. 
&isunaga, father of Kalasoka, 301. 
Sitadhyaksha , Superintendent of 

agriculture, 177, 197. 

£ivas, see Sibis, 39, 

Slave ( dasa ), 275. 

Slavery in India, 157; Greek writers 
on, in-112. 

Slokavarttika 328. 

Smith, V. A. on Mahendra, 20 $n; 
on Asoka’s claim of Gods ming- 
ling with men, 234; on polishing 
of stone, 265; on the retirement 
of Chandragupta, 165 n; on the 
Satiyaputas, 238; on the terri- 
tories ceded to Chandragupta by 
Seleucus, 153. 

Smrti literature of Chandragupta’s 
time, 164, 

Snakes, Greek writers on. 97-98. 
Socrates, 106 and an Indian philo- 
sopher, 81. 

Sodrai (Sudras), 40. 

Sogdiana, conquest of by Alexander, 
45- 

Sogdianians, 33. 

Sogdoi, the subjugation of the, by 
Alexander, 74. 

Sopara, Asoka’s inscription at, 203, 
205. 

Sophagasenus (Subhagasena), 246. 
Sophystes, see Saubhuti, 29, 37> 69, 
80, 98, 102, 126, 127, 129. 
Sourasenaoi see Surasenas, 101* 
305. 

South India, and Ceylon— 249 ff; trade 
of, 42. 

Spitaces, a nomarch, 37. 

Spooner, 345, 346, 356, 357; on _the 
Zoroastrian period in Indian 
History, 198. 

Sramanas, (Sramanai, Sarmanes), 
106, 107, 163, 210, 234, 241, 247, 
293, 296, 297, 3°6 5 334> 335 * 

four kinds of, 294-295. 

6rauta Sutra, 284, 333. 

!§ravana Belgola, settlement of 
Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta at, 
*65* 2 49> 297. 



INDEX 


435 


Sravasti, the capital of Kosala, 183 
269; 210 n; Anathapindika, mer- 
chant prince of, 270. 

§(r)enis, guilds, 274, 275. 

Srinagari, town, built by Asoka, 219. 
Srngdraprakdsa , a work of Bhoja, 

' 328, 33<\ 34°* 

Sruta-kevaiin, Jain saint, 165. 
Stadia, a measure, 91, 92. 

State, the, and industrial and co- 
mmercial policy, 275-279- 
State landlordism, 197. 

Statira, d. of Darius m. by Alexander, 

353* 

Stein A. 167, on the identification of 
places in the swat vallev, 49; 
on the resemblance between the 
Khotanese and the Kashmiris, 
220. 

Stein O., 113, «, 174 n. 191; on 
the Arthasastra, 200; on Mega- 
sthenes and Kautilya, 196; 

Sthdnika , the 18 1. 

Sthulabhadra, son of Sakadala. 
297; Mahagiri, the successor of, 
298- 

Stone cutting, 265. 

Strabo, 33, 41, 45, 47, 89, 91, 9 IW > 

94, 96, 98^, 10272 , 103 107, III, 

1 16, 1 17, n. 135, 130, 153, 

154, 169, 262; extracts from the 

memoirs of Nearchus in the works 
of, 88; sources of, on the king’s 
hair washing ceremony, no; on 
the Cathaeans, 38; on Chandra- 
gupta, 162, on Chandragupta 
and Seleucus, 152, 153, 154; 

on the gold emroidered garments 
of the Indians, 264; on the 
hair washing ceremony, 162; on 
the Hylobioi, 334; on husband- 
men in India, 114, 115? on an 
incident in Sonhvtes’ court, 98; 
on the kingdom of Mousikanos, 
40; on law and deposits in India. 
112-113; on marriage among 
the Kathaians, 102; on marriage 
and occupation in India, 116; on 
Megasthenes’ account of the 
Indian Philosophers. 106; on 
Megasthenes at Patallputra, 
152; on the mission of Deimachus 
to the court of Bindusara, 168; 
on the Oxydrakai, 39 ; on 
Pataliputra, 356—57; on the peo- 
ple of South India, 43; on petro 
cles. 89; on the position of the 
ruler of Takshasila 35, 36; on puni- 
shments, 279; on the size of 
India, 91; 

Stri-adhyakshsa mahamatra . , (ganikd- 
dhyaksha ), 226 
Stupa, 344, 384. 


Subandhu, a minister of Nanda, 
Chandragupta and Bindusara, 329, 
330; a rival of Kautilva, 167; 
author of the Vasavadattd JVatys- 
dhdid , 330, 331. 

Subhadrangi, principal queen of 
Bindusara, 167; mother of 
Asoka (?), 208. 

Subhagasena (Sophagasenus) and 
Antiochus, 246. 

Subhuta see Saubhuti, 69. 

Sudama cave, the 346, 385, 386. 

Sudras (Sodrai), a tribe, 40. 

Sudarsana lake, construction of the, 
bv Pushvagupta, 155, 182. 

Sudracae (Oxydrakai), 39. 

Sudraka, 318. 

Suhastin, conversion of Samprati to 
Jainism by, 245. 

Sumana, elder brother of Asoka, 
klling of, 210. 

Sumanottara, 330. 

Sunga art, 384. 

Sunitha, 15. 

Surasena, 44. 

&urasenas (Sourasenoi), the 17, 19, 
honour of Herakles by the 101, 
305. 

Surashtra, a part of Chandragupta’* 
empire, 155; a republic, 168, 173. 

Susa, 30, 159, 357- 

Susiana, 273. 

Susima, a son of Bindusara, 219. 

Susruta, and the Arthaiastra, 195. 

Sutrapitaka, 284. 

Suttas, the, 164. 

Suvarnabhumi 270; Anoka’s mission 
to, 274, 

Suvamagiri, a centre of provincial 
administration, 223. 

Suvamakudva (Kamarupa), textile 
manufacture in 262. 

Suvastu, the territory of the Assa- 
kenians, 35. 

Svarga, 230. 

Svasarajya, 167. 

Svayambhunath, shrine of. 221. 

Syadvada, doctrine of. 298. 

Sybyrtius, satrap of Arachosia, 89. 

Sydracae, see Oxdraki, 39- 

Sylvain Levi, 313; on the Arthaiastra , 
199 . 

Syrakousai (Oxydrakai), 39. 

Syria, Antiochus, king of, 168-169; 
revolt of Bactria and Parthia 
from 2. 

Syrian court, and the Mauryan 
court, I34- I 35- 

T 

Tdittinva Brahwinna, 268. 

7 'aittiriya samhitd , 2 88. 



436 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Takshasila (Takila), 35, 59, 64, 88, 
227; Ambhi of, 46; and Alexander, 
37, 52, 55 — 57 > Aramaic inscri- 
ption at, 346, 352* and Asoka, 203, 
209, 282; coin finds at, 125; 

capital of Uttarapatha, 158 n ; 
223, 354; a centre of provincial 
administration under the Maur- 
yas, 223,354; description of, 103- 
104; Kaulilya of the college at, 
325; Philip, the satrap of, 65; re- 
volt in, daring the days of Bindu- 
sara, 167; sages near, 104-106; 
seat of Kunala s viceroyalty, 220. 
Tambapanni, 219. 250 (Ceylon). 

Tamil (z), origin of the word, 322. 
Tamilakam (Dravida, Damirike) 

43-4) 

Tamil literature, the Nanda and the 
Mauryas in, 253. 

Tamil poems, on Mauryan war 
chariots, 188. 

Tamralipti, 218; Aioka’s stupas in, 
222. 

Tamraliptika, sakha of the Godasa- 
gana, 298. 

Tamraparni, see Ceylon, 43, 238. 
Tamraparnika, a pearl, 42. 
Tantrayuktis borrowed by the Tolka- 
ppiyam from the Arthasdstra , 192; 
in the Arthasastra and Susruta, 
l 5°, 33 6 - 

Taprobane, see Ceylon, 43, 95. 
Taranatha, 244; on the age of Panini, 
327; on the period of rule of 
Nanda, 23; on the warlike acti- 
vities of Bindusara and Kautilya, 
167-168. 

Tarn, 58, 159 n; on the territories 
ceded to Chandragupta by Seleu- 
cus. I53-5T 
Tarukkha, 289 

Tauala ( Patalene, Pottala ), a 

kingdom, 41) 

Taxila see Tax lies, (Takshasila), 35, 
37, 104-5, 125, 15 3 a, 167, 220 
282,325, 346. 357, 354. 

I ax lies' 7 ^ee Tukdiasili, 35, 103. 
Taxiles, (Ambhih 47, 63, 64, 77- 
78, 79, 103, 139, 149. 

T'rmilai (Trmmili), 321. 

Textile industry, the, 262-264. 

1 hanesar. 19. 

w fhatagtii**. see Sattagydians, 30-31 
T'iathari, 2'U. 

iheistic mrivt rients in the Nanda- 
Maurva Period. 304-307. 

Thera ;d f Jid coir-i- ni'uy, swrTs about 
Chandragupta in the, 13J.. 
Theravada, 215; (VibhajyavaJ*0 
school, 302. 

Theravadins, 301. 

Thomas, F. W., 189, 191, 


Timosthenes, admiral of the fleet of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, 89. 
Tlrthankaras, 165. 

Tirthikas, Indian sophists 295. 

Tissa 259. 

Tishya, asterism of Asoka’s birth 
207, 21 5 w, 239. 

Tishyaraksmta, 215 n. 

Tivala (Tivara), a son of Asoka, 214, 
243- 

Todeyya, 289. 

Toleration, Asoka on, 235-236. 
Tolkappiyam , the 328; Tantrayuktis 
borrowed by the, from the Artha- 
sdstra 192. 

Tosah (Dhauli), 223, 225. 

Town administration under the 
Mauryas, 18 1. 

Trade, under the Nandas and the 
Mauryas, 269—275. 

^Translation compounds* in In- 
do- Aryan, 319. 

Trayi, 333. 

Triparadeisos (Triparadisus), parti- 
tion of, 139, 149, 150, 1 51. 
Tripitaka, 184, 284, 285. 

Tnratna, 242. 

Trivarga, iy4> 

Trogus, 135, 144; sources of, on 
Chandragupta, 143. 

Turama>a see Ptolemy II Philadel- 
phus of Egypt, 206, 207, 217. 
Tushaspa { Yavanaraja), 223; gover- 
nor of Girnar, 233; improvement 
of the Sudarsana lake by, 182. 
Tyriespes, a satrap under Alexander, 
46, 65; ruler of Paropamisadae, 

74, 78. 

U 

Udayana, 330; capture of Pradyota 
by, 33 on. 

Udayi, son of Ajatasatru, 158/1. 
Udichya dialect, 314, 312; tract, 
310. 

Udyana. the territory of the Assakeni- 
ans, 35; and the &akya Mauryas, 
142 n. 

Ugrasena. see Mahapadma, 15, 18, 
23. 

Ujjayini, (Ujjain, Ujjeni) ^ 1 67, 224, 
227, 269, 317; and Asoka, 203, 
209; Buddhism in, before Asoka, 
300; a centre of provincial adminis- 
tration, 153, 223; Samprati’s rule 
from, 245; Vasavadatta of, 33°* 
Umarkot, 76. 

Upagunta, 203, 221; spiritual guide 
of Asoka, 213, 300; Thomas on, 
216 n. 

Upapatha , 270. 

Upasaka, an. 



INDEX 437 


Upavarsha, a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25, 325; an author on 
Mimamsas, 335. 

Upayas, four instruments of policy 
187. 

Uposatha ceremonies, 215; day 214. 
Urasa, Arsakes, the chief of, 36, 
68 . 

Usinara, 310. 

Utpahni , a work of Vyadi, 327. 
Uttara, 274; a disciple of Mahagiri, 
298. 

Uttarabalissaha, a gana founded by 
Balissaha, 298. 

Uttarakuru (Ottarakorrhas), 315. 
Uttarapatha, 26, 158. 

Uttiya, king of Ceylon , 257, 259. 

V 

V achabhumikas (go-adhyakshas) con- 
trollers of cowpens, 228. 

Vadugar, 255. 

Vaed(dja (Yakkha) Q56, 257, 258. 
Vaikhanasa (Vanaprastha), 293. 
Vaikhanasasastra ; 334. 

Vairodhaka, 146. Vaisali (Visala), 
269; the Buddhist community at, 
302; capital of the Vriji country, 
19, 21; second Buddhist Council 
at, 299, 300-301. 

Vaisika kala, 337. 

Vajapeya, 289. 

Vdjasaneya{i)samhitd, 268, 328. 

Vajasaneyi pratisdkhya , work of Ka- 
tyayana Vararuchi, 328. 

Vakkula, stupa, 213/n 
Vakyapadiya , a work of Bhartrari, 
327 * 

Valmiki, 208, and n . 

Vamadeva, aVedic Rshi 288. 
Vamaka, aVedic Rshi 287. 

Vamana, author of the Kavyalankara - 
sutra vrtti , 330. 

“Vamba Moriyar” 134. 

Vanga, textile manufacture in, 262, 
263. 

Vararuchi, a scholar of the Nanda 
period, see Katyayana, 25, 325, 
327, 330/1, 340. 

Vararuchcim Kavyam , the 330. 
Vardbamana Mahavlra, 11. 

Varsha, a scholar of the Nanda 
period, 25. 325. 

Varshakara, 15. 

Vasatis (Ossadioi), Submission of 
the, to Alexander, 74, 40. 

Vasavadatta, 330. 

VdsavadaJd Naiyadhard , a work of 
Subandhu, 330, 33 r * . 

Vasettha (Vasishtha), a Vedic Rshi, 
287, 288, 293, 333- 
Vasishtha Dharmasutra, 293. 


Vasudeva, Garuda, pillar at Vidisa 
in honour of, 305. 

Vasudeva cult, 305, 306. 

Vatsa, (Kausambi), textile manu- 
facture in, 262. 

Vatsaraja, 330. 

Vatsyayana, 148, 308, 337; author of 
the Kamasutra , 195. 

Vayu purana , reference to the, by 
Bana, 22-23. 

Vedangas, 333. 

Vichdrasrent , the, of Merutunga, 136. 
Vidarbha (Varad(h;atata, an Aryan 
state, 321. 

Videha, 142, 308, 310; language in, 
3 * 3 - 

Vidisa, 269 ; Asoka’s love with Devi 
at, 209; garuda pillar at, 305. 
Viduratha, a king of the Ikshvaku 
clan of Kosala, 17. 

Vidyadharas 253. 

Vigatasoka (Samprati?), 244, 245, a 
brother of Asoka (?) 208. 

Vihara, 214. 

Viharaydtrd, royal hunt, 162, 241. 
Vijaya, 257; and Ceylon, 256. 
Vijayasimha, the traditional con- 
queror of Ceylon, 44. 

Vijigishu, 3. 

Virkrama era, foundation of the, 136. 
Village government under the 
Nandas, 22, 181-182, 185. 
Vinayapitaka , 284. 

Vinaya texts, 302. 

Virasena, 244. 

Visakhadatta, the author of the 
Mudrardkshasa, 134. 

Vishakanya poison maiden, 147. 

Vishaya , an administrative division 
under the Nandas, 22. 
VishnudharmoiUra , the 146. 
Vishnugupta, see Kautilya, 146, 148 

19 1 * 

Vishnupurdna , the, 134? on 

Pushyamitra, 246. 

Visbti, 192, 199. 

Visvamitra, 288. 

Vitasoka, brother of Asoka, 214, 
and 215/1. 

Vithi, a dramatic variety, 332. 
Vitihotras, the, exterminated by 
Mahapadma, 17. 19-20. 

Vratvas the, 10, 31 1. 

Vrijjika (Vriji) a republic, 19, 2 I, 173 
Vrisha, the vahana of Siva, 344. 
Vrishala, see Chandragupta, 139, 

140, 294. 

Vrshasena, 244. 

Vrshni race, 306. 

Vyadi, a post-Pan ini erammarian, 
25, 325, 327, 329, 33 1, 335 - 
Vyadiparjbhdshd , 327. 

Vyddiparibhdshdiriti, 327. 



438 


AGE OF THE NANDAS AND MAURYAS 


Vyavakara, 186. 

W 

Waddel, 356, 357. 

Walsh, on the Taxila Hoard, 280 n> 
281 n. 

Whitehead, R. B., on currency in 
ancient India, 282; on the identi- 
fication of Sophytes, 126, 128. 
Winternitz, 191, 192. 

Writing, origin and development of, 
322-324- 

Woman, present of an elephant to, 
by her lover, 96. 

Women, services of, to the king, 1 76. 
Woodwork, 264 — 65. 

X 

Xandrames (Agrainmes, Mahapadma) 
14, 16, 23. 

Xathaoi see Kshatri, Kshatriyas, 
40, 74. 

Xenophon, 12, 30. 

Xerxes, Achaemenian emperor, 32, 
368; equipment of the Indians 
in the army of, 86, 318. 

Y 

Yajnavalkya 193; on units of weight, 
279 - 


Tajus samhita , 262, 264. 

Yakkha (Vaeda), 257. 

Yakkhas of Himavanta, 217. 
Yakshas, sculptural representations 
at Patna, 308, 332, 244-345 and 
«, 346«* 373, 378-379. 
Yasobhadra, a Nirgrantha, 297. 
Yatthala dagoba, 259. 

Yavakrlta, 330. 

Yavana ( Ionians ), the, 146, 
318. 

Yavanalipi, 26. 

Yayati, 330. 

(Y)erragudi, 223, 225, 234, 313; 
Asoka’s inscription at, 204, 205, 
206. 

Yogananda, 20, 147. 

Tojanas , 172. 

Yona, Greek, 35; 217, 222, 225; a 
tribe under Asoka, 154. 
Yuddhamsraushti, Augrasainya, a 
royal epithet of, 14, 15. 

Tukta , 200, 226, 227, 

Yunnan, South-west China, 319. 

Z 

Zabag, 254. 

Zachariae, 193. 

Zaradros (Hesidrus, Sutlej, Sutudri, 
Satadru), 28. 

‘Zoroastrian period’ in Indian history, 
198. 




The Lion -Crowned Column of Basarh . 


I 


Plate III 



The Lion-Crowned ('olumn of Lauriva-Xandangarh. 





Hull Capital Kampurva 


Plate VI 




Plate Vri 







Rock-Cut Elephant Dhauli. 


Plate 



^ * 










v 


f:iephant from the abacus of the Sarnath Capital. 





Plate XIII 



Lion from the abacus of Sarnath Capital 



Plate XIV 





** 




Yaksha from Patna, front view 








Plate XX 



Park ham Yak^ha. 








Plate XXV 



Terracotta from Pataliputra. 



Plate XXVI 



Terraootta from Pataliputra. 





Plato A XVI II 



Terracotta from Pataliputra 



Plate XXIX 



Lomas Rishi Cave 







1 


Central Archaeological Library, 

NEW DELHI. jCjggy 

9 34’ o/Si/2 


Call No. 


7CT 


Author — 'fd if <x/c<2/v£$d- jK'A' 







