


B. C. LAW VOLUME 

PART I 


Edited by 

Dr. D. R. BHANDARKAR, m./ v,u>. 
Prof. K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, m.a. 
Dr. B. M. BARUA, M.A., D.Litt. 

Dr. B. K. GHOSH, u.Phil., D.Litt. 

Prof. P. K. CODE, m.a. 



PUBLISHED BY 

THE INDIAN RESEARCH INSTITUTE, 

CALCUTTA 

194 5 



IMnteU 

Friniing 

Bombay 

Skal. 

Indian 




by JVI. N. Kui.karni, at the fvarnatnk 
Press, Karnalak Hou9e, Chira Bazar, 
: 2 , and published by S vns Chandra 
\i.a., I3.L». > Hon. CJeneral Sr-creta ry, 

Kt-searcK Institute, 170 Manicktolla 
Street. Calcutta. 



THIS VOLUME O F ARTICLES 

CONTRIBUTED B V 

H 1 S FRIENDS AND ADMIRERS 

IS PRESENTED 
T O 

Dr. B. C. LAW 

.VI-A-, B.L., Ph-D., X>- Litt., F.R.A.S.B. 




CONTENTS 


Page 

PREFACE i 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH .. ii 

HOMO SAPIENS 1 


By The Morfft Hon. the Marquis of Zetland, K.G., G.C.S.I., G.C.I.E. 

DESPATCHES AND REPORTS IN INDIAN HISTORY 

By Sir Jadunath Sarkar, M.A., P.R.S., C.I.E., Hon. D.Litt., 


Hon. M.R. A.S. ( Lend. ) . Hon . Fdlow R . A . S . B . ( Cal . ) , Correspond 
ing Member, Royal Historical Society (Eng.). 

SAKUNTALA. THE CHILD OF NATURE 19 

By Dr. S. K. Belvalkar, M.A., Ph.D. 

AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 35 
By Prof. K. A. Nilkanta Sastri. M.A., University of Madras. 

V'IMKHADATTA 50 

By Ur. S. R. De, M.A., D.Litt. 

KALIDASAS USE OF THE INCARNATION THEME 58 

By Mr. C, W. Gunter, C.S.L, I.C.S. 

DEVELOPMENT t OF TRIPITAK A-T RAN SL AT IONS IN CHINA 66 

By Mr. Fachow. 

BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 75 

By Dr. Suniti Kumar Chatterji, M.A. (Cal.), D.Lii. (lx>nd.), F.R.A.S.B. 

KOKAM U KH ASV AM IN 88 

Bv Prof. H. C. Raychaudhuri, M.A., Ph.D. (Carmichael Professor, 
Calcutta University). 

THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 92 

By Dr. S. N. Sen, M.A., Ph.D., B.Litt. 

KIMVADI SAMMASAMBUDDHO ? Ill 

By Revd. A. P. Buddhaidatta, Colombo, Ceylon. 

SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 

FROM THE ACCOUNTS OF EUROPEAN TRAVELLERS . 114 

By Dr. B. A. Saletore, M.A.. D.Phil. (Giessen L PhD. (London), 

(Gujarat College, Ahinedabad). 

EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA— HISTORIC SURVEY OF ITS 

ACHIEVEMENTS IN DIFFERENT AGES U28 

By Dr.^A. S. Altekar, Benares Hindu University. V 

' HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GILGIT MANUSCRIPTS . 134 

By Dr. R, C. Majumdar, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.A.S.B. 



11 


CONTENTS 


PAGi 

STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF INDIAN PLANTS— -ANTIQUITY OF 
JAWAR OR JONDIitA (HOLCIJS SORGHUM ) i FROM B.c. .?200 

TO A.D. 1850) 141 

By Mr. P. K. Gocic. M.A. 

CAN WOMEN PERFORM SRAUTA SACRIFICES OF THEIR OWN f 

ACCORD? ..159 

By Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.A.S.B. 

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON GUPTA COINAGE . . ' . . 164 

By Dr. Radha Kunnid Mookerji, M.A., P.R.S., Ph.D. 

AGADOKAKA AND THE KINGDOM OF AGNI 170 

By Dr. B. Ch. Chhabra, M.A.. M.O.L.. Ph.D. (Liigd.), ( Oolzicamimd ) 

LOKACARYA OF THE SRI-SAMPR A DAY A 173 

By Dr. Roma Chaudhuri, M.A., D.Phil. (Oxonh 

A DISSERTATION ON THE IDKNT1TY OK THE AUTHOR OF THE 

DHVANYALOKA 179 

By Dr. Satkari Mookerjee, M.A., Ph D., Head of the Department of 
Sanskrit, University of Calcutta. 

YAMA IN T HE VEDA 194 

By Dr. R. N. Dandekar, M.A.., Ph.l>.. Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

DID PUSYAMITRA SUNGA [PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS ? .. 210 

By Mr. N. N. Ghosh, M.A., Lecturer in Ancient Indian History, 

Allahabad University. 

DVARAKA 218 

By Dr. A. D. Pusalker, M.A., LL.B., Ph.D. 

TWO DECADES OF MADURA (1734- 1754 ) 225 

By Dr. T. V. Mahalinga Sastri, M.A., D.Lilt. 

QUL1 QTJTB SHAH. A POET-KING OF GOLCONDA (1513 A.D,-- 1550 A.D ) 232 

By Prof. Dr. K. K. Basu, M.A., Ph.D., T. N. J. College, Uhagalpur 

THE SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN THE POLITICAL 


SYSTEM .. 237 

By Rao Bahadur C. S. Srimvasachari, M.A., Professor of History, 

Annamalai University, Annamalainagar. 

TI1E MORAL ROLE OF INDIAN ART 260 

By Dr. Radhakamal Mukerjee, M.A., P.R.S.. Ph.D., University of Lucknow 

VEDIC GODS >77 

By Mahamaliopadhyaya Dr. R. Shamasasiry, B.A.. Ph.D. 

THE BUDDHIST SECT'S : A SURVEY # .282 

By Dr. Nalinaksha DuU, M.A., B.L., Ph.D., D.Litt. 

SOME SANDESA KAVYAS & MALABAR GEOGRAPHY .. 293 

By Dr. C. Kunhan Raja, M.A., D.PhiL (Oxon). 



CONTENTS 


in 

Page 


THE AJATJVADA OF GAUI.JAPADA 308 

By Or. T. M. P. Mahadevan. M.A., Ph.D.. University of Madras. 

‘PROPERTY-- HOW IT IS ACQUIRED AND MANAGED 321 

By Dr. Md. Husayn Nainar, M.A., LI..B. ; Aligarh), Ph.D. (Lond.), 
University of Madras. 

SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 326 

By Dr. C. Achyuta Mcnnn, B.A., Ph.D. (London), University of Madras. 

ASPECTS OF PR E-PAN INK AN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 331 

By Dr. Batakrishna Ghosh, D.Phil. (Munich), D.Litt. (Paris). 

BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 346 

By Mr. V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar. M.A.. University of Madras. 

THE HOME. OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 35* 

b'y Dr. Bcnoytosh Bhattarharyya, M.A., Ph.D. tBaroda). 

HISTORICAL PORTRAITS IN SANA’S HAR$ACARIT. 1 . . 362 

By Dr. U. N. Ghoshal, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.A.S.B. 

VED1C CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND : A STUDY IN THE 

PRTHVI SfJKTA OF THE ATI I ARVA V EDA 368 

By Dr. Vasudeva S. Agrawala, M.A.. Ph.D. 

v THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 377 

By Mr. A. V. M. Abdul Ali, M.A., F.R.A.S.B. 

BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE THE PUR A NIC DATE OF 

BUDDHA’S BIRTH 392 

By Mr. M. Raja Rao, M.A., Mysore Govt. Educational Service (retd.). 

UJJA1N1 IN MRCCHAKAT1KA 100 

By Dr. S. Mukerjec, M.A. (Cal.), Doctor-esl-Letters (Paris), Vedanta- 
urtha, Siistri. etc, Mayurbhunj Professor of Sanskrit, Benaics Hindu 
University. 


THE STORY OF DHANIKA. THE POTTER’S SON. AS TOLD IN THE 

DIFFERENT VINAYAS 09 

By Dr. P. C. Bagchi, M.A., Dr. es Letters (Paris). 

EARLY BUDDHISM AND THE TAKING OF LIFE 136 

By Mias I. B. Homer, M.A. 

THE LING A CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA (ITS PROTO-INDIAN 

ORIGIN AND EARLY DEVELOPMENT) 456 

By Dr. A. P. Kartnarkar, M.A., LL.B., Ph.D. 

SOME SOURCES OF BUDDHIST ICONOGRAPHY 169 

By Dr. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, D.Sc. 

THE AGE OF THE ARTIIASASTRA . . . 477 

By Dr. A. B. Keith, M.A., D.Litt., LL.D., D.C.L., I.C.S., F.B.A., 
Bar-at-Law. 

HAR$A, THE AUTHOR OF THE ANKA-YANTRA-C1NTAMANI & HIS 

RELATIVES 196 

By Prof. G. V. Devasthali, Nasik. 



IV 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES A STUDY .. ' .504 

By Mr. Adris Buncrji, M.A. 

ROUTES BETWEEN ARYAVARTA AND DAKSHINAPATHA .. 519 

By S. R. Shendc, Brihan-Mahura^htriya Karyalaya, Sangli, (Bombay). 

/BRAHMANISM AND JAINISM izT 

By Dr. Phani Bhutan Roy, M.A., Ph.D. 

THE PROSPECTS OF ECONOMIC PLANNING' FOR INDIA AND T$E 

WORLD 530 

By Dr. Benoy Sarkar, M.A,, Dr.ll.C. 

BAC1TRA NATAK 537 

By Dr. Indu Bhusan Banerji, M.A.. Ph.D.. Calcutta University. 

THE KINGDOM OF MAG AN 515 

By The Rev H. Heras, S.J. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SU DDHADV AIT A ' ! 559 

By Dr. Susil Kumar Maiira, M.A., Ph.D., Calcutta University. 

ON SOME SPURIOUS CALUKYA COPPER-PLATE GRANTS . 570 

By Dr. Moreshwar Dik&hil, Ph D , Poona. 

PRATITYA SAMUTPADA * .574 

By Dr. B. M. Rama, M.A., D.Lit- (F-ond.). Calcutta University, 

■""EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURY A 590 

By Mr. C. D. Chatterjee, M.A., University of Lucknow. 

PLASTER 611 

By Prof. Stella Kramrisch, Ph.D. 

/on the successors OF KUMARAGUPTA I 61? 

By Mr, Nalini Nath Das Gupta, M.A. 

•i'HE CHRONOLOGY OF THE EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL ,626 

By Dr. R. C. Majuxndar, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.A.S.B. 

GULERIA PAINTINGS 642 

By Dr. Hirananda Sastri, M.A., M.O.L.. D.Litt. 

VEDIC PLANTS 645 

By Dr. Girijaprasanna Majumdar, M.Sc., Ph.D., F.N.l. 

/IS THE CULT OF DIIARMA A LIVING RELIC OF BUDDHISM IN 

BENGAL ? 660 

By Dr. Sukumar Sen, M.A., Ph.D. # 

/THE EVOLUTION OF VAISNAVISM 675 

By Rai Bahadur Khagendra Nath Mitra, M.A., Calcutta University. 

THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE KACHWAHAS OF AMBEIJ . 683 

By Mr. Golapchandra Raychaudhuri, M.A., B.L. 

THE CRITICISM OF HISTORICAL REPORTS AMONG THE MUSLIMS 605 
By Dr. M. Z. Siddiqi, M.A., Ph.D., Calcutta University. 

INDEX 701 



PREFACE 


In 1943 it was proposed to present a Volume of Studies in Indology to 
Dr. B. JC. Law, M.A., B.L., Ph.D., D. Lit!., on the completion of his 55th 
year on the 25th October 1946. It is needless to recount the services of Dr. 
Law to Ancient Indian History and Culture in general and Buddhistic 
studies in particular. His persevering researches in Buddhistic and allied 
subjects during the last quarter of a century have borne abundant fruit iri 
tlie form of a series of original studies replete with erudition and scholarship. 
His valuable editions of Buddhist texts and translations have clarified 
our understanding of Buddhist philosophy and religion. It is therefore in 
tiie fitness of things that a volume of studies in Indology should be presented 
to him as a mark of appreciation of his dynamic, selfless and scholarly work 
and as a partial redemption of the debt of gratitude we owe to him. God 
has fulfilled our desire and we express our gratitude to all those who have 
extended their hearty co-operation, and to the Indian Research Institute 
for undertaking to publish the Volume. At the same time we express our 
deep sorrow for some among the contributors who could not live to see the 
fxx>k in print 

* 

Tt is now for flu; j rut) lie to judge how far we have succeeded in complet- 
ing the Volume for presentation to a scholar of Dr. Law's eminence. 

D. R. Bhandarkak 
B. M. Barua 
K. A. Nii-AKANTA Sastri, 

B. K. Ghosh . 

P. K. Cow. 


12-12-44. 




BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

I 

INTRODUCTORY 

Tlys Volume has been projected from a sense of duly which his many 
friends and admirers feel that they owe to Dr. Bimala Churn Law in record- 
ing in a permanent form their deep appreciation of the manifold service 1 - 
rendered by him to the cause of his country in general and to that of learn- 
ing and scholarship in particular. 

Dr. Law is a unique personality both as a philanthropist and as a man of 
letters. Ife is a favourite child of the two goddesses of Latejmi and Saras 
vati who. forgetting their mutual jealousy, have combined to confer upon 
him their choicest: blessings. He is at once a patron and a devotee of 
learning. 

Born in Calcutta on the 2(it.h October 1891, he is a scion of the ancient 
! -aw family of Calcutta. He is the youngest son of the late Mr. Ambica 
Chum Law, and the youngest grandson of the late Mr Jaygobind Law. 
C. I. E. 

As a man of letters, he is already the author of more than 40 learned 
works on a variety of subjects connected with Ancient Indian History. 
Ethnology, Geography. Archaeology, Buddhism. Jainism and the like. He 
is an acknowledged international authority on Buddhism and Jainism. He 
is also a sound student of Law. His book entitled “ The Law of Gift in 
British India” is the only authoritative book on the subject 


II 

ACADEMIC AND OTHER DISTINCTIONS 

He has to his credit a rare record of varied academic distinctions con- 
ferred upon him by the Universities and other iaiblic bodies. 

He received his education at the Calcutta Presidency College and the 
Calcutta University. 

In 1914 he graduated with Honours in Pali. In 1916 he passed the 
M.A. Examination standing First in the First Class in Pali including Bud- 
dhist Sanskrit, epigraphy and Palaeography. He also graduated in Law. 
In 1924 he obtained the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Ancient Indian 
History and Culture. In the same year, he was awarded the Sir Asutosh 
Mookerjee Gold Medal by the University of Calcutta for his original re- 
searches. He is also a D. Litt. in History and a Bonarjee Research Prize- 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


viii 

man of the Lucknow University and a Griffith Prizeman of the Calcutta 
University. 

The Vidyalamkara Pirivena has conferred upon him the special title of 
Buddhdgama Siromani in recognition of the conspicuous services rendered 
by him to the cause of Buddhism and Buddhistic studies, a rare distinction 
with which few Indians have been honoured by the Buddhists of Ceylon. 

He is associated with the following learned todies and public institu- 
tions in different capacities : 

He is an Honorary Member of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona ; Honorary Member of the Ganga Nath Jha Research 
Institute, Allahabad ; Honorary Life-Member of the Calcutta Geographical 
Society ; Honorary Correspondent of the Archaeological Survey of India ; 
President of the Calcutta Geographical Society ; President of the Pracyavani 
Mandir ( School of Oriental Learning ), Calcutta ; Vice-President, Vangiya 
Sahitya Parishat { 1343 B.S. 1936-37 >, Calcutta ; Vice-President, Buddha 
Society. Bombay ; Vice-President, Indian Association for the Cultivation of 
Science, Calcutta ; Vice-President. Indian Science News Association, Vice 
President, Indian Research Institute, Calcutta ; Vice-President, Iran Society. 
Calcutta ; Life-Member of the Bengal Educational Society ; Life-Member of 
Nfirlsiksha Samiti (Council of Education for Women); Life-Member of the 
Sanskrit Sahitya Parishat, Calcutta : Life-Member of the Visvabharali Santi- 
niketan ; Life-Member of the Numismatic Society of India. Bombay ; a 
Trustee of the Vidyasagar Institute, Calcutta : Historical and Archaeological 
Secretary, Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. 1944-45 ; Fellow, Royal Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland ; Fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Bombay Branch ; Fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal ; Fellow of 
the Royal Geographical Society, London ; Corjx>rate Member of the American 
Oriental Society ( 1937-40 ) ; Vice-President of the Indian Society of 
Oriental Art ; Vice-President. British Indian Association for 1942-43 ; 
Member of the Executive Committee of the B, I. Association ( 1943-44, 
1944-45 ) ; Vice-President, City Athletic Club, Calcutta ; Life-Member of 
the Automobile Association of Bengal, Calcutta ; Member of the General 
Committee of the Calcutta War Commiltee ( Appointed in August 1940) ; 
Member of the Editorial Board of the Annual Bibliography of Indian His- 
tory and Indology instituted by Bombay Historical Society ; Vice-President 
of the National Defence and Savings Week Committee ("1941 ) ; Member 
of the General Committee of the Silver Jubilee Fund of late King George V 
( 1935 ) ; Member of the General Committee of the Red Cross Society and 
St. John Ambulance Association ; Member of the Executive Committee of 
the Medical College Centenary (1934); Member of the All-Bengal Central 
Flood Relief Committee (1943). 

Dr. Law is a big Zemindar of Bengal and Landholder of Calcutta ; an 
advocate of the Calcutta High Court ; a Justice of the Peace and a Presi- 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


IX 


dency Magistrate o£ Calcutta He is a Partner of Messrs. Prawn Kishen Law 
& Co. which is one of the oldest trading firms of Calcutta. lie is a Free 
Mason and has been elevated to the rank of a Mark Master Mason. 

III 

BENEFACTIONS 

The world of scholars knows him for his writings, but is not so well 
acquainted with the other aspect of his personality, his phenomenal philan- 
thropy in aid of approved public causes. It is his way to do good in stealth. 
He shuns publicity like poison. His daily small gifts are hardly known 
even to the inner circle of his friends. But there are many public institu- 
tions which loudly proclaim what they owe to his silent benefactions, of 
which they will remain permanent witnesses and enduring memorials from 
generation to generation. 

His Ix'nefactions cover a wade range of humanitarian purposes. He 
has responded liberally to the call of the suffering, irrespective of caste or 
creed, to the cry for relief of the jx>or, the infirm, the helpless, the afflicted, 
the diseased, the destitute, and the distressed. 

Ilis charities are informed by the loftiest idealism, a spirit of dis- 
interested positivist social service, of worship of Ntna Narayana, of serving 
Cod by serving Man. 

He has endowed beds in Hospitals, founded Free-Studentships in Schools 
and Colleges, general as well as technical, offered facilities for higher research, 
bellied the cause of advancement of learning by learned Societies, and liber- 
ally financed the publication of original contributions to knowledge. His 
charities keep flowing in a continuous stream. 

Some of his typical benefactions are. worthy of special mention. Besides 
endowing beds at Hospitals, he has paid a substantial contribution towards 
the construction of the Anderson Casualty Block at the Calcutta Medical 
College, and to the King Emperor’s Anti-Tuberculosis Fund in Bengal. 

Many of the Funds started at different places for the relief of distress 
caused by Earthquake. Cyclone, Flood or Famine have always received 
liberal contributions from him. 

Some of his charities have been directed towards the promotion of 
Public! Works oP Utility, and of Cultural and Social Amenities, in various 
forms, whether it be Water-Works, Scheme for Afforestation, Supply of 
Stud-bulls, free distribution of booklets for children. Athletics or Clubs and 
libraries. 

His very timely contribution for the supply of stud-bulls was thus 
appreciated by the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow : “ I have learnt with much 
satisfaction of your generous gift, and write to say how much I appreciate 
it. The improvement of the breed of cattle in India is a matter of the. first 



X 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


importance, and your generous donation will assist to further a work of real 
national interest." 

The war has had its full share of Iris munificence. He has contributed 
liberally to the different War Purposes Funds in Bengal. He has paid more 
than Rs. 20,000|- to the Indian Red Cross Society and to St. John Ambu- 
lance Association. He has paid substantial donations towards the Civic 
Guard Funds, I^ady Mary Herbert’s Women’s War Fund, H. E. Governor 
of Bengal's Christmas Gifts Fund for troops, 11 J 19th Hyderabad Regiment, 
I. T. F. Dinapore ( 1940 ) . He has been helping the cause of the. War in 
many ways. 

The value of his gifts to these institutions has been acknowledged by 
the Governor of Bengal, Sir John Herbert, in the following terms : “ Re- 
membering the many occasions upon which you have helped me before, 1 
regard this donation as yet another example of your consistent generosity 
and public-spiritedness ; and if I am able to count upon the same measure 
of support and interest coming from all sections of the community, I don’t 
think Bengal will have any difficulty in fulfilling its full obligations in this 
great humanitarian cause.’’ 

His Excellency R. G. Casey, the present Governor of Bengal, has also 
expressed to him his appreciation of an additional gift as follows : “ I 

can assure you that this sum will contribute substantially to the fulfilment 
of Bengal’s obligations to the sick and the suffering, and that it will be 
most gratefully appreciated by those who have sacrificed so much in this 
war on our behalf." 

His contribution to the Cyclone Relief Fund was thus appreciated by 
the Governor, of Bengal : “ I regard this prompt and generous gesture as 
splendid evidence of your public-spiritedness and your sympathy for the 
suffering. I can assure you that it will be most warmly appreciated by 
those who are in most urgent need of assistance." 

His donation to the Society for the Protection of Children in India in 
response to an appeal issued by Her Excellency the Marchioness of Linlith 
gow was thus appreciated on her behalf : ‘‘Your generous donation is a 
source of great encouragement in the face of difficult conditions obtaining 
at this present time." 

His contribution towards the King Emperor's Silver Jubilee Fund in 
the neighbouring Province of Bihar has been thus appreciated by the Deputy 
Commissioner of Hazaribagh, Mr. S. L. Marwood : “ I wish to thank 

you personally for your liberal contribution which is one of the first received 
in this district. It will be a groat encouragement to the Committee and an 
example to other subscribers." 

Dr. Law has been the recipieht of the Silver Jubilee Medal ( 1935 ) 
and the Coronation Medal ( 1937 ) as a personal souvenir from fits Majes 
ty the King Emperor of India. 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH XI 

His contributions towards these humanitarian and War purposes total 
more than 3 lac and a half. 

An account may now be given of same of his known educational bene- 
factions as follows : — 

( 1 ) A donation of Rs. 8,000;- to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal 
for the institution of a medal called the “ Bimaia Churn Law Gold Medal ", 
to be awarded to “ the person who has made conspicuously important con - 
tribution to Indology." 

(2) * A donation of Rs. 3,000j- to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal 
for financing the publication of its popular Lectures. 

(3 ) A donation of Rs. 5,000i- to the Indian Association for the Cul- 
tivation of Science at: Calcutta foi endowing the ‘Bimaia Churn l^aw Gold 
Modal ' to be awarded every year to “ a person who has made the most 
important contribution to Science including Medicine." 

(4) A donation of Rs. 2,5tJ0:- towards the endowment of a Research 
Fund instituted by the aforesaid Indian Association for the Cultivation of 
Science. 

(5) A contribution of Rs. l,000j- to the Indian Science News Asso- 
ciation. 

tO A donation of Rs. 7,000; - to the University of Calcutta for pur- 
chasing Electron Microscope for the Biophysical Laboratory of the Univer- 
sity College of Science. 

(7) A donation of Rs. 3.000 j- to Rabindra Sainiti, Calcutta, for en- 
dowing a prize on Rabindranath Tagore. 

( 8 ) A donation of Rs. 5,000j- to Sarat Chunder Chatterjee Building 

Fund. 

(9) A recurring annual grant of Rs. 1,500 - to the Daulatpur Col- 
lege of Agriculture and Industries in Bengal. 

(10; A donation of Rs. 5,000 for the construction of a Hall at the 
Asutosh College, Calcutta. 

( 11 ) A donation of Rs. 5,000 j - to the Chitlaranjan Scvasadan, Cal- 
cutta, and another donation of Rs. 4,000j- to the Oufferin Hospital. Cal- 
cutta; for the endowment of two beds to perpetuate the memory of his 
deceased daughter. 

(12) A donation of Rs. 5,000’ - to the Chittaranjan Hospital, Calcutta, 
for endowing a bed. 

(13) A donation of Rs. 2,5001- to the Calcutta Homoeoiiatliic College 
for endowing a bed to the sacred memory of his late grandfather Jaygo- 
bind Law, C.I.E.’ 

(14) A contribution of Rs. 1,000;- annually (1935 to 1939) to the 
Kern Institute of Holland towards the publication of its Annual Bibliogra- 
phy of Indian Archaeology. 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


Xi! 


(15) A donation amounting up to now to over Rs. 40,000|- to the 
Indian Research Institute. Calcutta, to conduct its quarterly Journal, the 
“ Indian Culture ”, 

(16) A donation of Rs. 5,000j- to the Lucknow University Endowment 
of Dr. RadHa Kumud Mookerji Lectureship. 

(17) A donation of Rs. 1,000!- to the Ganga Nath Jha Research Insti- 
tute at Allahabad. 

(18) A donation of Rs. 3,000;- to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bom- 
bay which holds it as a Fund, the interest of which is to be spent ‘in buying 
books in Pali and Sanskrit, to be kept separately in its Library as a special 
collection under the designation, ‘ Dr. B. C. Law Collection \ 

(19) A donation of Rs. 12,000; - to the Royal Asiatic Society in Lon- 
don. which the Society has created into a Trust Fund, the income from 
which is being utilised by it (or the publication of learned monographs on 
topics of Indology in the Royal Asiatic Society’s Special Series called ‘ Dr. 
Bimala Churn Law Trust Series'. 

(20) A gift of valuable stone images and sculptures of the Bengal 
School to the Indian Museum, Calcutta, and that of a very valuable ivory 
image from Orissa to the same institution. 

(21) A gift to the Mahiibodhi Society, Calcutta, of a granite figure 
of Prajfia Paramita from his own collection. 

(22) A present of Persian and Mughal Manuscripts of great histori- 
cal value to the Delhi Fort Museum, and also to the Islamic section of the 
Indian Museum. Calcutta (1939 >. 

The total of his endowments of Free-studentships at different educa- 
tional institutions amounts to over Rupees Fifty thousand : (1) Rs. 10,500!- 
for the Calcutta Medical College; (2) Rs. 16,700j- for the Bengal Engi- 
neering College, Sibpur (Howrah); (3) Rs. 8.0001- for the Calcutta 
Presidency College ; (4) Rs. 4,500!- for the Government Commercial Insti- 
tute, Calcutta ; (5) Rs. 6,000!- for the Calcutta Betbune College, and Rs. 
4,500j- for the Campbell Medical School, Calcutta. 

IV 

LITERARY CONTRIBUTIONS 

We may now turn to the work and achievements oj Dr. Law in the 
field of scholarship. The quantity and quality of his literary output are 
unique in the annals of letters. As has been already stated, he is to-day 
the author of more than 40 learned works dealing with different aspects of 
Buddhism, Jainism, Ancient Indian History, Geography, 'and Archaeology. 
All these works by the thoroughness and standard of their scholarship mark 
him out as an • Indologist of the first rank. The range and depth of his 
scholarship will be evident from his numerous publications. 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


xiii 

His noteworthy contributions to Ancient Indian History consist of the 
following viorks- : 

1. K$atriya Clans in Buddhist India, 

2. Some Ksatriya Tribes of Ancient India, 

3. Ancient Mid-Indian K§atriya Tribes, Vol. I. 

4. Ancient Indian Tribes, L, 

5. Ancient Indian Tribes, II., 
tribes in Ancient liuiia, 

7. India as described in early texts of Buddhism and Jainism, 

S. The Magadhas in Ancient India (It AS Pub.}. 

In his several Volumes on Tribes, he presents a comprehensive and 
systematic . account of more than 130 tribes belonging to different parts of 
India and playing an important part in the early history of India. In 
these works, he has drawn upon all the available sources, Brahmanical, Bud- 
dhist and Jain. He has utilised original works in Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit, 
Tibetan and Chinese, and also epigraphic and numismatic sources, 
archaeological finds and the itineraries of the Chinese pilgrims. A careful 
and exhaustive study of ancient Indian tribes written in a spirit 
of scientific research and without any parti pria has been presented for the 
first time in these books on tribes. One may rightly say with Dr. Sten 
Konnw that ' the more we had books of the same kind, not only about tribes 
and dans but also about geographical designations, the better it would be 
for the yyoi Id of scholarship.* ‘lie has splendidly enlarged and supplemented 
the materials which were shortly dealt; with by Rhys Davids/ as remarked 
by Dr. Geiger. 4 It must, be admitted that the future historian of India 
will find his task substantially furthered both by the wide knowledge and 
sound judgment of the author/ 

His treatise entitled " India as described in early texts of Buddhism 
md Jainism ” is a well written book dealing with the geographical position 
of India, its kings and jieoples, social life and economic conditions, religion, 
education and learning, based on the early texts of the Buddhists and Jains 
written in Pali and Ardhamagadlu. together with relevant Brahminica! 
texts throwing light on obscure points. The treatment is entirely novel 
and the results achieved are excellent. In the opinion of Dr. Keith, * no 
author has done as much as Dr. Law has to make living the picture of 
ancient India and we are deeply indebted to his learning and skill in exposi- 
tion. This well -arranged and useful book represents the intensive phase 
which Indian historical studies are now entering as a result of the labours of 
Indian scholars. A vast array of facts effectively marshalled presents to us 
kings and courtiers, saints and knaves, calculating money-lenders with their 
promissory notes and records of wealth on gold and copper plates, resource- 
ful merchants and skilled craftsmen. This conscientious and painstaking 

B 



XIV 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


work goes to elucidate the progress of the country in the different fields of 
culture.’ 

The following are the more notable contributions made by Dr. Law to 
Ancient Indian Archaeology and Geography : 

1. Srdvasti in Indian Literature ( A. S. I. Memoir No. 50 ) 

2. Rajagriha in Ancient Literature ( A. S. I. Memoir No. 58 ) 

3. Kausdmtn in Ancient Literature ( A. S. I. Memoir No. 60 ) 

4. Pattchdlas and their capital Ahichchhatra (A. S. I. Memoir ( No. 68) 

5. Vjjayini in Ancient India ( Arch. Depth, Gwalior) 

6. Geography of Early Buddhism 

7. Geographical Essays 

8. Holy Places of India 

9. Rivers of India 

10. Mountains of India. 

An attempt has been made in the first five monographs to present a 
graphic picture of the ancient sites of sravasti, Rajagriha, KausambI, Ahi- 
chchhatra and UjjayinI from ancient Indian literature, coins, inscriptions as 
well as from the itineraries of the Chinese pilgrims. These exhaustive and 
systematic Memoirs will immortalize his name. 

His treatise on the ancient city of UjjayinI gives for the first lime a 
full and systematic account of its history based on all available original 
sources supplemented by the evidence of coins and inscriptions and the 
information supplied by the Chinese travellers. This .monograph shows 
what an important place an intensive study of local history and specialized 
work in a limited field can have in building up the general history of India 
in all its aspects, political, economic or cultural. There is no wonder that 
Indologists of the eminence of F. W. Thomas, Barnett, Wintornitz, Keith. 
Johnston, Stein, Geiger, or Oldham, should have spoken so highly of these 
works. In the opinion of Winternitz, ‘ this work adds one more to the long 
list of highly useful publications which we already owe to him and adds also 
to our knowledge of the history of ancient India. This excellent piece of 
work, full of information and completely free, from unjustifiable speculation, 
has received admiration on all hands’. 

His excellent Memoir on Rajagriha is an admirable piece of scholarly 
workmanship. By collecting every detail about tliis ancient city, he has 
contributed a new chapter to the work which he has undertaken. 

His Geography of Early Buddhism is undoubtedly an example of his 
erudition and sound exposition. In the well-considered opinion of the Ger- 
man Orientalist, Otto Schrader, ‘ this is indeed the kind of work which is 
often missed when reading through the Pifakas and which every Indologist 
will welcome as a great boon. ’ He admires the pains which the author has 
taken in collecting every available material on the subject. He expresses 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


XV 


his opinion that this book will become 4 an indispensable work of reference 
for all of .them/ The great Russian scholar, Theodore Stcherbatsky, remarks 
that this book ‘answers a long- felt need and will be highly appreciated by 
all students of Buddhist India/ 

His Geographical Essays is ‘ a really valuable digest of information, ' as 
Dr. Barnett remarks. Dr. Keith says that 4 it is a most valuable, collection 
rich in accurately stated and carefully collected facts and lays all students 
once more under a deep debt of gratitude/ 

These two works offer us a systematic exix>sition of geographical and 
topographical information based on critical study and research, following 
the lines of investigation started by Sir William Jones, Sir Alexander Cun- 
ningham, Buchanon Hamilton, and Mackenzie. 

His Holy Places of India , Mountains of India and Rivers of India 
are the publications of the Calcutta Geographical Society. They are 
historicu-gcographical sketches of subjects presented for the first time. The 
holy places of India connected with the three religions. Hinduism, Buddhism, 
and Jainism, have been arranged regionally and illustrated with maps and 
sketches. Jhv first named work places the educated India of to-day under 
a deep debt of gratitude by describing the holy places of India in a very 
picturesque manner, combining the historians desire for detail with a scru- 
pulous attention to the tourists or pilgrim’s need of topographical informa- 
tion, The result of this happy combination makes these works indispen- 
sable guides to these places of pilgrimage. By his first hand study of Sans- 
krit, Pali and Prakrit literature, he is eminently qualified to write this book 
and his geographical training lias added to the utility of the text by enriching 
it with three maps showing eastern India, north and north-western India 
and southern India respectively. 

His monograph on the Rivers of India presents a systematic account 
of the rivers of India, dividing them into the Sindhu, Desert-River, Ganga- 
Yamuna, BhagfrathT-Hcxighly, Brahmaputra-Meghna, coastal rivers, Goda- 
vari, Krishna, Kaveri, Punner and Narmada-Tapti systems. 

His Mountains of India presents likewise a systematic account of the 
mountains of northern, western, eastern, central and southern India based 
on the materials available from Indian literature, the accounts of the Greek 
geographers and Jhe itineraries of Chinese pilgrims. 

Dr. Law is a life-long student of Jainism with an intimate acquaintance 
with its literature and historical traditions. His publications in this im- 
portant branch o* Indology are not so numerous as in other branches. But 
his book entitled Mahdvira ; His Life and Teachings , gives us an objective 
account of what may be learnt from the Jaina and Buddhist texts regarding 
the historical founder of Jainism. It is characterized by the same accuracy, 
the same careful choice of facts, the same objectivity and sobriety of judg- 



XVI 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


merit which form the marked features of all his writings. It will be difficult 
to find out a book which gives a clearer and more systematic description of 
the life and teachings of the Great Jain leader. It is no exaggcrati<jn to say 
that this very suggestive account has been written in a spirit of impartiality 
and freedom from the narrow prejudice that so often vitiate the writings of 
sectarian authors. In the opinion of Geiger, 4 it is an excellent comparative 
study of Mahavira and Buddha, which sheds a flood of light on several 
points at issue.' We welcome the publication of this kind which contains 
valuable details some of which deserve careful consideration, as hus been 
rightly pointed out by the well-known German Indologist, Glascnapp. 

Dr. Law has unrivalled knowledge of Buddhist literature, religion and 
philosophy. All his works on Buddhism and Buddhist thought are very 
important, as they help much to elucidate many difficult and knotty points. 
A brief account of these may here be given. 

A History of Pali Literature (in two Volumes): It is a comprehensive 
work of Pali literature. It is a clear and exhaustive exposition of all the im 
portant problems of the subject and is marked by the sober and impartial 
judgment of the author. It contains a very learned and important discussion of 
the relative chronology of the canonical texts, which means, according to 
Geiger, 4 a considerable progress beyond what Rhys Davids has said on the 
subject.* In the opinion of Winternitz. ‘this is the most comprehensive 
treatment of Pali literature that has so far been published. The well-known 
French savant Finot so much iiked the book that he was frank enough to 
say : “ It seems to me extremely well-devised to provide tillers in the Buddha- 
ksetra with an invaluable stock of information and references. The author 
has worked hard for this result and undoubtedly he will reap in return much 
punya with the gratitude of the whole pandilajana;' 

The Life and Work of Buddhaghosa : This book is the first systematic 
treatment of Buddhaghosa as a man and as a Pali commentator. The late 
lamented Mrs. Rhys Davids in her Foreword to this book, says : “The book 
is all the more needed now as a very useful compendium of what we yet 
know* of Buddhaghosa both from his own works and from other documents. 
It is a well-executed piece of work in which the author has collected all the 
historical and semi -historical materials bearing on the life and labour of 
the great Master of the Law and sifted them with considerable ability, sup- 
plementing these by chapters on the origin and development of the stand- 
ard commentaries on the Buddhist scriptures (a very interesting expose ). 
on Buddhaghosa's successors, and on his writings.'” Geigpr and Carpenter 
have expressed their admiration of this book. The former considers it to 
lx: ‘ an excellent monograph * on the celebrated commentator of the holy Bud- 
dhist scriptures and the latter takes it to be a very important book on the 
subject. He also thinks that the chapters on the origin of the commentaries 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


XVU 


and the interpretation of Buddhism by Buddhaghosa ‘may bring many valu 
able sidelights on the history of Buddhism and its consolidation as a system 
of thought in the Theravdda.’ 

Historical Gleanings : This is an interesting and well-written collec- 
tion of essays on historical topics. In the opinion of Dr. E. J. Thomas, 
‘the book gives much more information of Buddhist notions than can be 
gained from the usual books.’ 

Heaven and Hell in Buddhist Perspective : This is a comprehensive 
treatment of the eschatology of popular Buddhism. Geiger, Carpenter, 
Pargiter and Kapson have greatly appreciated this work and one of them 
goes so far as to say that it is ‘ full of rich illustrations of the working of the 
principles of Karma in producing merit and guilt. A comparison of these with 
similar concept ions in Brahmanism would show how much folklore was com- 
mon to the two groups of teaching.' Lord Zetland who lias contributed a Fore- 
word to this book introduces it. spying : “ If the reader after perusal of ttie 
Volume has not acquired a comprehensive knowledge of the eschatology of 
(xipular Buddhism, he will have no one but himself to blame for Dr. Law has 
admirably accomplished the task which he ser out to perform." 

The Buddhist Conception of Spirits : This book acquaints the reader 

as far as possible with what the ancient Buddhists thought about the spirits 
and spirit world. A study of the prela belief among the southern Buddhists 
is bound to be attractive. Geiger says : “ this book has preserved no doubt 
the popular beliefs spread all over India. It shows us that Buddhism did 
not annihilate the older creeds and ideas but the teacher adopted them and 
inserted them into his own system." Hopkins (xnnts out that it fulfils its 
purpose admirably in giving a very clear notion of what the Buddhists 
understood by the spirits departed and others. 

Women in Buddhist Literature : It contains a clear and comprehensive 

account of women in early Buddhism. It deals with marriage and marital 
relations, jxxation of slave girls, the place of dancing girls and courtesans in 
society, female education, female character, influence of Buddha's doctrine 
on women, the origin and constitution of the order of nuns, and prominent 
Buddhist women. This subject has been ably tackled for the first time by 
Dr. Law before I. B. Homer and others. 

Concepts of* Buddhism : This is a publication of the Kem Institute, 
Holland. It is a scholarly analysis of some of the important concepts of 
Buddhism based upon a careful study of original texts. It deals with eleven 
Buddhist concepts. Dr. F. W. Thomas considers it to be ‘ an excellent work, 
one. of the best of the author’s writings.’ 4 The precision and exactness of its 
statements and the aptness of its citations render it eminently suitable for 
forming ancl conveying to students a correct idea of the main features of 
Buddhist doctrine.’ Dr. Keith remarks that ‘the author has aimed at pre- 



XVlii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

seating us with a large mass of material carefully chosen, accurately inter- 
preted and skilfully co-ordinated, bearing on the essential ideas of^ Buddhism 
as it is presented to us especially in the Pali texts. Dr. Laws work is of 
Immanent value.' 

A Manual of Buddhist Historical Traditions ( Saddhamma Safigaha): 
This book which is a publication of the University of Calcutta is the first 
English rendering of an imix>rtant text of Theravada Buddhism. The 
Saddhamma Sahgaha is said to have been compiled by Thera Dhammakitti 
of Ceylon at a great monastery called Lankarama built by the great king 
Pararnaraga. It comprises 11 chapters and his introduction contains a very 
good summary of the contents, chapter by chapter. The historical value 
of this work is enhanced by the inclusion of the account of two Buddhist 
Councils held in Ceylon during the reigns of Devanampiya tis.su and Valta- 
garnanf. There is a very important and interesting account in this book as 
to how the four great Nikayas were entrusted to various Theras at the 
First Council. The story of the Buddha s prediction about the establish- 
ment of the sasana in Ceylon has been developed a step further in this book 
than elsewhere. AVe get a very interesting account of the three original com- 
mentaries on the Tripitaka. The translation is very satisfactory arid Dr. 
Law lias indeed rendered a great service to the students of Buddhism and 
Buddhist history by preparing this valuable translation written in a scholar- 
ly style. The book is indeed a valuable asset to the library of Buddhist 
literature. 

Designation of Human Types , The Minor Anthologies of the Pali 

Canon — Pent III- -Buddhav a msa and Caniydpitaka : The first named 

work is a publication of the Pali Text Society. It is the first English ren- 
dering of the fourth book of the Abhidhamma Pitaka called Puggalapannatti. 
According to Geiger, 4 the translation is very well made and remarkably 
correct.* 

The Minor Anthologies included in the Sacred Books of the Buddhist 
Series contain an English version of the Buadhavamsa and Cariydpilaka by 
Dr. Law whose love for indology and scholarship in Buddhist literature 
needs little or no mention to students of Buddhism. 

As an editor of Pali texts, too, Dr. Law stands pre-eminent. Besides 
being an editor of the Indian Culture , he has edited the following bex^ks : 
Thnpavamsa , Buddhistic Studies , and D. R. Bhandarlar Volume. The 
Thupavamsa has been edited for the first time by him for the Pali Text 
Society, London. 

The second book is a collection of essays written by scholars of repute 
on Buddhism and Buddhist thought. Dr. Keith points out that the editor 
has succeeded in securing 4 many and varied communications which together 
form a very important addition to our knowledge of Buddhist philosophy 
and religion, history and philology.’ In the opinion of Dr. Barnett, ‘the 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


XIX 


publication of this fine spiritual puspdnjali is a puny a of a high order and 
Dr. Law has laid the world of scholarship under a deep debt of gratitude to 
him.* 

TJ ie D. A\ B bandar kar Volume edited by Dr. Law has been well received 
by Indian and Eurc>i>ean scholars all over the world. It is undoubtedly 
a very valuable contribution to ancient Indian history. 

A Study of the Mahavastu and Supplement : The Mahavastu which 
is an encyclopaedia of Buddhist legends and doctrines is one of the imfiortant 
Buddhist books. Dr, Law has given a bird's-eye view of this text. He has 
‘ succeeded in reducing its confused mass to a comprehensive shape,’ as Dr. 
Hopkins points out. Dr. Barnett considers it to be 4 a very helpful book 
which may serve as a guide to the student through the wilderness of the 
original text.’ Rapson congratulates him on * his patience in analysing this 
encyclopaedia of Buddhist lore and his skill in making such an interesting 
selection from its contents.’ The celebrated German Indologist Hermann 
Jacobi remarks that 4 all student* *of Buddhism will be glad to use this guide 
to the bewildering contents of that important text/ 

Dr. Law has published in DevanS&ari characters the texts of the Ddthd - 
rawsa ( the history of the Uxrth-relic ) and the Cariydpitaka \ the collection 
of ways of avnriuct ) with their English translations. 

lie has also enriched Bengali literature by his well-known publications 
entitled Gautama Buddha . Licchavi Jdtu Preta Tattva , Bauddharamani , 
Bauddhnyugcr Bhugola, Jainagum Malta vim , Bharat er Punydhtlw, and 
Sound ar ananda Kdvya. He has translated Asvaghosa’s Saundarananda 
Kdvyu into Bengali language long before the appearance of Johnston's Eng- 
lish translation, which acknowledges the help derived from Dr. Law’s Ben 
gali rendering of the work. 

The Law of Gift in British India t First Edition 1924 and second Edi- 
tion 1926) : This book collects in one. place all that is to be said on the 
subject of gifts, a subject upon which the theocratic principles of Hindu 
Law do not always coincide with the secular view of Roman a ml English 
Jurisprudence, and what is its modern equivalent in this country/the rules 
of justice, equity and good conscience. Tt is a complete and comprehensive 
treatise on a subject which is often before the Courts. It is an intelligent 
attempt to co-ordinate the texts and case-notes into a coherent commentary 
which is bound to be of use to legal practitioner?. A critical study of the 
ancient, texts and. of the improvements made by judicial decisions on the law 
laid down in the texts are not the least interesting features of the work. The 
book discloses great originality and research and is bound to provoke 
thought on the theories put forward by the author who ha? fully dealt with 
the entire £ase-law up-to-date. 

A jurist of repute like Sir George Rankin remarks that ‘ the exposition 



XX 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


of the principles of the Law of Gift is clear and his discussion of the case- 
law is well -arranged and accurate.* 

It may be noted that many of Dr. Law's works have found their pub- 
lishers in several learned Societies such as the Royal Asiatic Society of 
(heat Britain and Ireland, the Pali Text Society of England, the Kern In- 
stitute of Holland, the Archaeological Department of the Government of 
India, the University of Calcutta, the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti- 
tute, the Calcutta Geographical Society, the Archaeological Department of the 
Gwalior State, and the Indian Research Institute. Calcutta. * 

The above record is to be considered not as a mere personal record of 
Dr. Laws intellectual work and achievements. It has an imixjrtant public 
aspect, showing to what extent Indian history in general, and Buddhism in 
particular, arc indebted to the strenuous and sustained labours and researches 
of one man. and of one who has consecrated himself to a career of painstaking 
scholarship and has been ‘‘living laborious days" in a rare spirit of self' 
denial and asceticism, eschewing a life of leisure and ease appointed for him 
by his affluence. Very few scholars of his social position and standing have 
to their credit such a dedicattxl life or have lived to see its rich fruition and 
fruitage in the publication of such a remarkable series of original studies 
marked by a uniform standard ol erudition and scientific method, and also 
including among these, editions of valuable Buddhist: Texts and their tran- 
slations. 

In this connection a reference may also be made to what is not so much 
known outside the inner circle of his friends. U is the help that he has 
been always rendering to his poor fellow* workers in the field of Research by 
way of granting them subventions in aid of their publications. He has been 
also rendering that, help in another form by undertaking financial resjwnsi- 
biiity for conducting that renowned Research Journal known as the “ Indian 
Culture " on behalf of the Indian Research Institute of Calcutta. Tribute 
is due to Dr. I^aw for his efficient editorship of this important Journal. 

He is one of the editors of the Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeo- 
logy published by the Korn Institute, Holland. He acted for sometime as 
the editor of Bengal , Past and Present, which it the organ of the Calcutta 
Historical Society. 

Besides books, Dr. Law has tu his credit numerous papers contributed 
by him on the basis of laborious and much original research to different 
learned Journals and also to Conferences. The total output of his activities 
in this field may be understood from the list given below : 

A, Contributions to Commemoration and Presentation Volumes : 
K. B. Pathak Commemoration Volume : 

Social, Economical and Religious Conditions of Ancient India, accord- 
ing to the Buddhist Texts. 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


xxi 

Dr. S. Krishnasivami Aiyangar Commemoration Volume , 1936 : 

South JLndia as a centre of Pali Buddhism. 

Woolner Commemoration Volume t 1940 : 

Drugs and Diseases known to the Early Buddhists. 

Stadia Indo-Irmica (Ehrengabe Fur Wilhelm Geiger) , 1931 : 

“ Cetiya ,f in Buddhist Literature. 

Dr. Bhagtvanlal Indraji Commemoration Volume . 1939 : { Journal of the 

Gujarat "Research Society, Vol. I, No. 4. October, 1939). 

Dependent Origination. 

A Volume, of Studies in Indology presented to Prof . P. V. Kane , 1941 : 
The Andhras in Ancient India. 

jaindchdrya Shrl Atman and Centenary Commemoration Volume , 1936 : 
Teachings of Mnhaviira. 

Prtif. K. V. Ratngaswami Aiyangar Commemoration Volume, 19 W \ 
Mathura. 

The. Cultural Heritage of India < Sri Ramakrishna Centenary Memorial, 

voi. n. 

Eschatological Aspect of Nirvaija. 

Hartrprasada Sumvardhana-Lekhamdld, 2nd Vol. 

Pracina Bharater Rajnaitik Avast ha. 

D. R. hfhatidarkar Volume. 1940 : 

Contemporaneity of the Kings of India and Ceylon. 

Radha Kurnud Mookerji Presentation Volume { Bhdrata- Kaumudi) : 
Buddhist Rules of Decorum. 

B. Contributions to Conferences 
Indian History Congress ( 3rd Session, Calcutta, 1939 ) : 

Contemporaneity of the kings of India and Ceylon. 

Third Oriental Conference, Madras, 1924 : 

The Buddhist Conception of Mara. 

Fourth Oriental Conference, Allahabad, 1926 : 

Female character as depicted in the Pali Texts. 

Oriental Conference at Benares 1943 : 

Ayodhya in Ancient India. 

Presidential Address at. the inaugural meeting of the Bharali Buddha Parisad 
held on 1 P-5-43 : 

Buddha Gautama. 



xxu 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


Presidential Address delivered at the Vaisakhl Piirnbnd Anniversary Day 
convened by the Mahabodhi Society in 1944 : 

Sakyasirpha. (Mahabodhi Journal. May -June 1944 ). 

Lecture delivered at the Discussion Meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal on the 3rd August. 1944 : 

Ancient Historic Sites of Bengal, illustrated by lantern slides. 

C. Contributions to learned Journals 
IRAS 

(1) Formulation of Pratltyasamutpada ( April, 1937 ). 

(2) Some Observations on the Jatakas ( April, 1939 ). 

JASB : 

(1) A Note on Buddhaghosa’s Commentaries ( N. S., XV, 1919, 
No. 3;. 

(2) Influence of the five heretical teachers on Jainism and Buddhism 
«N. S„ XV. 1919, No. 3 ). 

(3) A short account ol wandering teachers at the time ol the Buddha 
( N, S.. XIV. 1918. No. 7 >. 

■ 4} Taxila as a Seat of Learning in Pali Literature ( N. S., XII, No. 
1, 1916). 

(5) The Licehavis in Ancient India •' N S„ XVI). No. 3, 1921 ). 

(6) Data from the Sumahgalavilqsint, Bucldhaghosas Commentary on 
the Digha Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka ( N. S.. XXI, No. 1, 1925 ), 

(7) Anga and Campa in Pali Literature (N. S.. XXL No. I, 1925). 

( S ) Gautama Buddha and the Paribrajakas ( N. S., XXI, No. 1, 
1925 ). 

(9) The Asmakas or Assakas in Ancient India ( N. S., XX, 1924 ), 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute : 

(1) Geographical Data from Sanskrit Buddhist Literature ( Vol. XV, 
1934, Oct.- Jan ). 

(2) Pali Chronicles (Vol. XIII. Pts. I1I-1V). 

(3) Countries and Peoples of India ( Epic and Paurariic Sources ) 
!( Vol. XVII, 1936, pp. 217-242 & 319-339 }. 

(4) Some Ancient Indian Tribes (Vol. XXII, Pts. 1 & II, 1913 ). 

(5) Non-Canonical Pali Literature ( Vol. XIII. Pt. 11;. 

(6) Nirvar.ia and Buddhist Laymen ( Vol. XIV, 1933 ). 

(7) Magadha and Rajagriha in Pali Literature (Vol. XIII). 

(8) Chronology of Pali Canon ( Vol. XII ) 

(9) Ancient Indian Tribes (Vol. XXI ). 

(10) Mind in the Dhammapada (Vol. XIX). 

Epigraphia Indica : 

(1) A Pali Counterpart of the Nalanda Text of Pratltyasamutpada- 
yibhafiga ( Vol. XXIII, Pt. VI ). 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH XXlii 

(2) BhikkhuflJ in Indian Inscriptions (Vol. XXV, pt. 5). 

JBBRAS : . 

(1) Studies in the Apadana (N. S., Vol. 13, 1937). 

(2) Buddha’s First Discourse ( N. S., Vol. 15, 1939 ). 

(3) Tlie Ahgas in Ancient India (N. S., Vol. 20. 1944). 

Indian Culture : 

(1) Some Ancient Indian Tribes (Vol. I, pp. 381-91 & Vol. VII, 
No. 2). # 

(2) Kosala ( Vol. 1, No. 3. pp, 521-3 ). 

(3) The Van gas ( Vol. 1, No. 1. p. 57 ). 

(4) Some Notes on Tribes of Ancient India ( Vol. 1, No. 2 ). 

(5) Buddhist Paramitia (Vol. 1. p. 885). 

(6) Did Asoka become a Bhikkhu ? (Vol. I). 

(7) Importance of the Bhabru Edict ( Vol. I ). 

(8) The Damijas ( Vol. Ill 

(91 Assets of Nirvana (Vol. II). 

(10) Asvagho?a the Poet t.Vol. Ill, No. I). 

(11) Asvaghosa the Philosopher (Vol, III. No. 1). 

(12) ATicient. Indian Tribes (Vol. Ill, No. 4). 

! 13) Distinguished Men and Women in Jainism < Vol. Ill ). 

(M) Telakatahagatha :( verses on oil-pot) (Vol. V, p. 25). 

Journal of Indian History : 

( T) The Pundias of Ancient Bengal (Vol. XII). 

(2) Buddha's Life in Art (Vol. XVIII ). 

(3) The Ambasthais ( Vol. XIII ). 

(4) The Kja-Ss in Ancient India (Vol. IV). 

(5) Some Tribes of Ancient India (Vol. XX. Pt. I ). 

(8) The Utkalas end Udras in Ancient India (Vol. XIX, Pt 3). 

Journal of the V. P, Historical Society : 

(1) . The Malavas in Ancient India ( Vol. VII, Pt. 2 ). 

(2) Sacrod Places of (he Jains. 

(3) Sacred Places of the Vaisnavas (Vol. X. No. 1). 

Journal of the Department of Letters, Calcutta University : 

Buddhist Conception of Dharma ( Vol. XXVIII, 1935 ). 

Journal of the Bihar & Orissa Research Society : 

Buddhaghosa's Visits to Ceylon and Burma and his reminiscences of 
the Island of Lajhka (Vol, VIII. Pt. I. 1922 ). 

Jaina Gazette : 

Vividha-tirtha-kalpa ( Vol. XXXV, No. 12, Dec., 1938 ; Vol. XXXVI, 
No. 1, January, 1939 ; No. 3, March, 1939 ; No. 6, June, 1939 ; No. 7, July, 
1939 ; No. 8, August, 1939). 



XXIV 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


Jaina Antiquary : 

(1) The Kalpasutra, ( Vol. II, No. 4 ). , 

(2) Vais (ill and Mahdvira. 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society : 

(1) The Yaudheyas in Ancient India ( Vol. XXV). 

(2) Geographical References in the Ceylonese Chronicles ( Vol. XXII ). 

(3) Pali Tracts in Inscriptions ( Vol. XXII, N. S., No. 4. p. 399 ). 

(4) Mathura : An Ancient Indian City (Vol. XXXII, No., 1, July. 

1941, p. I ). 

(5) A short account of the Damikis ( Vol. XXVII. p. 26). 

Vi ra (Vol. IV, Nor. 12 & 13, Jayanti Number): 

(T) Jnatrika Kjatri aur Bhagvtin Mahavira (p. 276 1 . 

(2) Vardhamana Maliavlra ( p. 346 ). 

Indian Antiquary : 

Buddhist Women ( 192S, March-May ). 

New Indian Antiquary : 

(1) Flying Mechanism in Ancient: India (Vol. II. No. 1. April. 1939. 

p. 62 ). 

(2) Arjunayanas : Prarjunas (Vol. I, No. 7, October 1938). 

(3) A Note on Some Ancient Indian Tribes ( Vol. I, No. 9, Dec.. 
1928. 598-99 ). 

(4) Expansion of Buddhism in India and Abroad ( Vol. II. 1939-40. 
pp. 695-710 & Vol. III. 1940-41. pp. 17-28 ). 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology (published by the Kern Insti- 
tute ). 

Publications relating to Ancient Indian Geography ( Vol. X. p. 12 ). 

Buddha Prabhd ( Journal of the Buddha Society, Bombay ) : . 

(1) Jivaika Komarabhncca (Vol. VI, pp. 1029-36 ). 

(2) Buddha and Contemporary Teachers ( Vol. VII. pp. 1122-26, 
April, 1939 ). 

Buddhism in England : 

Caste in Early Buddhism ( Vol. VIII, 1933, p. 15 ). 

Science and Culture : 

Sir Alexander Cunningham ( Vol. V, p. 410 ). 

The Buddhist : 

(1) Gautama Buddha (June, 1936). 

(2) Buddhist Cave Temples in India ( Vesak Number, May, 1937 ).. 

(3) Nalanda ( May & June 1934, Vol. V. Nos. 1 & 2). 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


XXV 


Journal of the Ganganath Jha Research Institute : 

Ayodhya in Ancient India (Vol. I., pt. 4, 1944 ). 

The Indian Geographical Journal, Madras : 

Ancient Indian Geography (Jan. -March 1944, Vol. XIX, No. 1). 
Pracyavant—lhe Journal of the Pracyavutii Mandira, April 1944, Vol. I, 

No. 2 : 

Malpvira and his Doctrine. 

Amrita Bazar Patrika : 

(1) Ca<le System in Buddhist. India (Pujah Number, 1933). 

(2) Tribal Organisations in Ancient India (Pujah Number, 1943). 

(3) Indian Rivers (Pujah Number, 1914). 

Hmduslhan Standard : 

Mountains and Hills in India ^Aijah Number, 1944). 

Calcutta Geographical Review : 

■ 1) Holy Places in Soufh India (September, 1940). 

:2) Geography in National Life (Vol. Ill, No. '£•, September, 1941). 

Mahahodhi : 

(1) Magadha of the Orient (Vol. XL1II). 

; \1 ) Sukha-Dukha in Buddhism (March-April, 1944). 

Calcutta Police Journal : 

City Guards in Ancient India (Vol. I, No. IV, p. 292). 

Landholders Journal : 

Bengal Zemindars (Vol. VII, No. 5, February, 1939, p. 362). 
Arya>\Path : 

Reincarnation in Buddhism (November, 1940, Vol. XI, No. 11, p. 569). 
Calcutta Review : 

Manners and Customs of the Licchavis of Ancient India (June, 1922). 
Indian Historical Quarterly : 

(1) The Kosaias in Ancient India (Vol. I, No. 1, March 1925), 

(2) Marriage in Buddhist Literature (Vol. II, No. 3, September 1926). 

Snbhfcrati : 

(1) Anathapindika (Bliadra. 1345 B.S.). 

(2) Jainaguru Mahavlra (Agrahayaija and Pau§, 1345 b.s.). 

(3) Telakatahagatha, (VaiSakha, 1346 b.s.). 

(4) Buddhadever Prathama Dharmopadesa (Agrahayaija, 1346 B.s.). 

(5) Sir Alexander Cunningham (Caitra, 1346 B.s.). 



XXVi BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Vaisyasakti : 

Bauddhasahitye Strfcaritra (Caitra, 1335 & Vaisakha and Jaistha, 
1336 b.s.). 

Suvai navanik-samacaia : 

(!1) Suvarnavanik Jatir Varna Ninjaya (1st Year, 1323 B.S.). 

(2) Ajatasatru (1st year, Caitra, 1323 B.s.). 

(3> Vrji-Licchavi Vivarana (1326 B.s., 3rd year). 

(4) Practnamudra Kar§apaa.ia (2nd year, ASvin, 1225 B.S.). 

(5) Taksaslla (2nd year, Kartik, 1325 B.S.). 

(6) 6antideva (4th year. Kartik. 1327 B.S.). 

<7) DTnanath Dhar ( Jais(ha, 1331 B.s., 8th year). 

(8) Paralokagata Nandalal Dey (Phalgun, 1333 B.s., 11th year). 

Sahityc pari fat Patrikfi : 

(1) Daksina Bharatavarse Pali-B'-.uddha-dharmcr Vistara (1342 b.s. 
No. 4). 

(2) Bauddha Apadiina (1344 b.s. No. 2). 

(3) Bharatiya Lekhamalayc Bauddha Bhikkhun! (50 Bhaga, 4th 
Sairikliya ) . 

SMubhamtl : 

(1) Bauddhatirthasthan (Pt. IV, pp. 1338-40). 

(2) Praclna Bharater Bauddha Visvavidyalaya (Pt. IV, pp. 1441-54) 

(3) Bharater Jaina Tirthasthan (No. 21, p. 1638). 

(4) Pradna Bharater Janapada (No. 24. p. 1890). 

(5) Praclna Bharater Samajik Avastha (No, 25, p. 1974). 

(6) Bharater Parvata O Nad! (No. 32, p. 2534). 

(7) Bharater Vai§navatlrtha (No. 34). 

(8) Brahmaputrer utsa sandhane (No. 38, p. 2987). 

Pr avail. : 

(1) Licchavidesa Vaisali (Kartik, 1328 B.s.) 

(2) VaiSallvasI (Agrahayatia, 1328 B.s.). 

(3) Videha (Pau$, 1328 b.s.}. 

(-4) Canakya O Candragupta (Magh, 1328 B.S.). 

(5) Baudhasahitye Silpa O bhaugolika tathya (Vo). XXXI, Part I, 
1338 B.8„ pp. 629-32). 

(6) Praclna Bhfirate Nagararaksi (Miagh. )348 b.s.). 

(7) Pahcfller Rajanyavarga (A$adh, 1350 n.s.). 

Bkaratavarsa : 

(\) Chayajana Bauddha Tirthikacaryer Itivrtta (Agrahayajja, 1323 

B.S. ) . 

(2) PrScana Bharater Aroavapota (Agrahayaija, 1322 B.S.). 



BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


XXVII 


(3) Bharate Naga Puja ( A$adh, 1322 B.S.). 

(4) Ranci Bhramaina, (Asvin, 1322 b.s. ). 

(5) Bharatiya Paribrajaka (Asvin, 1328 B.S.). 

(6) PiSdna Bfiarate Avanti (Jaistha, 1336 B.s.). 

(7) Vatsadesa Kausambi ('Sravarta, 1336 B.s.). 

(8) Jagannathpurer Mandir (Ranchi) (Vaisakha, 1337 B.S.). 

(9) Gautamer Vairagya O Sambodhilabha (Magha, 1337 B.s.). 

(10) Pradna Bharate Mahajanapada (Agrahayajja, 1340 B.S.). 

(11) Pradna Bharater K§atriya Jati (Caitra, 1341 B.s.'). 

( : 12) Pr&dna Bharatiya Attalika (Pau$, 1343 B.s.). 

(13) Jaina Tirthasthan (Sravana, 1344 B.s.). 

(14' Jaina guru Mahavirer Dhamiopadesa (Magha, 1245 B.S.). 

(15> Pradna Bharata (Sravana, 1346 b.s.). 

(16) Kausambi (Jaislha, 1347 B.S.). 

(17) Bharater Puoyallrtha < Agrahiayana, Paus, and Phalguy, 1348 B.s.). 

(18) Pracina Bharater Vyadhi (24th year, Pt, II, No. 1, A$adha, 1344 

B.S. ) . \. 

(19) Pandaler Rajnaitik Avastha (Jai$tha. 1350 B.S.). 

(20) Suprasiddha Jaina Nara-Nari (Abvin, 1343 b.s.1. 

(21) Sautyapura- -PtacTna Mathura cSravana, 1350 B.s.). 

(22) Pracina Bharater Bhaugolik Avastha (Vaisakha, 1351 B.s.). 

Bfon : 

Simhala-kahini (3rd year. No. 2, 1317 b.s.). 

M<ina$i : 

Tiijer SilpT Ke? ( Agrahayaija, 1318 B.s.). 

Aryan nr lift : 

(1) Pravada-Prasafiga (Jai$tha, 1319 b.s.), 

(2) Sukiyabibi O Sukiya Street (firavana, 1319 B.S.). 

Sankalpa : 

Uttarakum (Bhadra, 1321 b.s.). 

Manasi-0 Marmavanl : 

(1) BauddliaBhasyakar Dharmapiila (Falguija. 1324 b.s.). 

(2) Pracina Safhaja Prasanga (Kiartik. 1325 b.s. i. 

..(3) Buddhadever Samasamayika Paribrajakagana ( Agrahayaiia, 1325 

n.k). 

(4) Pracina Bharata-Itihase Usi'naragana ( Asadh, 1336 B.S.). 

Baswmlt : 

Pracina Bharate Paribrajakagaija (Jaistfia. 1336 b.s.). 



XXViii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Pancapuspa : 

(1) Pracinayuge MathuravasI Surasenagana (Anivana, 1336* B.S.). 

(2) Praanayuge Paftealagaoa (Agrahayapa, 1336 b.s.). 

Vicilra : 

(1) Pracina Cedigapa O Cedirajya (Asadh, 1336 b.s.), 

(2) Pracina Bharate Kuiu vaqisa (Agrahayana and Pau§. 1336 b.s.). 

Puspapdtra : » 

Pracina Bharate Matsyagana (Sravapa, 1336 b.s.). 

The above constitutes a unique record of learning and scholarship, of libe- 
rality and philanthropy, deserving of public and permanent recognition in a 
fitting form such as that projected in (his Presentation Volume made up of 
learned articles contributed by so many scholars of different lands as tokens 
of their appreciation of Dr. Birnala Churn Law’s life and work. 


Rami a Kumud Mookerji. 



E< v R AT A 


Page 83 Read of instead of or. 


„ 133 

„ tvordly 

I* 

t , worldly* 

., 142 

„ or 

it 


219 

„ married 


„ carried . 

„ 275 

„ delineate 


„ delicate. 

409 

, f disembodied 

it 

„ embodied . 

„ 499 

„ Ka ran a-c in id main 

M 

„ Kaana- child m an i 

., 520 

„ At hole Inscription 

!) 

„ Ihole Inscription 

„ 521 

„ Yuan Chwang 


„ Uyan Chateau*. 

„ 529 

lf religions 

it 

„ religions. 


tract 


,, track. 


ADDENDUM 

I \ddcndurn to Dr. R. C. Mazumdars article “ The Chronology of 
the Early Kings of Nepal. 1 

No notice has been taken of Mr. Jayaswal's article on “The Chronology 
and History of Nepal ” ( JliORS. XXII, 137 ff.) and Mr. K. G. Sankar's arti- 
cle on “The Early Chronology of Nepal’’ illlQ. XI, 30-111)- The first is 
based on a scries of arbitral y assumptions backed by fallacious and specious 
arguments, which it would Ire a long and tedious task to refute in detail. The 
conclusions arrived at are also so complicated by a rearrangement of the entire 
list of kings given in the Vamsiivaiis that it would take many pages to set 
them forth in a clear light. Mr. Sankar’s article is inspired by the theory 
of Yasodharman-Vikramaditya which no scholar accepts now-a-days and is 
mainly based on astronomical data. It is interesting to note, however, that 
the results of his astronomical calculations are very different from those 
adopted by Fleet* Levi and Jayaswal. This indirectly supports what I have 
said above regarding the vajue of these data. 1 may add that Mr. Jayaswal 
followed Fleet in referring the date 386 of Mfinadeva to the Gupta era and 
placing the group of kings from Vpsadeva to Mfinadeva after Sivadeva 
and Arhguvarman. Mr. Sankar regards Amsuvarman as the Viceroy of Yaso- 
dharman and thus places him about a century before Hiucn Tsang. None of 
th^ can be regarded even as probable hypotheses. 




HOMO SAPIENS 


By 

The Mysl Hon. the MARQUIS OF ZETLAND, k.g., G.c.r.E. 

On a clay in July in the. year 1943. 1 was sitting on the stonepaved 
terrace which runs along the wing of the house in which my writing room is. 
situated, meditating, as I often found myself doing in the comparative leisure 
which retirement from Government office had brought me, upon the astonish- 
ing spectacle presented by the: human race devoting an unparalleled concentra- 
tion of effort on the task, as it seemed, of exterminating itself. Although the 
hands, on the dial of my watch pointed to six o'clock, the sun was still high 
m the heavens and cast foreshortened shadows from (he trees over die growth 
of rank grasses which covered what, in happier clays had been smoothly mown 
lawns. On tiu: sundial nearby, the slowly moving shadow disputed the in- 
formation given me by my watch to the extent of no less than two hours, 
for with a view to saving the fuel normally consumed in the production of 
artificial light and to giving the hard worked population the chance of re- 
creation in the open air at the end of the day's toil, it had been decreed that 
by the simple expedient of putting forward the hands of the clock, daylight 
should be prolonged to that extent but one of many indications of the abnor- 
mality of the times which had overtaken this man-made world of which we 
found ourselves the protesting but helpless denizens. The weeds and general 
air of unkemptness which met my gaze ; the entire absence of activity which 
was responsible for the triumph of the riotous vegetation over the former 
orderliness of gravel walk and well kept lawn — for under the system of 
rigid regimentation which had been imposed upon us, evciy male between 
childhood and old age, whether a gardener, or one employed on any kind of 
I>eace-time work whatsoever, had been wrenched away from his normal occu- 
pation— were others, as were also the bulletins issued on the air at regular 
intervals during the twenty four hours, describing the daily progress made 
in the process of extermination in the various theatres of war. 

On the back of the garden seat on which I was sitting were chiselled deep 
into the wood words which had once seemed to be full of a sweet content, 
but which now rang with a hollow note : — 

* " The kiss of the sun for pardon ; 

The song of the birds for mirth ; 

Man is nearer God’s Heart in a garden 
Than anywhere else on earth.” 



V 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The song of the birds for mirth? There was little enough mirth in these 
sombre days : moreover the song of the birds was drowned in a sea of rau- 
cous noise and the erstwhile jx'ace of the garden was constantly being sliat- 
tered by the sinister drone of aeroplanes -giant four-engined bombers and 
more agile and lithsome fighters — as they streaked across the sky ; by the 
rumble of monster tanks as they clawed their way along the high road nearby, 
for not far away was a vast military cantonment, and by the (jatterned ex- 
plosion of projectiles of many calibres on the moorland beyond, the trtvs 
which had formerly pastured flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, but which, 
since it now served the purpose of a tank range, had hocome. a no-man’s land 
of repulsive desolation from which the grouse and other wild life which had 
formerly found a happy home there, had fled abashed. 

As I sat rtondciing these- things on the summer afternoon in question, a 
letter, come by the afternoon jxist and beating an Indian stamp and postmark, 
was put into my hands. The postmark showed that it had been many weeks 
ori the way. which, in the circumstances, was not surprising, lot with battles 
on a vast scale raging along the Mediterranean sea-board and with the sewn 
seas infested with hostile submarines, the routing of ships had for long been 
an uncertain business. But long though it had been on the way, its eventual 
arrival at its destination was none the less welcome, for it brought me news 
of one with whose work as the historian of an age which presented so pleasing 
a contrast witli the present. 1 had long been familiar ; and I found myself 
sjieeding back in imagination to a day a quarter of a century ago when, from 
the summit of the ruin of an ancient lower -no less a building than the 
famous Pippala stone house marking the site of the former city of Rajagiha. 
of which the Chinese pilgrim Fa-Mien has left a record— 1 gazed over the 
dusty landscape spread over the Patna District of Bihar. 

For me much of the charm of Dr. Bimala Charan Law's work dciives 
from the fact that he succeeds in clothing with flesh and blood the dry 
bones, which are all that are left, to mark the scene of the life and times of a 
race of men who flourished nigh on 2.500 years ago. Apart from certain 
superficial mounds there is nothing to be seen to-day to distinguish Basarh, 
in the Muzafiferpur District in Tirliul. from any one of the numerous other 
villages dotted over the landscajxi of the modern Province of Bihar, just as, 
amid the drab hills of the Patna District hardby. then* is little beyond the 
ruins of walls and an ancient watch-tower built of blocks of undressed stone, 
to break the monotony of the view. Yet with a copy of ** The Rjatriya 
Clans of Buddhist India” as an aid, these modest relics of the past bour- 
geon into life once more and in place of the empty landscajrc we sec, as in a 
vision, flourishing cities and peoples, priests and rxitentatcs, playing their al- 
lotted part in the great drama of human history — Vaisall. the capital of the 
Licchavis and Head-quarters of the great and powerful Vajjian Confederacy ; 
Rajagrha, “ The King’s House ”, capital of Magadha ; Bimbisara and Ajata- 



HOMO SAPIENS 


3 


satru who lived and reigned there ; and, more particularly, men of venerable, 
bearing, leading lives of asceticism and discoursing on the higher problems of 
religion and ethics in the mango groves abounding in the neighbourhood of. 
the cities, or in the mote-halls in which gatherings of the jicople were held. 

While the picture painted for us by Dr. Law of these early inhabitants 
of the lands washed by the waters of the sacred Ganges is an attractive one, 
the painter does not seek to depict them either as a race of saint, or of sujier- 
mon ; but rather as people with a zest for life and with the shortcomings no 
less than*the virtues inherent in human nature. Me makes it clear that war 
was not unknown amongst them, for they prided themselves on being of the 
martial caste, while those who occupied the throne, where the State was or- 
ganised on a monarchical basis, were by no means deaf to the promptings of 
ambition. So far as their personal characteristics are concerned, he shows 
us tiie Licchavis iti particular, as a handsome race, fond of display and of 
iine iaimcnt, an affluent people, the owners of chariots and horses, yet hardy 
withal. Their young men. it is to lie noted, were high spirited with a pas- 
sion for manly sports, and no strangei's to the escapades common to hot- 
blooded youth all the* world over. Yet no doubt is left in our minds that 
if they found pleasure in the company oi courtesans, the sacrament of mar- 
riage was rigidly respected and a high standard of chastity demanded of 
their womenfolk. 

We see that the standard of civilisation evolved by them was a high one, 
and that with all their virile qualities they were lovers of the line arts : that 
among the people generally arts and crafts wcie highly develop'd, while the 
grandeur and variety of their buildings testified to the skill alike of their 
architects and their artisans. In brief, we derive the impression that what. 
Pericles said of Athens, might equally have been said of Vaisali, namely, that 
the Licchavis had provided education and recreation for the spirit and beauty 
in their public buildings which delighted their hearts by day and banished 
sadness . 

It is further made clear to us that their social and political organisation 
was on a correspondingly high level ; for side by side with the monarchical 
form of Government which flourished south of the Ganges in Magadha, there 
existed on the north side of the river the Republics of the Licchavis and 
other clans whose administration was earned out through the agency of power- 
ful Corporations of the citizens meeting in public assembly. 

In short, what we find in the picture presented to us, is a microcosm of 
civilised humanity as it evolved and spread over the earth ; and we ask 
ourselves, if the vignette which we. are given of the life and times of these 
Ksalriya dans is, broadly speaking a replica of innumerable other tableaux 
which go to the making of the vast and chequered panorama of human his- 
tory, what is it that gives to it a quite outstanding importance of its own ? 



4 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


To that question there can be but one answer ; it is the simultaneous appear- 
ance, as the most striking feature of the composition, of two dramatic figures, 
one a citizen of VaisalT, the other a member of the smaller clan of the Sak- 
yas dwelling in the foothills of the Himalayas three or four hundred miles 
to the north west— two members of the fraternity of Sramanas, or wander- 
ing ascetics, whose teaching, differing no doubt in some at least of its phi- 
losophical connotations, achieved immortality by the stress which it laid 
in its ethical aspect, upon the doctrine of loving kindness fahimsa) which 
five hundred years later on the shores' of the Lake of Galilee, was reiterat- 
ed with similar emphasis by another of the supreme figures in world his- 
tory, that of Jesus of Nazareth. 

Mahavlra of Vaisali, Buddha of Kapilavastu. Christ of Nazareth ; how 
different a world should we not lx* living in to-day, f thought as the rumble 
of tank and the drone of aeroplane broke in upon my ear once more, if 
men had not turned their backs upon the code of conduct common to all 
three and expressed succinctly by Jesus of Nazareth when, in reply to a 
question on the subject of the greatest, commandments of the law put by 
a spokesman of the Pharisees who sought to embarrass him. he replied 
simply—-" Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." 


As the rumble of tanks and the- drone of the aeroplanes wakened me 
from my day dream, there arose in my mind a very different picture. In 
no city of the modern world, I thought, would a Maluivira, a Buddha or a 
Christ cut a more incongruous figure than in Berlin, or Munich, or almost 
any other German city. For hero there has been evolved a philosophy of 
life and a code of conduct the very antithesis of those proclaimed these? 
many centuries ago in the Ganges valley and on the shores of the Lake of 
Galilee. Throughout Germany, indeed, where totalitarianism has found its 
most complete expression, the virtues of Jainism, of Buddhism and of 
Christianity are ridiculed as the most contemptible of human weaknesses, 
and a will to power is stridently proclaimed as the governing principle of 
human conduct. All freedom, not action only but of thought also, is denied 
to the individual who is held to be. of no account ; while God as the. object 
of worship has been supplanted by the State. 

In a system of which the central tenet is the purely pagan doctrine 
that might is right, there, is clearly no place for any moral law ; and its 
absence has been made manifest by a whole series of appalling crimes, of 
which the sadistic persecution of the Jews and the almost incredible bru- 
talities inflicted upon the hapless peoples whose lands have been overrun, 
are but examples. It is equally clear that amongst a people imbued with 
the ideas which form the basis of the German conception of the Reich, a 
high degree of racial arrogance and a widespread exaltation of war will be 



HOMO SAPIENS 


b 


outstanding characteristics. Even so. it might have been supposed that a 
whole people, in spite of the emphasis laid on the sense of satisfaction to 
be derived from the infliction of cruelty by a writer of the fame of Nietzs- 
che, would scarcely have been found willing to raise pure cruelty to the 
level of the highest virtues. Yet this is precisely what they have been 
willing to do, and the explanation of this sinister phenomenon is to lx; 
found in the success of a campaign of propaganda Extending over a long 
period of time. The leaders of German thought, and notably men like 
Clausewitfh and Moltke, knew well, indeed, how to wean their people 
from any such weaknesses as were to be attributed to those whom they re- 
garded as tire decadent and effeminate races. The argument was almost: 
childishly simple ; war. according to Moltke, was in itself part of the uni- 
versal order of things instituted by God - who when Moltke wrote had not. 
been wholly superseded by the State -and the purtrose for which it had been 
ordained, namely, tire ennobling of the human tact.* through suffering, must, 
not be frustrated by any illogical attempt to humanise it. War was intended 
nr be brutal, and the more, brutal that it ivas and the greater the suffering that 
it caused, the better it served the purpose for which it had been ordained. 

Neither was it military writers like Clausewilch, Moltke and Bern- 
hard! alone who played u|wn the baser instincts of the people and by the 

demoralisation- "using the word in its primary meaning— which they 

brought about, induced the desired degree of war mentality amongst them. 
Writers in many walks of life— Frederick the Great and Bismarck in the 
ranks of the politicians ; Nietzsche among the philosophers ; Mommsen, 
Sybel and Treitchke among the historians, are but a lew of those who 
during the 19th century poured forth a stream of poisonous propaganda 
directed to a single end. And the harvest of this baleful sowing was gar- 
nered in a beer hall in Munich by the 1 founder of the Nazi Party and his 
more immediate associates, '( lie re is no doubt that in his fevered imagi- 
nation, Adolf Hitler, the inefficient corporal of the earlier world war, saw 
himself as the world's greatest sujierman and the German people of whom 
he was the archetype and preordained leader, as the chosen race, the Her- 
renvolk, high gods among puny mortals, destined to inherit the earth and 
to exercise domination over its peoples. 

That there should exist a man suffering from these delusions is, in it- 
self, a matter of little significance ; it merely indicates the presence in the 
particular individual of a pathological condition well known to the medi- 
cal profession under the name of paranoia, which frequently takes the form 
of persecutory, or ambitious mania. What is significant is the fact that 
a whole people should have allowed themselves to become hypnotised by 
so dangerous a charlatan. The explanation is to lie found, of course, in the 
steady undermining of the nation's belief in the reality of spiritual and 
moral values, brought about by the insidious stream of propaganda of which a 



B, C. LAW VOLUME 


mere indication has been given above. Much more might be said under this 
head ; but there is no need to elaborate, for the evil teaching ol-a century is 
epitomised by Adolf Hitler himself in that most revealing and cynical of 
human documents, Mein Kampf. Moreover there is another aspect of the 
catastrophe in which mankind is involved which calls for comment, if any 
attempt is to he made to see it and its causes as a whole. 


It is not only the peoples of the aggressor States whose outlook upon 
life, has become unbalanced by the spectacular achievements which during 
recent years have crowned the strivings of civilised man on the material 
plane. For if in the case of the aggressor States the inventive genius and 
ykill of the scientist have been prostituted to the perfecting of man’s capa- 
city for making war, amongst, the Western Democracies they have been 
directed too exclusively towards effecting increases in his material prospe- 
rity. The fatal mistake has been made, as a recent American writer has 
put it. of regarding civilisation “as a by-product of economic progress,” 
whereas. “ the essence of civilisation is a restraint, imposed by divine law 
or by reason, upon the instincts of man In short, in the cast' of the 
one as in the case of the other, man’s outlook has become unbalanced be- 
cause his progress on the physical plane has outstripped his advance along 
the moral and spiritual plane?. 

The theme is one? on which much might 1* written ; but. it is to the 
future that we must look to redress the. evils of the past, and what is vital 
in estimating the chances of the survival of civilisation is that there, should 
be signs of a dawning realisation that for his moral and spiritual well being 
man must turn back once more to the* simple truths taught him in the 
Ganges valley and in Palestine long centuries ago. Happily such signs are 
not altogether wanting. 

'<■ if .*■ 

Here in England, even while the battle is at its height and it is still 
only with the eye of faith that the dawn of victory can be glimpsed on the 
far horizon, there are many signs that men’s tninds, occupying themselves 
with the planning of the new world which they hope to see rising from the 
ashes of the old, are permeated with an ever growing consciousness of the 
spiritual and moral issues involved. In the space at. nty disposal nothing 
more than an indication of the general trend of thought is possible ; let 
two pointers suffice to serve my purpose. 

The Atlantic Charter, signed by the Prime Minister of Great Britain 
and the President of the United States on August the 12th, 1941, is a 
great document of State and as such is primarily concerned with political 


I. "A Time for Greatness”, by Herbert Agar. 



HOMO SAPIENS 


7 


and economic issues. It is of all the more significance, therefore, that the 
word '‘spiritual” should find a place in its phraseology — the first time in 
all probability that the word has crept into any such State paper. In 
(joint 8 of the Declaration the two signatories proclaim their belief that - 
for practical reasons, certainly ; but no less for spiritual reasons— all the 
nations of the world must, come to the abandonment of forces ; in other 
words that the pagan doctrine on which German authoritarianism is based, 
must give way once more to the Buddhist and Christian doctrines ot lov- 
ing kindness and unselfishness, which in their turn require that recognition 
be accorded to the right of the individual to he regarded as something moie 
than a mere cog in the soulless mechanism of the Totalitarian Slate ; to 
claim, indeed, as Mr. Herbert Agar, writing from the standpoint of Chris- 
tianity. puts it, no less a thing than equality in God -“in the divine spark 
which gives abiding valu* to the individual soul." 

Thai, is the basis on which civilisation must stand if it is to survive that 
one and all, the casual labourer and .the merchant prince, tlije crossing- 
sweeper and the dweller in palaces, the. sudra and the brahmin, are. equal 
in God. And it is in consonance with the stress laid upon the picciousnoss 
of the individual soul in Christian teaching, that here in England Govern- 
ment and Parliament alike are devoting their attention to the education 
and upbringing of the individual child. And this brings me to my second 
pointer, chosen for the reason that the worthiness, or otherwise, of the new 
world to survive, must depend in the main on the fitness of the children 
of to-day to be its citizens. 

1 have spoken of education and upbringing ; let it not be thought that 
in doing so I am guilty of tautology. Education rightly considered may, 
as a recent writer has observed, constitute a philosophy of life. Bui: where 
and how often has education been rightly considered ■ The same writer 
answers the question when he says “ If there is any truth in the recapi- 
tulatory hypothesis of the evolutionary biologist . . . then morally every 
baby born is a stone-age baby and in a decade or so has to be pulled up 
from a stone-age morality to that of a civilised morality ; whereas, on the 
other hand, knowledge is cumulative and each age inherits the inventions, 
the learning and the institutions of its predecessors;” and he concludes 
that “the problem of problems for education is how to speed up our ethics 
and to bring them into line with our scientific knowledge.” 1 

The expression of the above view would be of less significance if it 
were not lor the lact that the writer has put into a sentence what a large 
and growing number of people are thinking. There is, indeed, an increasing 
distrust of a system of education whose curricula are confined to secular 
subjects and a growing sense: of the urgency of fostering in the mind of the 

1. T. Evcrard M , A . . in the Hibbert Journal, January, 1943. 



8 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


pupil an awareness of spiritual and moral values ; of raising him as Mr. 
Everard puts it, from the moiality of the stone-age to that of civilisation. 
Evidence of this is widespread. A strong Committee appointed by the 
President of the Board of Education in 1941 , 1 found a very general feeling 
that Christianity could not be called a failure, because it had never been 
tried and an instinctive desire, particularly among the young that it should be 
tried 41 both within and between the nations, and in no formal and conven- 
tional manner." They added that there was -evidence from Jhc higher 
schools, the Universities and various student and youth associations, that 
among the rising generation there was a movement of minds impatient of 
bare formularies, yet eager for the truth. " a feeling after God if haply they 
may find him." They accepted as fundamental and true, the view express- 
ed by an earlier Committee that no boy or girl coulc! lx*, counted as pro- 
perly educated, unless he or she had been made aware of a religious inter- 
pretation of life. 

Much had already been clone -by the leaders of the denominations to 
smooth away the difficulties due to doctrinal differences, by collaboration on 
an agreed syllabus; and when, in July, 1943. the President of the Board 
of Education submitted to Parliament his scheme lor the reorganisation of 
the educational system of the country, no feature of it excited more wide- 
spread interest than his proposal for giving religious education a more 
dearly defined place in the life and work of the schools, and his declaration 
that in order to emphasise the importance ol the subject, provision would 
be made for the school day in all primary and secondary schools to begin 
with a corporate act of worship. 


1 have travelled far from my rustic scat oil the stone paved terrace 
outside, my window, as was, indeed, inevitable when my inusings began 
straying over the present plight of, and the future outlook for, the species to 
which was given— in a moment of sarcasm, it might also Ik: thought -the 
title of homo sapiens. The occasion of their doing so was, as I have ex- 
plained, the arrival of a letter which touched a chord of tender memory ; 
and it is to that letter that these discursive musings rn^st be regarded as the 
answer. 


L. Committee of the Secondary School Examinations Council, under the Chair- 
manship of Sir Cyril Norwood. 



DESPATCHES AND REPORTS IN INDIAN HISTORY 

By 

Sir JADUNATH SARKAR, m.a„ rr.s., kt., c.i.E. t Hony. d.utt., 
Ilony. M.K.A..S. (Lond.), Ilony. Fellow R.A.S.B. (Cal. ) . 

Coriesponding Member, Royal Historical Society (Eng.) 

I 

Just a century ago the gtcal German historian Leopold Von Ranke wrote, 
I see a time coming when we shall build modem histoiy no longer on the 
accounts even oi contemporary historians, except where they possessed ori- 
ginal knowledge, much less on derivative writers ; but on the relations of 
eye-witnesses and the original documents.’’ 

The modern period of Indian history may be said, in one sense, to have 
begun about the middle, of the 1 7th century, say the yeai 1658 wlien Shah 
Julian's reign *:nded at Delhi. At that time the epoch of the Wars of Reli- 
gion having been closed by the Peace of Westphalia (1648) and the English 
Restoration (1660;, the progi essive peoples of western Europe were set free 
to direct all their energies to the expansion of eastern trade and the increase 
of their national wealth ; the golden East was invaded by the hungry West, 
in the humble disguise of traders. The same thing hapixjned in India again, 
but in an intensified military form (soon leading on to political domination ) , 
after 17(33, when the Seven Years' War having conic to an end. vast numbers 
of demobilised European soldiers turned their steps to this fabled land of 
wealth and plenty, 

Happily for the student of Indian history, from about this year 1658 
has been preserved a class of our historical documents which exactly satisfy 
Ranke’s criterion, and they grow in volume and variety in the course of the 
next hundred years, till from 17(33 onwards wc have English and French, 
Persian and Maralhi-and though this last class is as yet little known and of 
small size and range, Rajasthani,- records which give us “ the relations of eye- 
witnesses.” These relations naturally fall into two classes, namely (ay offi- 
cial despatches or thfc letters of military commanders, governors and diplo- 
matic agents describing what they themselves have done or seen done by their 
subordinates, and (b) news- ref xjrtcis’ accounts of what they have seen or 
heard done by others, i.e., things of exactly the same type as modern journa- 
listic messages. 

Now, it is obvious that a wide empire can be administered from the cen- 
tre only by means of extensive letter-writing and calling for regular local 
reports. This necessity was felt as early 1 as the Persian empire of Darius, 



10 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


about which wo read. 41 To each of the satraps a royal secretary ( i.c., writer) 
was attached, who attended to the receipt and despatch of the correspondence 
between the king and the satrap." ( Cambridge Ancient History , iv, 197). The 
system was of still earlier origin, as we can judge from the Tel-el-Amarna 
tablets ; it was one of the necessities of Nature. 

Corning down to India and to more modern tunes, we find a fully deve- 
loped recording system for the first time under Akbar. Here again, wc must 
distinguish between the Court diarist and the press-reporter (if the. Matter term 
can be used when there was no press and no publicity of the news, and the 
report was contained in a hand -written “ news-letter ” for perusal by a private 
or royal patron). The tenth Ain of Book II describes a regular officer, the 
Recorder of Court incidents, whose duty 1 2 was to attend the royal court daily, 
and “write down the orders and doings of llis Majesty, whatever the heads 
of the departments report, llis Majesty's remarks, appointments, gifts etc., 
the arrival of reports (from the provinces.) and the minutes thereon, extra- 
ordinary phenomena, harvest, etc."- { Ain-i Akbari, tr. i. 258). The example 
thus set by the Mughal Emperors was imitated by their vassal princes, many 
of whom still maintain an officer called the pmchd-ivfda . for writing down 
the most trivial details of the daily doings of the Raja or Nawab and the 
occurrences of their darbar. 

From the capital the system was spread to the provinces. When in De 
eember 1579, Akbar divided his empire into twelve subahs and organised a 
regular and uniform administration for them, he appointed to each province, 
in addition to the governor, the diwdn , the bakhshi (inspector of the forces), 
the judge, etc., also a Waqa' navis or Recorder of events. ( Akbarndmah , tr. 
iii. 413). A little later, one of his highest councillors suggested to Akbar that 
“ a daily journal of events should be obtained from all the cities and towns/’ 

( Akbarndmah . tr. iii, 559). Jahangir continued this arrangement and highly 
praised it, remarking, 41 Much gain and great advantage arc to be brought 
about by it, and information is acquired about the world, and its inhabitants/ 1 
t Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, tr. i, 247 ). 

II 

In the Persian language we have a profusion of despatches funn local 
officials and commanders of detachments or specially deputed agents sent to 
the Central Government at Delhi. A despatch announcing a military success 
was technically called a Fath ndmah or “ letter of victory These, as may be 
easily imagined, were often highly exaggerated in tone . ,J The English reader 


1. Done by a body of 14 clerkss two by rotation attending daily. 

2. And sometimes falsified as to facts, c.g., when a victory was " written in the 
name of M or in other words, officially ascribed to a prince and not to the general 
who really won it. 



DESPATCHES AND REPORTS IN INDIAN HISTORY 11 

may remember a ludicrous example of such perversion of facts in a famous 
work of fiction, Haji Baba of Ispahan. I have found truth outdoing fiction 
in point of exaggeration, among the despatches of one of Aurangzib’s grand- 
sons, Muizz-ud-din, to that Emperor, penned by munski Madho Ram. The 
most sober and reliable accounts of victories in the Persian, language arc the 
despatches of Mirza Rajah Jai Singh I in his campaigns against Shivaji and 
Adil Shah (1665-1666), written by his Secretary Udiraj. The exaggeration 
of numbers in documents of this class and in the historical narratives based 
on them, fhay be explained away, as a natural defect of the mentality of that 
age and not cases of deliberate, falsification. The Cambridge Medurval His- 
tory, in commenting on the numbers alleged to have been engaged in the 
Crusades, justly remarks, “ all those general estimates art' merely pictorial 
in character ! ’’ (V. 297 ). 

Except in this one point of numbers, the military despatches in the Per- 
sian language are often of the highest degree of accuracy and rich in signi- 
ficant details. On the last batli*- of Panipat (1761), I have, found two 
Persian narratives of contemjioraries — though not strictly despatches— no way 
inferior in clearness and correctness to the best European historical despatch- 
es ; these aro-Kashiraj’s diary of what he saw and did as an eye-witness and 
the “ Life of Najib-ud-daula " written by Sayyid Nur ud-din Husain, the agent 
of ex-wazir Ghazi-ud-din Iniad-ul-mulk, who was very close to the scene and 
m the know of everything. These two more than compensate us for the lack 
of " press-reports ” ( akkbdr ) on that historic battle. 

Every high official, both civil and military,— these two categories were 
often fused into one, —and every vassal prince (of the Empire of Delhi, and 
even the French mercenary captains (like De Boigne and Perron), besides the 
British Residents at the courts of the Indian Powers, -kept a munshi or 
Persian secretary for writing all his letters to the Indian princes and their 
own Indian subordinates (except inside the same Rajput State), and also for 
interpreting the Persian letters and news-rejiorts ( dkhbar ) that reached him. In 
almost every case, these munshis kept with themselves copies of the letters 
which they wrote for their masters and others, afterwards collected them toge- 
ther, in a classified form, added a formal preface and colophon, and sent them 
forth into the world as examples of their literary skill. This collected form 
has preserved many letters of the highest historical importance from the loss 
to which stray documents are subject. We owe thanks to the literary vanity 
of these writers. 

Ill 

Besides the despatches of high ofttcers to their royal masters, we have in 
the same Persian language, a very much larger number of documents con- 
sisting of Court-diaries and news-reports, — the latter two forming really one 
and the same class. AkhbaTfit-i-Darbtir-i-mu'ala is the special name of the 



12 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


reports of the occurrences and sayings at the public darbar of the Delhi Em- 
peror, taken down on the spot and transmitted to the writers' absent 
employers. Similar reports of the darbar proceedings and news circulating 
at the Court or canip of the Nawab of Oudh, the Nizam of Haidarabad, 
Sindhia, Holkar, Ranjit Singh of Lahore, etc. were taken down and sent off 
by the scribes iiostod there to their masters. 

Every prince of the blood, provincial governor general or vassal prince, 
when absent from the imperial Court used to employ a writer ( waqi'a-navis ) 
to write and send to him reports of the doings and speeches at his Sovereign’s 
court. Similarly, in the reverse direction, there were posted imperial agents 
at the provincial headquarters' and the camps of generals detached on cam- 
paigns, charged with the duty of sending to the Central Government periodi- 
cal reports of local occurrences, which were often read out openly at the 
Emperor’s daily darbar and thus got incorporated in the Akhbdrdt-i-Darbdr-i- 
rnu'ala. 

These Government news-writers were of three classes, in the most deve- 
loped form of the Mughal intelligence department : (1) Waqi'a-navis, (2) 
Sawdnih-nigdr, and (3) Kit fin-navis or harkdrah. The Waqi’a-navis was the 
more regular and public reporter of the two. while the Sawanih-nigdr was 
of the nature of a secret rqtorter on important cases only ; the latter was 
intended to be a spy and a check on the former ! At a later stage, as a check 
on this check (namely the Sawanih-nigdr ) , a third set of spies were appoint- 
ed, called Khufia-natris (or secret writers). These last, in the late 18th cen- 
tury, were popularly called harkdrahs, though this term usually means 
'couriers of news’ or mail- runners. The Khufia-navis was a most confiden- 
tial agent. lie reported to the imperial wazir on local events without any 
communication with the authorities of the place, who often did not even 
know his name. The news-reports were sent to an officer of the Central 
Government named the Ddrogha of Ddk Chatiki, i.e. Superintendent of Posts 
and Intelligence, who handed them unopened to the Wazir for submission to 
the Emperor. 

Owing to the paucity and high price of hand-made paper in those days 
and the necessity of minimising the load of the letter-carriers (who travelled 
in pairs, called juri, and carried the letters enclosed in bamboo cylinders called 
tialo ), — these dkhbdr or ivaqa'i sheets were made extrenjely terse, their lang- 
uage pared down to the bare bones of the facts and figures. But on occa- 
sions of greater importance or interest they were liberal of description. 
Indeed, these reporters, by long practice of the professional craft, had deve- 
loped quite a modem journalistic sense of “ news value ” and never failed to - 


1. Secret news-reporters appointed from the capital to the provinces were an 
important element of theadministration of the Abbasid Khalifs. (Camb. Med. His,, 
IV. 283). 




DESPATCHES AND REPORTS TN INDIAN HISTORY 


13 


report in detail any marvellous or unnatural occurrence, which illustrated the 
credulity and taste of that age. The diplomatic repents in the Marathi 
language, in the late 18th century, are an exception to this rule of brevity, 
and they give us full information, as I shall describe later. 

Of these imperial court news letters we possess a vast mass, sent to the 
Rajahs of Jaipur by their Darbar agent, dating from the accession of Aurang- 
zib (1658) till about 1730. These were written on small slips of paper, 
about 61 inches by 4 inches, one sheet for each day. Sometimes there is no 
entry except the date and the remark, “ His Majesty did not hold the morning 
darbar " or “ His Majesty did not hold the evening darbar." When the events 
wore numerous, more than one slip was used for that day. Of the mass of 
these news-letters that came to Amber (the old capital of the Jaipur State), 
bundles covering 26 years were borrowed by Lt.-Col. James Tod more than 
a century ago and deposited by him in the library of the Royal Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland (in London). The remainder, covering 
the other yearn of Aurangzib’s long reign of 51 lunar years, (with gaps for 
a few years) are preserved in the Jaipur State record office. These latter 
have been recently sorted, repaired, and copied. Similar Akhbdrdt-i-DarbaT-i- 
Mual'a (i.c.. Delhi imperial Court diaries) are found in small batches, here 
and there, but of a much later date than the Jaipur collection, e.g., 36 days of 
the year 17'13 in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, and a larger number, 
covering the years 1753-56, in the Peshwas’ daftar, Poona. 

The Jaipur archives possess, in addition to these reports of the Emperor’s 
Court, another class of reports, entitled Siaha-i-Hazur, which record the 
occurrences and speeches at. the camp or court of the Rajahs of Jaipur. These 
are of great: value too, because the Jaipur Rajahs had. since the days of Akbar, 
played a very important part in the general history of the Mughal Empire. 
Unfortunately these papers have not. been as yet copied. 

IV 

A change in the contents and importance of these diaries of the imperial 
Court of Delhi was caused in the latter half of the 18th century by the revo- 
lution in the fortunes of the Mughal dynasty. At the end of the year 1759, 
the FSdshahi fell under an eclipse, when after the murder of the Emperor 
Alamgir II, his heir Ali Gauhar (Shah Alam II) became a fugitive and a 
political pensioner or prisoner of the British, and did not return to Delhi 
till January 1772. Again, at the end of 1784 he took Mahadji Sindhia as his 
protector and regent, so that the centre of gravity of Delhi politics shifted 
from the capital to the camp of Sindhia, the Emperor’s keeper, and des- 
patches in the Marathi language rose to primary importance. 

The supreme value of these court-diaries to Indian history, will be illus- 
trated here by one example, in which light from every other source fails us. 
It is well known that according to the popular tradition in Rajputana the 



14 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


death of Mirza Rajah Jai Singh I (1667) was caused by poison administered 
by his second son. Kiral Singh, in consequence of which accusation the 
Kachhwa nobles have ever since that year debarred Kirat Singh’s branch of 
their royal family (the house of Kama) from adoption as heir to the throne 
of Jaipur in the case of a failure of natural hear. (See Tod’s Rajasthan, 
Annals of Amber, Vol. ii, Ch. 1, the end). I was the first to prove (in 1907) 
from contemporary Persian sources that at the time of Mirza Rajah’s death 
at Burhanpur, it was ascribed to poisoning by his munshi Udinij, and Kirat 
Singh far from having been the murderer, himself led the infuriated r Kachhwa 
soldiery in an attack on Udiraj for avenging his father’s death on the culprit. 
And now, two court akhbtirats of this very time give the true facts of that 
great Rajah’s death, — quite a natural one and under circumstances which are 
quite credible. These documents had lain in the Jaipur archives, untouched 
and ungarbled ever since they were written in September and October 1667, 
and they have been brought to light, only recently (1940). 1 translate them 
here (from Persian). 

News of the Imperial Court 

27th Rabi‘-ul-5wwal. regnal year 1 0th - 6th September, 1667. 

i 

‘Aqil Khan reported to the Emperor, — “ Isfandiyar Beg, who had been 
appointed as a bailiff to conduct Mirza Rajah Jai Singh 1 to Lahor. has written 
a letter to me to say that, at the time when Mirza Rajah started from Bur 
hanpur for the imperial court, he fell down from his horse, received very 
severe injuries to his leg, and died on the Burhanpur road ...” The Em- 
peror remarked, “ He was a capable officer of the Crown and a highly trust- 
worthy Rajah (Rajah-i-‘umda i’tiqad.”). 

News of the Imperial Court 

22nd Jamadi-ul-awwal, r. yr. 10th ~ 30th October, 1667. 

The Emperor asked Kirat Singh, the son of the late Mirza Rajah Jai 
Singh, “I low was the deceased Rajah wounded in the leg?’’ He replied, 
“One day as he was mounting to the back of his elephant, the foot of the 
ladder was not properly planted, and so the leg of the Rajah was injured. 
From that day his illness began and in a few days he died.” 1 

Here is a piece of novel intelligence from a Marathi report : — 

Lalfi Sevak Ram was the agent of the Peshwa’s Government at the Court 
of the Governor General of Bengal. On 11th November 1784 he wrote a 
letter to Nana Fadnis, which gives some details of Warren Hastings’ last visit 
to Benares which are not to be found elsewhere. T translate extracts from 
this Marathi despatch below. 

“At Lucknow the Bade Sahib (G. G. ) - [alarmed at the news of Ma- 
hadji Sindhia having brought the Emperor Shah ‘Alam under his control]. 



DESPATCHES AND REPORTS IN INDIAN HISTORY 


15 


by all kinds ol means brought Prince Jawan Bakht (eldest son of SJiah 'Alarn) 
under his own influence, and came back with him to Benares. On 22nd 
September, he paid a visit to the Shahzsada [Jawan Bakht J held a secret con- 
sultation with him for three hours, and summoning Nawab Sa‘dat Ali Khan, 
the brother of the Wazir [of Oudh], presented him to the Prince . . . That day 
the Bade Sahib got the Prince's elephant ready, seated Sa'dat Ali in the back 
scat (khawasi), brought him to the Gyan bapi in Benares city, where the 
Emperor £lamgir had constructed a mosque on the original site of the Vish- 
veshvar temple, and made him perform his namaz there. Next day I should 
be 24th September 1, for witnessing the Vijaya Dashami show, the Bade 
Sahib taking Sadat Ali Khan, [Ghulam] Ali Khan and (the Shahzada’s 
maternal uncle) Akbar Ali Khan, and ten or twelve English officers on ele- 
phants, came to the held of Chitrakut, where the Ramiila is celebrated won- 
derfully well .... In this city is the mansion of Dunda Bhagat, the diwan 
of Rajah Chait Singh, in which his wife and children reside. Some mischiev- 
ous person fold the Bade. Sahib that two krors of Rupees in cash lay hidden 
in the di wan's house. The Bade Sahib placed a guard over the house and 
had the floor dug up for seven days ; he also caused the ancient seat of 
Sadashiv neat' the Govaidhan hillock to be dug up for ten or twelve days. 
But nothing was discovered at either place. 'So, the Bade Sahib has been 
put to great shame. All the La las of the city are alarmed. In fact, this 
Government is in great straits for money on account of its indebtedness. In 
the English dominions up to Benares, there are 15 to 20 thousand Telingas 
( musketeers ) forming two campoos , ; tlieit pay has been in arrears for seven 
or eight months." 


V 

It may be here remarked that the news-letters from Delhi and other 
important cities in Upper India, even when written for the English Council 
at Calcutta or the Maratha Governments of Poona, Ujjain (Sindhia) and 
Maheshwar (Alialya Bin Holkar), were all composed in Persian, though their 
covering letters were in English or Marathi. On arrival they were translated 
into English (or Marathi.) by the Persian department of the respective Gov- 
ernments. Persian (and latterly Urdu) was the official language at Jaipur 
and Alwar, till our own days. The British in India, as well as the French 
adventurers who made money in Hindustan in the 18th century, were great 
collectors of these news-reports though written for others, and their collections 
have escaped destruction by having been sent to London and Paris. There 
^are several thousand such sheets (all towards the very end of the 18th century 
and the first eighteen years of the 19th) in the British Museum and the India 
Office Library, London ; a few in Paris, and a very valuable Munshi's diary 
of Col. Camac's campaign in Malwa against Mahadji Sindhia (1780-81) in 
the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Claud Martin, the famous French engineer 



16 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


in Oudh service, made a collection of over 1,500 sheets (1781-85) which 
is now in the British Museum ; and the Lalsot campaign ol Mahadji Sindhia 
(1787) is copiously illlustratcd by two reports daily — one from Mahadji's 
camp in Rajputana and the other from the Emperor’s darbdr in Delhi, — 
throughout the three months without a break. 

The akhbarats containing news of Ranjit Singh of Lahor, (referring to 
his early years, before 1814) have been mostly translated into English and 
published by the Panjab Government, under Professor Garrett’s ^editorship. 
The other Persian akhbarats (beginning of the 19th century ) in the Pcshwas’ 
dajlar await study and publication. I know of only one other very large 
collection of Persian akhbarats in India, namely those, that reached Kale the 
Poona envoy at the Court of Haidarabad, ranging front 1772 to the end of 
the century ; but these too await study and even unveiling. 

VI 

The historical records in the Maiathi language that can be rightly called 
primary sources, all belong to the 18th century ; they fall into three divisions : 
(a) despatches, (6) envoys' reports, and (c) news sheets. The first of these 
two differ from each other in many imi.K>rtaut respects, though they arc both 
written by officials to their masters. 

The historical letters in the Persian language are clearly marked off irom 
those in Marathi^ by certain features. First, the latter class are almost always 
careless about dates ; most of the Marathi letters omit the year and many 
even the month ; while in several of them the writer gives no date at all and 
we have to infer it from the context, or in exceptional cases, when an exact 
man like Nana Fadnis carefully endorsed them on the top corner with the 
date of their arrival, from that information. Besides this defect, one cannot 
help feeling that the Maiathi records, both of the (a) and (c) categories, 
are too concise, scrappy and very often obscure by reason of their extreme 
brevity and their writers' lack of literary skill. The elegant art of the Persian 
mamhis does not seem to have been admired or cultivated in the arid Deccan 
plateau. 

The Marathi official records, for all practical purposes are confined to 
those of the Peshwas, i.e., the Poona Government, while the extant records of 
Gwalior, Indore and Baroda are very scanty and unimportant from the wider 
historical outlook when we go to the period before 1800 a.d. After that year, 
records in the English language gain primacy in quantity and quality, even 
for Maharashtra’s internal affairs. 

The State records of the Peshwas are dispersed between two places, — in 
the Peshwas' Daftar, Fbona, down to 1774 and in the Menavli Daftar of the 
village of Menavli, in the Satara district, after that year. The latter legiti- 
mately belonged to the Peshwas’ Government ; but when Nana Fadnis during 



DESPATCHES AND REPORTS IN INDIAN HISTORY 


17 


his long years of supreme power in the Poona Government, received all the 
despatches that came from the subordinate officials of that Government, he 
kept them in his own private residence, and these after his death (in 1800; 
were removed to his village home at Menavli by his widow. The former col- 
lection is also enriched by a large number of papers of historical importance 
found among the private records of historical families, which were seized by 
the Inam Commission and brought to the Poona Alienation Office, whence 
they were* never returned to their true owners. The cream of the Poona 
archives has been sifted, properly arranged and published by the Bombay 
Government in 45 volumes (7801 pages), as Selections from the Peshwas ’ 
Doftar, edited by Rao Bahadur G. S. Surdcsai. 

But here news-letters are very few and seldom of the regular akhbarat 
type. The so-called Peshwas Diaries are not at all diaries in the English sense 
of the term, but only accounts of daily income and expenditure, which how- 
ever occasionally give an indirect information of great value. The Peshwas' 
itineraries, which are very full and accurately dated, are ban* lists of dales 
and place-names, and valuable only as enabling us to form a correct skeleton 
of their movements and marches. 

VII 

We now pass on to the. last section of primary sources in the Marathi 
language ior the 18th century \ really its latter half only), namely the envoys’ 
reports. These are as suix^rior to documents of the same class in the Per- 
sian language as ordinary Persian military despatches and news- reports are 
to their Marathi rivals. In these Marathi envoys' letters we find a mastery 
of expression, clearness and cogency of language, and jxjwer of rc]x>ning long 
discussions accurately and with an eye for the essential ix>ints only, which 
are a pleasing contrast to the Persian Secretaries’ sickening rhetoiical flourish- 
es. bombastic flattery of their own sovereigns, and excessive verbosity in con- 
sequence of which the few relevant facts have to be dug out of a heap of 
words. I have in mind here the letters of Apaji Ram Dabholkar and Sada- 
siv Dinkar, Nana Fadnis’s agents in Sindhia’s camp, and in a lesser degree, 
but less only to these two, the desj>atches of Mahadev Govind Ilingane, the 
Poona envoy at the Delhi Enif>eror s Court. 

The first two of these writers, I may be pardoned for saying it, were no 
whit inferior in literary power or skill in observation to the Venetian ambas- 
sadors whose despatches from the Court of Tudor England are so highly 
valued in Europe. Their position was delicate and they had to use consi- 
derable tact at every step and weigh their words carefully, as there was an 
almost intolerable tension for long years between their master and the Court 
to which they were accredited. Their prose style is an object of study and 
admiration. We find no case of despatches being written by them in a code 
(ank-pallavi); therefore, no cypher being available, they hajdai, to lise. 



18 


U. C. LAW VOLUME 


a veiled language, and yet not so veiled as to baiTle their masters. Many of 
their contractions we can easily interpret with a little detailed knowledge of 
the history of the time and place. E.g., ga kar atmak (name beginning with 
G) stands for Govind Kao ; na-kar in the particular context for the Nizam. 
Holkar's officials deputed to Sindhia’s camp complain against the latter as 
“ our friend”! and so on. Haribhaklas stands for the Marathas (pious 
Hindus h Some code-names of persons and places, especially with reference 
to British India, were used, and Parasnis has printed a key to th*m. 

The extant envoys’ despatches are. from the agents at the courts or camps 
v>f the Delhi Emperor, Mahadji Sindhia. Ahalya Bai Ilolkar, the Maharajah 
of Jodhpur, the Nizam, Tipu Sultan, the Governor General at Calcutta, the 
Portuguese Government of Goa, - the last three of the above list being rather 
meagre in number. The Marathi despatches written by Daulat Rao Sindhia 
and his officers and the news letters in the same, language written by agents 
in Poona that reached Pandit Lalji Ballal Guigulc. Sindhia’s “Resident” at 
Kota, are of first-rate imix>rtance for the years 1792-1803, and compensate 
us for the closing of the Menavli daftar iri 1794, though the earlier portion 
of these Kota archives down to the year 1791 is meagre and scrappy in the 
information it gives. A solution from this source under the expert editor- 
ship of Rao Bahadur Govind Sakha ram Sardcsui, is being arranged for publi- 
cation as soon as the war clouds arc dispersed. 



SAKUNTALA, THE CHILD OF NATURE 

By 

Dt. S. K. BELVALKAR. m.a.. ph.d. 

The pnglish poet Wordsworth speaks of a certain Lucy in these words : 

Three years she grew in sun and shower. 

Then Nature said, “ A lovelier flower 
On earth was never sown. 

This child 1 to myself will take : 

She shall be mine, and 1 will make 
A lady of my own. 

“ Myself will to my darling be 
Both law and impulse ; and with me 
The girl in rock and plain. 

In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, 

Shall feel an over-seeing power 
* To kindle or restrain.’' 

fn another poem composed “ A few miles above Tintern Abbey " the same 
poet tells us how he w T as prone to recognise 

Tn Nature and the language of sense, 

The author of my purest thoughts, the nurse, 

The guide, ihe guardian of my heart, and soul 
Of all my moral being. 

while in his poem styled “ The Excursion *’ lie lias delineated several aspects 
or stages of the relation that can subsist between Man and Nature.- Critics 
are agreed that what Wordsworth affords us in these and other poems of his 
are not so many examples of what is known as the Pathetic Fallacy, whereby 
man simply transfers his own feelings, emotions and sentiments to " inani- 
mate ’’ objects. The thoughts and impulses that Man is apt to derive from 
Nature, she really has the power to communicate to him, because between 
Nature and Man there is at work one self-same soul or spirit, so that an in 
ward communion between the two is as readily and legitimately possible as 
between two sympathising human friends ; and for such communion, there is 
not always required the use of articulate language. 

The philosophical basis of the above “ Theory of Nature " which W T ords- 
vvoith is known to have believed in and promulgated, comes very near to the 
view-point of India's own Vedanta Philosophy, which asserts that one and the 
same Atman pervades men, animals, plants and the whole creation. That 
this was Kalidasa's own creed goes without saying ; but if a poetic proof of it 
be necessary, the most convincing would be the speech of UrvasI (Vikramor- 



20 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


vtinyam , Act IV, passage 57. Pandit’s edition), who, cursed to become a 
creeper and subsequently restored Jp her original form, has preserved for us 
a record ol her experience as a creeper 1 * : 

srwrrcswrc: tiq ^ qgrcpil i [ snaRnwun 

sr^sowri: m i ] 

In fact, with the Hindu belief in Transmigration of the Soul, this can be 
accepted as the normal experience in such matters, so that it is possible to 
assert that objects in Nature can feel and communicate their thoughts just as 

41 

well as human beings. The most apposite example of the kind, however, is 
to be found in Sakuntal-a, the heroine of Kalidasa’s Abhijmmasakuntala. who 
was every inch a true Child of Nature, and whom the Poet has not merely 
described in words, but has ushered before us in flesh and blood and made 
her speak and feel and act in Ihe way such a child would normally feel and 
act ; and that constitutes the real interest of the following investigation. 

Born of Monakii, the Heavenly Nymph, from sage Visvamitra, whose 
fierce penance led the apprehensive I-ord of Heaven (India) to send down 
the Nymph to tempt him and frustrate his penances, the mother abandons 
the infant in the forest arid returns to Heaven. Thus left forlorn, the birds 
of the air take pity upon her and feed her, until she is found by sage Kanva, 
who names her Sakuntalfi (lit. ‘ fed by birds’) and adopts her as his foster- 
child. 

As companions of her childhood, sage Kaijva assigned to his foster-child 
not only the two friends Anasuyfi and Priyamvada -whose names sufficiently 
indicate their carefully contrasted character but the creepers MadhavT, Ati- 
muktak! and. above all, Sakuntala’s creeper sister | Navamalika, fondly named 
“Grove's Moonlight"; the Bakula. Kesara, Sahakara (mango) and other 
trees planted and tended with care and kindness ; the deer, antelopes, pea- 
cocks. swans, cuckoos and cakravakas : not to mention the Sylvan Deities. To 
assiduously tend, water, feed and minister to the comforts of all these inmates 
of the Asrama (besides the welcoming of occasional guests) was by Kajriva 
enjoined a* a daily task upon ftakuntala, who soon grew to like that task, 
and find therein the real joy of service : compare 2 : 

oi i a#* i [?r%sp5 

cfRfftqbr: I SRlfo rftrtFfe I ] 

or the well-known stanza' of Kanva in Act IV- 

jfREfl fjwpwifa *Rrat i 

* N.B. - For the convenience of readers not so familiar with the original words 
of Kalidasa, I have numbered the text-quotations in the essay seriatim, and trans- 
lated them into English at the end. 

t Ladabahinki : cL Asyam aharh tvayi ca samprati vitae int ah. |" In regard 
to her. and, now, in regard to thyself also. I have become freed of all anxiety.’*) 



SAKUNTALA, THE CHILD OF NATURE 


21 


and q: $S*ra#wrf^ q*qr vpTfg^: 

§q qift 5ifWcsi qfts? ^gitpmrcf it 

All these her comrades of the animal and vegetable kingdom became, each 
one of them, instinct with a life and an individuality of his own no less dis- 
tinctive than that of Anasuya or Priyarnvada. Naturally, they called forth 
from Sakuntala acts of service and friendliness varying with the vaiying cir- 
cumstances of each. Thus the creepers had not only to be daily watered and 
nurtured, but, whenever they showed signs of budding youth, they had to be 
mated with befitting trees ; or if they, like Sakuntala herself subsequently, 
did not wait for* the elders, but made it a svayamvara or mating by self- 
choice, they had at least to be l'elicited upon their great good fortune. So 
loo, the tender fawns needed particular care when, chewing blades of grass for 
the first time, they injured their tender mouths. There was one such in parti- 
cular that had lost its mother at birth ; and Sakuntala. took upon herself the 
office of a mother to this youngling, fondly naming it Dirghapanga (lit. long- 
eyed) and tenderly applying the Ingudi oil to its injured lips and, in fact, 
discharging for him all the functions of a loving mother, just as Darne Nature 
had done in the case of Sakuntala herself when mother Menaka had heartless- 
ly abandoned her. Compare Sakun tala’s words' in Act IV- - 

1 ft ggqraqftsrr^T *r aigarft i 3fft{tqxj$nr sjui-ifttr ftan 
qf|^ tpq I ft ms ftrf^-f gJT cTRt ftscTSWft I [^1 ft «5« 
qraqfcqifoff JTTf(3*rcfo i ■arn^n ftfn t*q i 

rrcr fttftcf siqfe?eifq«qft i ] 

or, tin; stanza preceding, where Kanva feelingly describes how Sakuntala used 
to tend the orphaned youngling- : 

5qq[ qoiftfa^ftf iftqi 
srfisrsqrr gft i 

stsq jt «j5r$aq>: qqqf n 

In consequence of such a constant and continuous exchange of sympathy 
and service. Sakuntala and all these companions of hers, human and others, 
were expected to exhibit a perfect understanding of each other’s needs and 
moods, divining and anticipating each other’s thoughts and hastening to fur- 
ther and fulfil each other's wishes expressed or suppressed. It was nothing 
stringu, therefore, that Priyamvadia could read correctly Sakun tala’s inner- 
most thoughts as the latter empties her pitcher into the basin of Vanajyotsna 
and gazes at her wistfully 0 : 

i stroiftr ftfaftra sasqai qonrtftft i l 

qrp eispsftq qr®i%T sift oira tpq ait ft swft 3i3*q 

qt ats? ft i [ swqft i qjFfrft ftftfta q’a^qfcsqwftm’i 


3a 



22 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


i i aferr tr^pt 3*rai, arfa am tr^^qfq 

anc^sg^T «rt tsvrcrfcr i ] 

Mut, is it not equally legitimate to inquire whether Vanajyolsna. Sakuri tala's 
“creeper-lister", could noi have done the same? So too to take another 
illustration - if Aiiasuva and Priyariivada were capable of devising ways and 
means for bringing lire Hero and tire Hetoine together by the expedient of 
.sakmuala’s love-letter, which Priyumvada was to deliver into Dusyanta’s 
h;urds ; - - * 

ri gqnrlqlN *i gfsrar qi-T^e i [ h (irRPrtftd 

$rfl dP? ©CT R-TRwgfa | ] — 

would not the Bakula or the Kesara tree or the creeper Vanajyolsna think 
of accomplishing something in the same line to bring about a similar result? 
That these would be no idle questions to ask in regard to Sakuntala's Aisrama 
companions as Kalidasa himself paints thrnr, follows from the circumstance 
that later, wlretr &akuntala starts to go to her husband’s house, it is not only 
Annsuya and Priyarirvada that get together for the occasion auspicious deco 
rations like' — 

Orator, ffipjMcisi, trw^trrnsni'nT^r [ upfak, 

dPfrjitW, *tW5HmT3WpnPt ] — 

not forgetting that garland of Bakula | Kesara | flowers whicir, we are told. 
Anasuya had specially set aside for the occasion” : 

viifttriOTgjqrT cr^fcfrffTf=f TRT 

frtfotjrat tftr ggaf%5K]JT#3Ti t [ 3r*t%5wg3fl> 

UdfrftRFR f^TcTI *W ?fe5 [%*&] qife^r I ] — 

but, as Kalidasa purposely tells us, even the Asrama trees had sent their own 
real (not imaginary) marriage presents 1 '’ : 

ajitf %*i^s|qi«s rfw 

3I^TtW. l 

3p%ta}} ^^R^rT^R^TRtfrSjfr- 

This is my problem number I. 

Similarly, if, before encouraging Sakuntala’s passion for Dusyanta, Ana- 
suya and Priyathvada are so anxiously debating amongst themselves as fo 
whether the King can prove a deserving object lor Sakuntala’s love 11 : 

3WJ(T I f{*I3T*FR5I <wm & 5Bl«?taf^| | 3#* tflll 

«fonoi i <tr gti § erffcrat erf^vrfc^ i [ 3?^ 1 spk w wwi 

artgfoi 1 *?rwi. srgpnffar « 1 ftg’jwpir 

1 ] 



Sakuntala, the child of nature 


23 


and subsequently, when the King himself actually and -unexpectedly appears, 
on the scene, if the same companions are seen to take, on their own part, 
all precautions to ensure a successful sequel to the love-intrigue by observ- 
ing 12 : 

qawr i q§q$?T g&ftofar i 3T? «it 

«T ^ cff I f I qgQPIT IRTR: t W f&WFft 

qaj*R#qifon 5T *Tqfa eT«n ftqfer 1 ] — 

me we not entitled to expect that some other companions of sakuntala from 
the plant or animal life ought to have been shown by the Poet as being 
capable of exhibiting an equal solicitude for Sakuntala’s future welfare? 

This is my problem number 2. 

Finally, in that well-known and lavishly praised parting scene in Act IV, 
when'in we set 1 the whole Nature grieving at the impending separation from 
Sakuntala 1 * : 

ftan 'rfafmori i 

g3lf7rT 55^ II 

[ najjf: i wtfNFfrqi gmswi- 

aar: n ] — 

and where, lo forestall the dreaded consequences of the curse* of DurvSsas, the 
two friends, at tin* final moment of parting, remind Sakuntala of the ring of 
Dusyanta, casually desiring her to make use o! it if and when needed, but 
unwisely keeping from Sakuntala all knowledge of the curse on the flimsy 
pretext, of saving her ^>me present grief 1 * : 

tfv&SF® qfofrfcsqi ferogjl i [ asftqwTi 

fa*RNt i ] — 

and wherein even father Kanva, possessing ns he did the Prophets pre- 
vision" of the great ordeal of grief and suffering through which his daughter 
was destined to pass, would not yet convey to her any indication or warning, 
not only in the text-book advice that he specifically reads to her 1B : 

gsjjppf W‘ Brtwsitaft sq^tore tic.— 

but even through that most stoically conceived message lo the King 1 ’ which he 
dictates seated under the shade of the obliging Kwravyksa : 

#53#! ^ fTlH, I — 

begging for his daughter no special concessions, but merely an equality of 
opportunities and freedom to work out her own destiny : 

’Compare Marica’s words''' in Act VII qWHl 1 



24 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


BBT WOT 

*nrnprew?r: <rt * n 

In this parting scene, I repeat, where we see Sakuntala heedlessly marching, 
so to say, right to the very brink of the precipice in a mood of confident hope- 
fulness,* her friends and father alike conspiring (although from different mo- 
tives) to keep her utterly in ignorance of the gravity and imminence of the 
dangers lowering over her head -the father in particular vainly endeavouring 
to suppress his sombre thoughts! —why should we not suppose Jthat some 
of the sub-human friends of the Heroine could have sympathetically caught up 
the innermost thoughts of the Sage and found for them, in their own language 
of looks, signs and movements, an expression which could have, at least mo- 
mentarily, touched the fringe of Sakuntala's consciousness, even though it 
might have subsequently been diiven out of it by some extraneous circum- 
stance, so that when she reaches the court of Dusyanta she remains abso- 
lutely unprepared for the storm that is to descend upon her with a tragic crash ? 

This is my problem number 3. 

Now. my study of Kalidasa’s Abhijnunasakunlala all these years has 
fully convinced me that if, instead of the Sakuntala of our uncritically edited 
text-books, we had before us the real original Sakuntala as Kalidasa wrote 
it, all the above problems would meet their instant and correct solutions. 
Such an edition is, however, not yet within sight.} The problem of the Ur- 
Sakuntala deserves to be tackled in the same manner in which the allied 
Mahabharata problem is being tackled, the underlying principles of textual 
reconstruction being the same in both cases, with this important difference 
that, while in constituting the present critical text of the B. O. R. Institute’s 
edition of the Great Epic, what is known as “ Higher Criticism ” comes very 
rarely in evidence, this will have to be more frequently appealed to in the case 
of Kalidasa's Magnum Opus, because, speaking relatively, the problem in the 


* Compare 1 * : qfcjjiT I *m I [qftoR | 

if I ] 

tThe best (evidence of the state of Kanvn’s mind is the s’lanza 1 * : 

¥r|: qfcflqfc 

fJ&SNR srf&§Rtn$55ri 
rFRuftnn n retail; m-gr 
m fossrt * *4 n 

which, although designed to comfort and cheer up Sakuntala, is still thrown into 
the plaintive, dirge-like 1 Tarim metre. That this is the Poet's conscious hit, should 
follow from the circumstance that there occur only three stanzas in the Play thrown 
into this particular metre, and they have each its own raison d'etre . 

t 1 tried to evoke the interest of the “ Vikrama Bi-Millennium Celebrations * 
for it. but without much success. 



Sakuntala, the child of nature 


25 


Play is unitajy and far less complicated. For obvious limitations of space I 
shall not attempt the indicated textual reconstitution here, but content myself 
with the demonstration that, assuming the correctness of the reconstituted text, 
we are able to deduce therefrom a conduct, on the part of tine Nature-com- 
panions of £akuntala which is just what one is led to expect if Kialidasa, 
like the true Hindu that he was, had regarded objects in Nature as being 
instinct with life and scntiency. 

In atyaper I contributed in 1925 to Sir Asutosh Mooketjce Silver Jubilee 
Volume, Orientalia, Pt. 2, pp. 349-359, 1 put forth the view that the order 
of the speeches in Act I of tire Abh ijn ruins tikuntala from the speech behind 
the curtain of the Heroine'-" : 

^ # fq3H$3it i [ & fjppnaj: i ] 

to the point where the bee emerges from VatiajyotsniTi’s basin 51 : 

SfWfT I iTl*nfo3i 3T3ff3T ^ HfWt I 

f ard i if i ] 

has gone wrong in tin* current editions of the Play. The Bengali recension 
here gives 35 speeclies, the KasmTrian recension 27, and the Devanagarl cum 
Soutlvlndian recension advocated by Cappeler, only 22. The story given by 
these sets of passages falls into three moments : the loosening of fiakuntaUVs 
tight garment {Valkalatilhilikarana) , sakun tala’s approaching the Kesara tree 
u|x>n a supposed beckoning from the tiee ( Kesarasamipagamana )-: 

fsrsr FT I «T l 

[ W %W|eR>: I *rn$?T HHFFnfo I ] 

and fcakimtalas watering the Navamalika creeper ( N avamalikasincana ). 
The available printed editions give the ValkalasilhiVikautna before the Kesa- 
rasamtpagamana . Only the recension contained in the unique birch-bark MS., 
Bombay Govt. Collection, No. 192 of 1875-76 ( now deposited in the B. O. R. 
Institute), gives precedence to the Kesarasamipagamana. The same MS. also 
tells us (through a stage-direction) that the King had concealed himself behind 
this very Kesara tree. No wonder, in that case, if the Kesara tree got con- 
fused by the. unexpected presence* of a stranger, and beckoned sister Sakuntalu 
(whose assigned task it was to attend to all Asrama visitors) to his side. For, 
why should Sakuntala have interpreted the slight flutter in the leaves of the 
Kesara, caused by a stray breeze, as the tree's call to her? Not a blade of 
grass can move without some purpose : that was the Hindu Poet's article of 
faith. Kalidasa elsewhere tells us, in so many words, that trees are in the habit 
of making birds (and, let us add, bees and movement* of leaves) as vehicles of 
their thoughts : compare 2 * — 



26 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


qfiwf^r ^55 q«n 

When .Sakuntala approaches the Kesara tree, that movement is described in 
the editions by tin; stage-direction Talha karoti IDoes accordingly]; the birch- 
-bark MS. alone makes it. Rnjnah sa/innkarsam dgacchali .[.Approaches the 
presence of the Kingj. The ensiling comparison of the Heroine to a creeper 
by tlie side of this tree* 4 — 

gi* gspT^pT fast araj ffonfe i [ ^rpnr. 

R^fiRrqT ScTT^rsT 3RT*T afctolft | ] 

gains in suggestive value only if the King is behind the tree ; and the Valkala- 
sithilikaram effected while the Heroine is so near the Hero (whose presence 
the ladies, of course, do not suspect) has a irngaric value which Kalidasa of all 
poets was not going to miss. There is much, therefore, in that stage-direction, 
which should prove that the MS. is. in some passages at any rate, in the line 
of authentic text-transmission. Only a fool or a pedant would think of chang- 
ing that tell-tale stage direction to the flat Tnthu karoti of the editions ! 

The speeches that follow after this moment in the watering-scene, and 
particularly the words of Sakuntala-' : 

§3T I rtf| <5T% strei I ORjg- 

jhtNto qvraifawft, ^sqg^rtr flgsrrd i [ i 

Rig 5R%S?q 3ftnTR7%srRr sajfcfcT: #?rl: I 5R^ERJ:, 

are sufficiently indicative of what was passing in the innermost thoughts of 
sakuntala. Priyamvada’s guess quite hits the mark and confuses the Heroine. 
But could not the other Nature- companions —and particularly the Vanajyotsna 
that formed the theme of the conversation - have divined the thoughts ? Cer- 
tainly. yes : and the Creeper goes one better, and, having seen the concealed 
King and believing him to be an appropriate consort for sister Sakuntala, she 
exercises the already- married elder sister’s privilege of arranging to bring her 
younger sister into contact, with her would-be lover. Hence, we must assume, 
she it is that purposely starts the bee ! Sakuntala had been watering so many 
trees and creepers that morning. Why should a bee have started only from 
the basin of the Vanajyotsna ? “ Mere chance ”, some one would reply ; but 
in a world believed to be permeated by an indwelling Spirit, chance has to be 
ruled out. 

The Kesara tree and the creeper Vanajyotsna thus prove themselves 
Sakun tala’s real loving companions. 

This is how l propose to sblve my problem No. 1. 

To be able to give a satisfactory solution of the next problem would 
sorely test one’s understanding of Kalidasa’s Sakuntala. Tn that famous 
Repudiation-scene in Act V when, to her utter consternation, Sakuntala finds 



SAKUNTALA, THE CHILD OF NATURE 


27 


that the ling is unaccountably missing, as a last deaerate attempt to awaken 
the King’s dormant memory, she hits upon the expedient of narrating the 
Uirghapanga incident-" : 

3nftr i r&m if grT^»^3?t oiw sfaroMf sqfi& i 33 atsf 

qtq t «4 fasT3m 3133?^^ t or ? arofafapr 

g<*TWTfqf* sqnd I q~^t dft-8 t!3 JTtr uj*& faqf *m3ft I cR 

*gq 3 pt pftRt fo 1 qs-fr faefirfe? 1 5% fa 159 amooran % 1 

( spirciferci qfMqiqqrqqqtip« (r srftfeetqrcltei. 1 

»W J i n it gqsR^t ^tftqFifT 3R gftorcfcrc; 1 orer — *w cti^l 

um fog- faqfo^sfRcr 1 3 g^tsqft^qi^wiwn^igqqdf: 1 

T-Trac. qfafor m qfo&sSR sr: w i (RiRfo*i ssfoftsir 1 

qq: *r;% foqftrfa 1 1 ] 

* This very word is used by Sakuntala a little later to describe her own condi- 
tion when., convinced of Du$yanta’s perfidy by the unintended double entente o( 
tin: \sonJ^ ttmanusifu. anMiiksag'.tmandL diijaih and Imrabhi loli in the stanza- 7 : 

* ■ ^mftf^qsRqqrpla 

fegrT w. aftfoRtq: 1 
apRiftsjqqqw; wtrstr- 
»T^(|t: qf«T: gg qfoffof II 

ihe wrath fully bursts out 28 : 

srrt I affioft tlRrangqifai qq^fa 1 ^ ^rfbr eWr qwj^sgam- 
ftmt foR^T$forq*q qq srgfoft qforfq^qft 1 [ srr i w^pit fqqr- 
gqfof 1 * sRpffoqf qifogq;q%nqqg<rr^$^q^ aqig? fet 
qfoRWf 1 ] 

And upon Du§yanLa's words- 2 : 

1 aftq qftqq; 1 ewrfrt * awf 1 

dn: flings back a spirited reply ^unaccountably omitted by all editors!) which is 
quite, worthy of the daughter of the fiery sage Visvamitra-" ; 

3*| ^ qi^pii qfpJiq qwrf&rft 3T <%3TW I 
cssrrf^rfeqiait gfmfrr g Rf» or qf|?5i3ft 11 
[ gqitq arnof srtfte =q stew 1 **5rTi2|ftf$di snsrfser 

*qg f«fc q *ri|55r: 11 ] 

And then finally adds 31 — 

PS qrq q^R3nfRfr T%qri? srr a?4 ^q*q gswmtror ^srq^- 

qritw pqfOTt 3?fTI^T 1 [ 353 arcn 

qifq^q g^ra?*$rc prqgqf ggn« w i aqqtf i 1 ] 

See below tor the propriety of the phrase %3t3Tqc*r=IT??q (carrying a weapon (con- 
cealed] in the heart) instead of %3Rrforcq (having poison in the heart). 



28 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

Mere, is it not legitimate to ask why sakuntala chose this particular incident ? 
The choice of the Navamalika bower is of course signilicant, But why did 
Dusyanta fetch -presumably from the adjacent river-canal— water in a lotus- 
leaf receptacle ? And why did Dlrghiipahga present himself in the bower just 
at this juncture ? It is easy enough to brush aside these as idle questions, 
as the products of some hyper-sensitive critic ; and they would probably be no 
more than that, ij Kalidasa had not been, a consummate artist who weighed 
his words, and whose every hit counted. Years ago I invited scholars to let 
me have their reasons as to the choice of the incident. Some few responded, 
but not quite satisfactorily. Here is my own reading of the situation : 

The bower incident was meant to remind the King -for, that is the main 
point— of his having given the ring. It must therefore have taken place im- 
mediately before or after the gift, of the ring. When, later, the missing ring 
is recovered, and, by the consequent termination of the curse, the King’s 
memory returns, this is how he describes what did take place " : 

afFsjri ni fjpn nfrT'rm 

i rarfcm trcr aeq^ffr— • 

t#&JT5f few 

fsrcr 

The above assurance given by the King apparently satistied Sakuntala. She 
ceased weeping, and was ready to put: implicit faith in her lover’s words. 
Thereupon. following the time-honoured Hindu custom, Sakuntala’s tear-soiled 
face had to be washed. The water in the lotus-leaf receptacle was what 
Bhasa * in a similar situation calls mukhodakam. The coming in of the 

Dirghapanga in the bower at this juncture was due, not to his being thirsty, 

for there was the running canal-water close by for the purpose — but. because 
the fawn wished to give his foster-mother a warning against too readily putting 
trust, into this stranger, who from Dlrghapaiiga ’s view-point, was no more than 
a hunter carrying weapons to kill innocent deer. Divghapahga has clearly 
shown his distrust of the King by refusing to drink from his hand 

This Dlrghapaiiga is actually introduced on the stage in Act IV. Sakun - 
lala has just taken leave of her erteper-sister Vanajyotsna twined around her 
mate, the mango tree”" : 

dvifllfefe i t 'mifoir A i [sprsitoR i 

sfeHfrrai ft SRdffeff flliJTdbldrfa: 5irai?T?rf*T: | '] 
and is mentally carving out a rosy picture of her own married life with the 
King Dusyanta. The next object that she notices is a doe who. like Sakun- 

*Cp. Svaptiavdsavadatlam, Act IV, towards the end. 



5SAKUNTALA, THE CHILD OF NATURE 


29 


tala herself, was expecting shortly to be a mother" -1 : 

hr i nswiwra fitaRf ^Rf gif 

<RT ftof&i^RrRT I [ HR I HNfcwwfawiMl *nfa- 

^R^^PRJRRT H^f *r ?OTfa foRfaRST |] 

Her own picture of herself as the mother for the moment drives out her 
earlier picture of herself as the wife and the Queen ; and we might imagine 
that Sakuntalii is engaged in mentally contrasting the treatment that she 
herself woujd be giving to her own would Ik; son. At this precise psychological 
moment her foster-son IMrghapnnga pulls her up by the garment, and seems 
to ask whether, in abandoning him then, she was behaving any better than 
tier own mother Menaka ? 1 am. however, disjiosed to think that DIrgha 

pauga's appearance here was to give his foster-mother another parting warning 
about Dusyanta, whose perfidy was, at long last, apparent even to the simple 
Anasuya-'-'' : 

rpr fraarotg?*?! ft ^ x& ur ftftsr ito vm 

3T i [ xrq tfcra ftfef 

w *i?r i ] 

ff Sakuntala's mind had not been obsessed by her day-dreams, she pro- 
bably would have received and understood all these warnings which her com- 
rades in Nature sought to give her, as she ere this had undersl<x>d the beckon- 
ing of the Kesara tree in Act I. 

This is my solution to my problem No. 2. Fortunately, except in minor 
details, the textual question does not come in the way of our reaching this solu- 
tion, once we accustom ourselves to read Kalidasa's masterpiece with an in- 
quiring and sympathetic mind. 

The third problem I have discussed in full details in a paper I contri- 
buted to the "‘Asia Major", Vol. II. fasc. 1, pp. 84 $7, as early as 1923. It 
refers to the Cakravaka incident in Act IV. There arc' three Prakrit speeches 
connected with it, out of which, the shorter or the Dcvanagari recension gives 
the second and the third, omitting the first, while, the Bengali gives the first 
only, omitting the other two. The Kasmirian MS. gives all the three, and 
fully satisfies the demand of higher criticism. The speeches in their correct 
order are as follows 34 *--- 

SR^IT — I 01 Hi 3Tfc*T ftRSFHt ^1 cR »f3r Of 

I 'RR I 

Hlifftaft orroRR^ fast i 
g^HSejsgoiRil H? fcfg ^ H9EI3TI II 

SflWT^sfer Rmnig. ^HRlSH HtHSpB: 

fH-. i i qfo^ iRfrd T Ript HigsHi^l fswrg i g<3t^°na- 



30 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


I ^ I 

3TR3? =^^rt fa h 

[ qfa 1 stejpr i jrfesftq^rRTRf^r i siRsfif 

5«^OTf ^Wtfct n ] 

fspfaptf — ?f% I *n rrs^ jrH^ I 

TT^nfij fauvr n^| *3?fa faqi^gart i 
tost fa 3?Wl^t ii 

( qfa l ifo JpafPl I tnjiftl fsjifrr f^I nqqfa foqK'fl&Ktq; I 
3^>qfir {^?5'.^qi5iR^r: qifirfa ii J 

Here the whole incident is designed to convey to Sakuritala a representation 
of the fate that is in store for her. The CakravakI calls, but the ChnkravS 
ka- through causes beyond his control, his heart being full of sakuntalfi- does 
not answer. So before long would Sakuntalu l>e herself calling, and Dusyanta 
would not answer ! Anasnya administers a consolation to her Iriend, which 
she could do with some confidence because they had in their ftossession the 
Royal ring which was to terminate the curse. Hence we find that in their very 
next speech the friends are reminding $akuntala of the ring. From another 
point of view the Cakravaka. in a sort of a spiritual telepathy, may be said to 
be taking up from Kanva the grief to which the stoic Sage refuses to give an 
opening, and so the Cakravaka tries, in his own ways, to warn sakuntala of 
the ordeal of sorrow and suffering through which she has to pass. That 
Sakuntala misses this warning, as she missed that of Dirghapanga, was due fo 
her pre-occupation : to her mind not being attuned to receive them. The 
Friends seem to have understood the. Cakravaka, and so immediately bethink 
themselves of the signet-ring. 

From the above discussion it will have become sufficiently evident that 
Kalidasa has depicted Sakuntala as a true “ Child of Nature. " privileged to 
have intimate intercourse and communion with the. objects in Nature in the 
midst of which she was brought up. A true understanding of the inner signi- 
ficance of Kalidasa’s Sakuntala would be irn;>ossibIe unless we understand the 
Poet's “ Philosophy of Nature ”. That sufficient attention to *h‘s aspect of 
the Play has not bam hitherto paid has to be attributed to the circumstance 
that, pace Pischel and Patankar and Cnppelor, a really critical edition of the 
Play still remains a desideratum. 

English Translation of the Original Texts. 

1. “By me, possessed of inward senses, hath been indeed witnessed the 
condition and happenings of Your Majesty.’’ 

2. “ Not merely because my father hath ordered it : T, for my own 
part, do also entertain a fraternal affection for these." 



Sakuntala, the child of nature Ul 

8. “ She, who would not think of drinking water herself whilst youi 
thirst remained unslaked ; who, although fond of decorating (her i>erson], 
would not, for very affection, deprive you of even a leaflet ; to whom the 
time of your first blossom used to be an occasion of festivity : she, Sakuntala, 
is now leaving lor her husband’s house : may ye all assent to it ! ” 

4. *‘My child, why wouldst thou follow me who am ready to forswear 
thy company ? Thou hast been- is’nt it so ? — reared up when thy mother 
died so soon after thy birth. Now too, separated from me, father Kayva is 
there to look after thee.” 

5. “ To whose mouth, pierced by the prickly-cnds of Kusa grass, was 
by thee applied, to heal the wound, the oil of Ingudi : that dear fostcr-son 
of thine, whom thou didst feed on handfuls of Syamdka lice : he is fnowj 
loath to leave thy track." 

6. “ Anasuye, knowest thou wherefore Sakuntala is gazing so intently 
upon Vauajyotsnii ? . . Just, as Vana jyotsna hath been joined to a befitting 
tree-mate, would that I also do secure a lover befitting me ! ” 

7. “ 1 slujli conceal it. under flowois and make it fall into his hand 
under ptelext of its being [part of the I lemainings of divine worship” 

8. “ Yellow-pigment, holy-earth, Durva-ends, and other auspicious de- 
corations." 

9. “ In that palm-leaf basket slung upon the mango-branch I have kept 
aside - for this very occasion- -a Bakula IKcsara] garland that retains its 
fragrance a long time. ” 

10. “ An auspicious silken garment, white as the moon, was put forth 
by one tree ; by another was exuded lac-dye pleasant for use on the solos. 
1'i'orn the others arose, up to the finger joints, the palms of sylvan Deities, 
that vied with the spi outing-up ol their own lender leaflets, and they pro- 
ffered fall these! ornaments." 

11. “Anasuye, far gone in love as she is, she is incapable of bnx>king 
loss of time. Where her affection is fixed, he is the ornament of the Paurava- 
race. So it behoves us to congratulate her upon her love.” 

12. "Friend, it is rejxirted that Kings have several objects-of love. 
Manage things in such a way that this our friend would not become an object, 
of commiseration for her friends-and-rcla t ions " 

13. “ The deer have dropped down their Darbha-morsels ; the |>eacocks 
have abandoned dancing ; the creepers, showering down faded leaves, arc, 
as though, shedding tears.” 

14. “Certainly, our dear friend with her tender constitution has to be 
saved (from the shock of grief |.” 

15. “ Through prowess of penance all this comes within the direct know- 
ledge of the revered Kaiyva.” 



3 2 


U. C. LAW VOLUME 


16. “ Render service unto the elders ; towards co-wivcs display con- 
duct as towards dear companions ” ; etc. 

17 ,lU . "Take good note of us as being persons to whom self-restraint is 
(heir { real | treasure ; also note well thy high lineage, as well as that course of 
her love towards thee, brought about somehow, without (the agency and ini- 
tiative of | the relations ” : 

17-'. "Such as she is. thou art Ur view upon her- -- -amongst Jtliy wives — 
as one deserving normal treatment f : anything ovei and above this, it is not 
for the relatives of the bride to express.” 

18. “ There is doubt even about the marriage : whence now my far- 
soaring hopes ? ” 

19. " Having attained the praiseworthy status of the “ mistress-of-the- 
house " unto thy husband of noble descent, and being engrossed every mo- 
ment in those activities of his, great on account of his high position : before 
long, having given birth to a son, like the Eastern-quarter the purifying Sun, 
thou, my child, wilt no longer reckon thy grief born ol separation from me." 

20. “This way —this way, my dear friends!” 

21. “ lielas ! Owing to the flurry caused by the [louring of the water 
[into the basin |, this bee, abandoning the Navamalika, is now hovering 
around my own lace ! " 

22. “ Here, with his lingers in the form of leaflets, is this Ivcsara tree, 
looking as though hurrying me up to him. So I shall honour him (by doing 
bis wishj.” 

22. "sakuntala hath been, by these trees— her brethren during forest 
residence— permitted to make her departure, seeing that such a melodious 
cooing of the cuckoos has been turned by them into an answer on their own 
behalf.” 

24. “ So that, with thy nigh approach, this Kesara tree appeals as 
though associated with a creeper.” 

25. " Holla ! Felicitous indeed is the time that has brought about the 
union of tlus creepcr-and-trec couple. The Vanajyotsna is youthful in her 
fresh blossom ; the mango-tree, putting forth tender leaves, is well-disposed 
for enjoyment. 

26. “ Dost thou not remember ? On a certain day. under the Navamali- 
ka bower, thou hadst in tliy own hand water Idled in a vessel made of lotus 
leaves. At that nick of time my foster-son named Dlrghapanga, the deer- 
cub, approached. ‘ Let him drink first ’ : with such a compassionate thought 
thou didst cajole him with the water. But, through lack of familiarity, he 

* A double entente in samdnya • (i — '‘normal''; ii = sa+ww-F|a]nya-; or iii 
— sa+mdnyo-), is possible, but hardly probable. 



Sakuntala, the child of nature 


33 


would not allow thee to handle him nigh. Subsequently, when the same 
water was taken by me in the hand, he fancied it. Then thus didst thou 
laugh out : ‘ Every one puts faith in his own kind : both of you are forest- 
ers ! ’ ” 

27. “ In the case of women, their untutored cleverness is in evidence 
even amongst the non-human species : what to say of those that are endowed 
with intelligence? Prior to soaring-up in the mid-region, the Parabhfts 
0. the cuAkoos ; ii. those vicariously reared up : e.g. court-maids or Apsa- 
rases) forsooth do know how to cause their younglings to be brought up by 
other Twice-born (i. birds: ii. Brahmins).” 

28. " Ignoble One ! Thou art judging by the measure of thy own 
mind. Who now would care to emulate' thee that art wrapping thyself with- 
in a cloak of saintliness : that art comparable to an okl hay-hidden well ? ” 

29. “ Good Lady, Dusyania’s career is before the public ; yet: is this 
not to be detected therein.'’ 

30. ‘ Alone thou art arrogating all autliorilativeness, and claiming 
i exclusively ! to know what is righteousness. Thinkest thou that the females 

too much overcome by inborn-modesty as they are -can know nothing at 
all ? ” 

31. “So, now. meet it is that l be here turned into a self-indulgent 
female, because, putting implicit faith in his Puru-lincage, I have allowed this 
i*:rson of honeyed mouth, possessing weapon in his heart, to handle me nigh." 

32. 4 ‘ Then, when about to start for my Capital, my beloved said to me 
with tears : ‘ After how long will the Son-ol-the-Noble-one afford me [public! 
acceptance ? ' Thereat, while putting upon her linger this my signet-ring, I 
made the reply : 

4 Upon this | ring), one each for every day, do thou count; the letters 

of my name. Precisely the time thou dost leach the last, there will be 

seen approaching thee a servant of mine, who shall dead thee to receive 

entrance into my private- residence.* " 

33. “ Vanajyotsne, although united with the mango tree, do thou never- 
theless give me an embrace with these thy branch-hands that are extending 
in this direction.” 

34. “ Father ! This doe with the burthen in her foetus, and so roam- 
ing | only] up to the outskirts of our cottage : when she has had a safe deli- 
very, do thou thereupon send me some one as reporter of the welcome tiding.” 

35. This indeed cannot remain unknown even to a person naturally 
averse to worldly matters, that that King hath behaved unto Sakuntala in a 
manner unworthy of an Arya.” 

36. AnasOya — Why, Friend ! There exists not within the bounds of 

this hermitage, any being endowed with mind who, about to be 


1 



34 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


separated from thee, is not this day rendered disconsolate. Just 
see : 

This Cakravaka. though addressed fby her), does not address back 
his deaf-mate that is partitioned off from him by a lotus-leaf ; 
and dropping down from his mouth the lotus-filaments, is fixing 
his gaze upon thee. 

Sakuntala - Helas ! Just see : 

This l female- ICakravalci, unable to sight her mate that is parti- 
tioned off from her by [just] a lotus-leaf, is crying aloud 
piteously: ‘How hard is my lot ! 

Priyamvada— Do not. Friend, think this way : 

liven she - separated from her mate —lives through the night, which 
appears all the longer for the grief. For, even the great pain 
of separation, the tie of hope does make one endure.” 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM 
IN SOUTH INDIA 


by 

Prof. K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, m.a., Pni verily oi Madia?. 

Since my last attempt to trace the outline of the history of Buddhism 
in South India 1 , I have had occasion to go further into the references to 
Buddhists and Buddhism in Tamil literature ; and I think it will be of some 
use to bring together the more important ones among these references here 
and also to consider in some detail what appears to have been one of the 
historic episodes in the ruinated contests between Saivism and Buddhism in 
the south, to which I made a brief reference in the paper just mentioned. 

Working with imperfect indexes ns they now turn out to be, I permitted 
myself to make the statement ‘ that only Jnanasambandar and Tirumangai 
seem to mention them (Buddhists) particularly and their dress and habits 
in their verses'. 2 This is clearly wrong and there are found equally clear 
and definite references to Buddhists and their practices and doctrines, of 
course always with a sneer, in the hymns of Appar and Sundaramurtti and 
in some of the alvars besides Tirumangai. Appar is well known as the 
senior contemporary of Jnanasambandar. and both have been assigned on 
very proper grounds to the seventh century a.i>. Sundaramurtti came about 
a century or more later. 

The position of Manikkavasagar, the other great protagonist of Saivism 
most celebrated in legend as the opponent of Buddhism, is unfortunately 
not yet satisfactorily settled ; whether he preceded the other saints or came 
after them is still a subject of debate, and I will not enter into this vexed 
question here, but merely refer the reader to my Pdndyan Kingdom where 
I have summed up the main arguments on either side. The disputation 
that took place at Chidambaram between Manikkavasagar and the Buddhists 
from Ceylon and the legends that have gathered round it have been discussed 
fully by G. U. Pope in his superb edition of the Tiruvdsagam, and there 
is no need to reproduce the story now. But it is perhaps worth noting that 
the episode is briefly mentioned in a verse in the Tiruvi\aiyddal-Purfniam 
(The Purana of Sacred Sports ) by Vembarrurar alias Perumbarrappuliyur 
Nambi (ch. 30 v. 51) ; it does not in any sense differ from the legends re- 
viewed by Pope and is of interest as being perhaps the earliest extant literary 


1. The Maha-b4dhi Vol, 50, Apl.-June, 1942, pp. 157-67. 

2. Ibid., p. 163. 



36 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


reference to the story of the dispute. The Periya Pmanam of Sekkilar does 
not mention cither Maijikkavnsagar or his disputation with the Buddhists. 
This omission by sekkijbar who follows the tradition coming down from 
Sundaramurtti is one of the strongest arguments for Manikkavasagar being 
assigned to a date after the time of Sundaramurtti. the last of the three 
saints whose hymns together constitute the sacred collection known as the 
Devdram (The Divine Garland). The story that the Buddhists with whom 
Mariikkavusagar had his disputation came from Ceylon may also be taken 
to point in the same direction ; for there was no dearth of Buddhists and 
Buddhist institutions in South India in the seventh century A.n. as may be 
seen from Iliuen-Tsang’s account of Dravida and Malakuta and also from 
the episode in Jfianasambandar's life, to be discussed presently in some de- 
tail. This consideration is, however, by no means conclusive. For the only 
legitimate conclusion that can be drawn from it is that Manikkavasaga r did 
not belong to the same age as the hymnists of the Devdram ; he might have 
lived before or after their time, and those who stand for an early date for 
Majijikkavasagar may argue that as Buddhists continued to flourish in South 
India up to the fourteenth century a.d. after the coming of Buddhism, 
Mat.iikkavasagar must be taken to have preceded that age and followed that 
of the Sangam pioets who know only of Vedic religion and indigenous cults, 
but nothing of Buddhism or Jainism. We should not also lose sight of 
Asoka’s claim to have sent missionaries of the faith to South India to preach 
the Dhamma there, though of the practical results of these missions we have 
no definite knowledge. 

Appar makes several references to Buddhists' 1 but two of them deserve 
particular notice as in both they are mentioned along with the Jainas and 
another sect called Kundar. In the hymn on Tirutturutti (IV. 42) we read 
in v. 9 : 

Kundare £amanar Buddliar kuiivai'iyadu nin.ru 
katjdade karuduvarga] karuttemiadoj.imin nlrga| 

i.e. have no regard for the faith of the ignorant Kuixlas, Jainas and Baud- 
dhas who take account only of what they see, — a dig at the philosophical 
position of the sects which accept only pratyaksa (with anumana) as pra- 
maija. Again in the hymn on Tirunagai-karotjam (VI. 22) we have in 
v. 10 : 

manaituranda vallamariar tanga] poyyum 
marjburaikkum manakkuujdar tangal poyyum 
sinai podinda dvarattar tangal poyyum 
mcyycnru karudade poda nenje, — 

i.e. ‘O intelligent mind, do not* take for truth the falsehood of the hardy 

3. Sec pp. 61, 67. 144, 212, 228, 233, 248, 254, 269, 316, 317 and 359 of the 
Saiva Siddhanta-tnahasamajam edition, (1941), 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 37 

Jainas who have abandoned their homes, or the falsehood of the boastful - 
minded Kundar, or the falsehood of those (Buddhists) who cover their 
limbs with civara (monk's robes)'. 

Now who are the Kunrfar who seem to figure as a third sect by the side 
of the Jainas and the Buddhists in both these passages ? I am not able to 
answer this question with any confidence. One suggestion that occurred to 
my friend Mr. Vaiyapuri Pillai, Reader in Tamil (Madras), with whom 1 
discussed tlws question may be mentioned here though no finality can attach 
to it until manuscript authority is forthcoming in support. It is this. In 
the first two lines of the last citation given above from Appar, it seems 
probable that the amanar who renounced family life aie contrasted with 
kui.idai who hang on to it, and if this surmise is accepted a slight emenda- 
tion of the text will be seen to support the view ; -instead of manakkundw 
we have only to read manaifz -kundar, (kundar living in their own homes), 
and the phrase will be a perfect contrast to wanai-lunnida amanar of the 
preceding line. The Kundar would be the laity among the jainas. And 
this seems to get some support from the. phrase once employed by Nambi 
Arulrar Nambi (end of tenth century a.d. ) in whose works there are found 
frequent references to the Kundar. That phrase is amandnn van kundar' 
i e. the strong Kundar. who are Jainas. which shows that the Kundas were a 
section among them. But one is not sure how far Nambi who came long 
after Appar’s date may be taken to represent the correct position regarding 
these sects and sub-sects. And to make matters worse, there is another text 
of the same author in his Tiruvandndi (v. 28) which reads : uri kaip parita 
laik kundar i.e. the Kundar with slings in hand and heads made bald by the 
hair being plucked, showing thus that Kundar are here identified with Jaina 
monks. But if the Kundar were identical with Jaina ascetics, it is very diffi- 
cult to account for the way in which Appar mentions them separately from 
the samanas in the passages cited above. 

There is one other reference to Kundar, and this is from Jfianasam- 
bnndar, which seems to suggest that Kundar were the Jainas who wore robes 
as opposed to those who did not. It occurs in the hymn on Kilait-Tiruk- 
kattup-palli (T, 5, 10) : 

op-tuvar ar tugil adai mey-ix>rttucci-ko]amai-yui.irle-yuraikkun 

kundargalod-araik-kuraiyillar kuruvadangupamalla karidir 

i.e. ‘ Know ye that there is no good in the words of those who have no 
clothes on their waist.- and of the Kundar who cover their bodies with clothes 
coloured with bright red ochre, and eat their meal in the forenoon.' Here 
Kurujar are said to covet* themselves with red robes unlike the naked Jainas ; 
the svetambara Jain monks though their name means ‘ white-robed ’ are seen 


4. AMaiya Pillaiydr Tirukkalambakam, v. 8. 

4a 



38 B. C. LAW? VOLUME 

today wearing the orange-coloured robes used by monks of other persua- 
sions ; and if this practice may be assumed to have prevailed in the days of 
Sambandar, this passage should be taken to mention two schools of Jainas ; 
otherwise the kupdar of this text must: be taken to he Buddhists. One ex- 
planation of the word Kimdar I have heard may also be noted here. Kuiidu 
means a depth or hollow ; and hence lvuridan means a man of low character, 
a heretic. But this explanation of the term as a word of abuse which seems 
to be followed in Tamil Lexicon also does not by any means constitute a 
satisfactory account of the question raised by the references ‘tited above 
about Kundar. This discussion which has to be left in this unsatisfactory 
state shows how little we know definitely, and even Nambi Avidar Nambi 
knew, of the details of sectarian history which loomed large in the eyes of 
contemporaries. 

Departing a little from the chronological order, we shall take up the 
references to Buddhists in Sundaramurtti next. There are quite a number 
of such references 1 in which they are called Therar. Sakkiyar and so on. but 
only one of them is of sufficient geneial interest for being noticed here. In 
v. 10 in the Dev dr am on Tiru-valkoh-putlur we have the phrase ; irundun 
lerarum ninrun Samanum i.e. the Buddhas who eat their meal seated and 
the Jainas who do so standing. This distinction between the adherents of 
the two faiths known to the Tamil Saiva canon, does not seem to occur 
anywhere else ; and being unable to say how far this distinction is true to 
facts, and if so, what the point of the contrast is, T must leave these things 
to be explained by scholars who have better knowledge of the subject. 

Before leaving Sundaramurtti I should like to cite one verse from him 
w'hich, though it does not bear on the Buddhists but relates to the Jains, 
is still of great general interest as an index to the attitude of intense hosti- 
lity to the heretical sects, taken up by the Saiva saints of the day. The 
very presence of the viharas and paljis. some of which are known to have 
been in a very nourishing condition, was an irritation to the Saivas. and the 
following verse is strongly reminiscent of the tilings they saw and heard and 
did not like. The verse is No. 9 in the hymn called Namakkadigal-agiya 
adigal i.e. The God who is our I^ord. It reads : 

Namananandiyuh-KarumavTranun-Darumasenanum cnxivar 
Kumaoa-mamalaik-kunrupol-niniu tanga! kuraiyonrinriyc 
N T amanamfmana-fian^ naiiala 

amai.iarar-palippurlaiyaro nainiikkadigal agiya-vadigale 
i.e. ‘ Is our Lord God to be touched by reproaches from these Jainas who 
are lost to all sense of shame, viz., Namananandi, Karumavira, Darumasena 
and the rest of them, who stand erect with no clothes on their bodies like 

5. pp. 17, 71, 111, 114, 134, 268 of the Saivasiddhanla Mahasamajam edition 
(1935). 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 39 

some foul smelling hillock ancl mutter (unmeaning formulae sounding like) 
n a mana-nan an a -n a n a -non a n 1 ' ? This precious verse is a concentrated expres- 
sion of the intolerance of the age which forms the subject of this paper, an 
age which offers one of the few striking exceptions to the easy-going tolerance 
bordering on indifference that has been the general rule through the ages in 
all India. But the Jainas and Buddhists seem to have risen equal to the 
occasion and in their turn reciprocated the hatred directed towards them. 
Sambanda* refers to the Jains' intolerance of Saivas in rather strong terms ; 
in III 108, v. 8 (Madura) he says : 

ni.r.ru meniyarayinar melurra 
kar.ruk-ko|!avum nilla amanai 

i.e. the Jains who would not even stand in the direction of the wind that has 
touched the bodies of persons wearing the holy ashes (Saivas). 

Jfianasambandar was indeed the purest and the greatest of the Deva- 
nun trio. Unlike his elder contemporary Appar, he was no Jain turned 
8aiva. and had no past to look back on with remorse. Unlike Sundaramurtti 
whose youth was dazzled by the full lustre oi woman’s love and whose love 
affairs on occasions entangled even the deity he worshipped, Jfianasambandar 
was the joyous recipient of the highest knowledge while yet he was but a 
child, and an utter stranger to sex life. Sambandar has been best known 
lo legend and history as the opponent of Jainism, and the scene of his most 
remarkable achievements against that religion was the court of the Pandyan 
ruler of Madura on the banks of the Vaigai river. On his return to the CoJa 
country after his victory against the Jainas. he had to meet and overcome 
the opposition of Buddhists, and this episode in Sambandar's life is not so 
well known as his great encounter with the Jains of the Pandyan kingdom. 

The references to Buddhists in Sambandar’s hymns are numerous, and 
he speaks of their dress, mode of life, and their doctrines, of their denial of 
the authority of the Veda and the efficacy of sacrifice, and of their allegiance 
to the Bodhi tree and the Tripitaka. All these references have been collected 
and carefully indexed together with those on the Jains by my friend, Mr. 
Balasubramania Mudaliyar 6 , and there is no need to cite these texts here. 
We may therefore turn to a consideration of Sambandar's contest with the 
Buddhists in some detail. 

Before we enter on this task, some indication may be given of the 
sources of our knowledge of the incident and their relative importance. 
Sundaramurtti’s celebrated hymn known as Tiruttondat-togai, (Groups of 
Sacred Devotees) is the starting point of the hagiology of Tamil Aaivism ; 

6. pp. 60-66 of the Saiva Siddhanta Mahasamajam edition of Sambandar's 
Devaram (1937). This index appears in the second edition and not in the first, 
but even the second edition has gone out of print, and it is to he hoped that it 
will be reprinted when conditions allow of its being done. 



40 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


by its nature it is nothing more than an almost bare mention ot the names 
of the devotees with no details whatever of their lives and achievements, 
which, however, must have been matters of common knowledge among the 
votaries of Saivism when the hymn was composed. The traditions are re- 
corded in a little more detail some two centuries later by Nambi Arujar 
Nambi in his Tiruttomlaf tiruvimdddi and other works, some of which will 
be mentioned presently. Nambi then marks the second st?*ge in the literary 
tradition, when we are vouchsafed some details of the ancient oral tradition. 
The third and definitive stage, in this development is reached in &kkijar’$ 
Tiruttondar-puTanam also known as Periya-purfniam . twelfth century. The 
nature of this great work and the circumstances of its composition have been 
outlined by me in the chapter on Literature in my work The Colas and need 
not be reproduced here ; we may note, however, that in this extensive purana 
which has found a place, in the saiva canon from the date of its comix>sition, 
we have the most complete record of the traditional lives of the Saints of 
Saivism. Being the work of a devout believer m the faith, we find miracles 
recorded in it side by side with the commonplace occurrences of every- day 
life with equal seriousness and gcx>ri faith. I have thought it best to let 
such a work speak for itself, and hence, all the verses in which Sekkilar has 
described Sambandar's contest with the Buddhists are presented here in 
translation, and a few comments offered to enable the reader to follow the 
narrative with ease. 

The translation of the thirty odd verses of sekkilar has been found by 
no means an easy job ; the diction is prolix and often obscure ; and the 
translation now offered might never have been made but for the alacrity 
with which my friend, Mr. P. N. Appuswami undertook to make a draft 
translation which could be treated as I liked after it was placed in my 
hands ; and 1 am very grateful to him for his generous aid. The draft was 
checked and revised with all possible care with the assistance of Mr. S. 
Vaiyapuri Pillai given with equal readiness. But under the circumstances 
I have stated no responsibility should attach to my collaborators for any 
shortcomings readers may discover but only for the merits in it. if any. 

l^et us now turn to the story of the disputation between Sambandar 
and the Buddhists. The account of Sambandar’s life in Nambi ftrajar 
Nambi’ s Tiruttondm Tiruvandddi does not contain any reference to this in- 
cident. But in his other works on the life of the Saint which are no fewer 
than six in number 7 Nambi repeatedly uses expressions which are clear re- 

7. Aludaiya PiHaiyar Tiruvandadi. 

Aludaiya PiHaiyar Timccaiibai Viruttam. 

Aludaiya PiHaiyar Tirumummai?ikkovai. 

Aludaiya PiHaiyar Tiruvulamalai. 

Aludaiya PiHaiyar Tirukkalambagam. 

Aludaiya PiHaiyar Tiruttogai. 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 


41 


lerences to this disputation, and once refers to an incident in the encounter 
which figures again with some variations in the longer account of SekkiJar's 
puranam. Nambi repeatedly applies to Sambandar terms like : para-mata- 
kolari (Lion to enemy faiths), aruhdsatti (thunderbolt to the Arhats ) , Kuu 
dfisant (thunderbolt to the Kundas). and so on. The specific and unmis- 
takable reference to an incident in the dispute with the Buddhists occurs in 
Aludaiya-Pillaiyar Tiruttogai, 11. 19-21 which read : 

• net vanda 

puttan talaiyaip-puvimer purajuvilta 
vittagap-padal vilambinan. 

i.e. he uttered the magic song which caused the head of the opposing Bud- 
dhist to roll on the ground. Judging from this cryptic reference, Sambandai 
must be taken to have composed and recited some song in the course of his 
disputation with his Buddhist opponent, and as a result the. opponent’s head 
was severed from the body and rolled on the ground. We shall see from 
what follows, that this miracle is attributed by Sekkijar, not to Sambandar 
himself, as Nambi does, but to a devotee of his who, after demonstrating 
his superiority against one set of opponents by this miracle, met a second 
pally ol Bucldhists under another leader and had a long-drawn logical argu- 
ment with them which is reviewed at some length by Sekkijar and as a re- 
sult of which the Buddhists acknowledged the. superiority of Saivism and 
turned Saivas. 

We shall now trace the story in the words of Sekkiiar, — (the numbers 
within the brackets are those of the verses in the Sambandar Purdtmm) . 

896. “ Followed by a great concourse of holy servants of the Lord, 
jieerless in their goodness, he, on whose chest lay the. triple thread, came to 
the land made fertile by the Kaveri. Adored by devotees and citizens, he 
visited every temple dedicated to Him who wears snakes as ornaments. He 
offered worship at Tirukkalar, the city of maiden ramparts ; and sang of 
PatalSccaram which belongs to Him, whose throat is adorned by the black 
stain ; and bowing down he offered worship to all other cities en route, and 
reached Mujjivaykkarai. 

897. “ Carrying the sandal, the eaglewood, and the teak which grew 
upon the hills, and bearing mountainous piles of bowers which bees hummed 
around, and rising to a great height, the river became so swollen by the 
flood, and the waves rose so high, that men dared not cross it. Because the 
barge-pole thrust against the river bed could not strike bottom, the boatmen 
of the river left the boat deserted on the shore. That noble of Kaupiya 
dan versed in the arts saw it there, and came to that shore gracing it with 
his presence. While he stood thus, 

898. “ He saw on the opposite shore TirukoJJamputur where resided 
the Lord of the gods. His pure heart yearned to go thither and bow down 



42 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


in worship. Since the shore was deserted with none to ferry the boat across, 
the chieftain of Sanbai, with eager haste untied the boat, and got the ser- 
vants of the Lord on board, and witli the might of his tongue for a barge- 
pole, he stood upon the deck, and with feeling sang of the Lord the hymn 
beginning ‘kottam’ (Costus root). 

899. “ By the grace of Him. who drank the poison in order that the 
gods may live, the boat was propelled on and on. and moved across the 
river and readied KoUamputur, the city of the Ix>rd whose looks are like 
red gold. When the boat had reached the other shore, he. who in his in- 
fancy was on Knowledge fed, alighted with the faithful servants of the Lord 
to bow down to I>ord Siva, and with delight walked up to the gates of the 
temple of Him who is fond of fresh blossoms of fragrant Konrai, < Indian 
laburnum).” 

This miraculous crossing of the stream from Mujlivaykkarai to Ko]|am- 
putur on the opposite shore is mentioned a number of times by Nanibi 
Andar Nambi in his works on Sambandar to which reference has been made 
above. To continue Sakkilar’s narration : 

900. “ He prostrated in worship in front of the lofty upstanding lower, 
and entering with the crowd of the peerless servants of the Lord, he. circurn 
ambulated the temple which shone bright. He stood with head bowed down 
in the sacred presence of the moon-crested Lord and reverently extolled Him 
thus : * O Immutable One. O Lord who shewedst me Thy grace by propell- 
ing the boat upon the river ! O Thou who wearest snakes for jewels ! O 
Three-eyed one and pure, who wearest as a shawl the flayed skin of the 
elephant ! ’ 

901. “ In the days when he dwelt there, ever coming out of the temple 
after singing paeons of praise, he desired to prostrate in worship before the 
Lord whose hymnal decades were unconsumed by fire at the disputation with 
the heretical Jains held in the presence of the Pa,odya. Obtaining His grace 
in abundant measure, he departed thence, and prostrating in worship before 
the cities he had visited earlier, surrounded by those who love the Lord, he 
reached Tirunallaru praised of the four quarters, and went tn the temple 
of the Lord of the land. 

902. “ There, while the ever holy servants of the Lord surrounded him 
on all sides, he descended from the pearl palanquin, and bowing before the 
glorious and holy gates, entered in. He went round the temple of the Lord 
who on His crest wears the moon, and approaching nigh with delight in 
his heart, and clasping in worship his flower-soft hands, he prostrated before 
Him and in praise of the gracious Lord sang the hymn beginning ‘ Padaga 
mellatfi ’ ( The soft ankled foot ) with tears streaming from his eyes. 

903. “ ‘ At the disputation which the Jains held in the presence of the 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 43 

Patjdya. Thou didst preserve the freshness of the palm-leaves thrown into 
the fire. Thou abidest as a friend within my heart and yet Thou dwellest 
in Alavay too. -How is all this, O my Father? \ Thus praising Him again 
and again, and laying on Him a garland of Tamil song, he dwelt there with 
tiie sweet-natured servants of the Lord. And then bowing down in worship 
to Nallitru, the chief of Sanbai went forth for worship in the other cities. 

904. “ Then he went to Tiruttejicceri glistening in splendour, and after 
praising tfic Lord Siva, he reached Bbdimahgai where lived the Sakkiyas 
ignorant of the true faith. Knowing this full well the Saivas ( followers of 
Sambandar) sounded their conches and brass trumpets and many other 
musical instruments and raised a din like unto a surging sea : and they 
blew shrill clarions at whose sound the earth rejoiced ; and upon pipes tor) 
they blew, to proclaim, ‘He has come - he who is like a devouring lion to 
I he other faiths 

Bbdimahgai was a Bauddha settlement on the way from Tclicceri to 
Tinikkadavur. It may be the same as Bbriimahgalain, a hamlet of Tiruvi 
riaikkali in the Mayavaiam Taluk : Buddha images have been recovered from 
this neighbourhood in recent years. * But we may note here that Rbdiman 
gai was an 'exclusive colony of Buddhists, and because of this the Saiva 
followers of Sarnbandar deliberately draw the attention of the residents of 
Bbdimahgai to the presence of the Saiva saint by the noises they make, and 
Unis challenge them to a contest. This challenge to what was apparently a 
strong centre of Buddhism in tin? Tamil country in those days, could not 
well be ignored by the Bauddhas. We. should remember that the whole of 
this account comes to us from the side of the victors in the contest which 
followed ; but if we allow for the natural likes and dislikes of the author 
of the account, the substratum of truth is not very hard to get at. Let us 
sec how the Buddhists reacted to the challenge. 

905. 41 When the mean-minded Sakkiyas learnt of his arrival, they 
gathered together, and being greatly bewildered by the envy provoked in 
their hearts by the noisy shouts of the servants of the Lord and by the 
swelling sounds of the trumpets which went forth to welcome the lx)id of 
Fugali, when he came and graciously entered upon their outskirts, they went 
to their Buddha-Nandi and to the other learned Theras and angrily inform- 
ed them (of this). 

906. “When their hot and angry words, and the rising sound of the 
trumpets blown in front of the Divine Child, and the loud and joyous shouts 
of the servants of the Lord thronging there entered his ears like a barbed 
arrow, a great hatred swelled up in Buddha-Nandi's heart. He rose in anger, 

S. 276 of 1925 ; A. R. A. 1912-13', p. 75, I owe these reference to Mr. K. K. 
Venkatarama Aiyar of Fudukottah. 



44 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and going forth with a congregation of Theras around him, angrily spoke 
thus : “ Is it not seemly that you should blow upon the trumpets of victory 
only after defeating us in disputation ? ” 

Evidently there was a vihara in Bodimahgai with many learned theras 
in it and a number of other monks not so learned. In the first stage of the 
contest. Buddha-Nandi figures as the leader on the Buddhist side, and takes 
up the challenge. He offers to meet the Saivas in a disputation and stops 
their noises as unseemly in persons who have as yet no victory of, their own 
to celebrate. This irritates the Saivas and they report the occurrence to 
Sambandar. 

907. “ When Buddha-Nandi, surrounded by groups of Buddhists ori 
all sides, forbade the blowing of the truly victorious trumpets in the gracious 
presence of that incomparably wise and holy man, the Lord's devotees rose 
up in indignation, and glared in anger, thinking * If we sliould forbear and 
do not cut them down for this act of theirs, the heretics' position will be- 
come strong’ ; they approached him who sat like a jewel upon the palanquin 
set with rows of jiearls, and making due obeisance, told him of the nccui- 
rencc and stood waiting. 

908. “ ' Truly this is a strange welcome in the place we are visiting ! 
When their doctrines are set forth in argument in a definitive manner by 
Buddha-Nandi we shall know the falsity of his propositions’ said the chief 
of Pugali. But the devotee, who wrote down the noble hymnal decads as 
they were uttered, cried out in impatience ‘ By the might of the holy word 
of Sambandar. let the thunderbolt fall with a roar and knock the head of 
the Bauddha off and roll it down ’. 

909. “Like the omnipotent mantra which, like a thunderbolt, destroys 
all obstacles to the spread of the commandments enjoined for those of the 
faith of the Lord of the bull-banner, these words uttered by that holy 
truthful servant of the Lord sundered and blew into fragments the head 
and trunk of the Buddhist who came seeking victory in wordy disputation. 
Thereat the gathering of the Buddhists was thrown into utter confusion, 
and being thoroughly frightened, it fled precipitately. 

910. “ When those servants of Kara saw the plight of the Buddhists, 
and saw the devotee with words as weapons cut asunder the head of trunk 
of Buddha-Nandi who had come seeking wordy disputation, they went and 
humbly informed the Divine Child who gave them victory. He replied 
' That which has happened to remove the obstacle in our way is pre-ordained 
by fate. So shout you all ' Hara ', whereupon their shouts reached up to 
heaven.” 

This is the first stage. Sambandar is patient and offers to meet Bud- 
dha-Nandi when he has stated his doctrines ; but a devotee of his is im- 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 


45 


patient, he utters a curse against Buddha-Nandi, and that acts immediately ; 
Buddha-Nandi dies, and there is confusion in the Buddhist camp. Samban- 
dar for his part, when he sees what has happened, more or less ratifies the 
action of his devotee on the score of predestination. We have seen that in 
Nambi's account, the loss of the Bauddha’s life was brought about by a 
song of Sambandar himself ; Sckkijar evidently felt that such a method of 
controversy should not be attributed to the great saint and modified the 
story. Narpbi's account knows nothing of what follows ; but he did not set 
out like Scikkiliir to give a full-fledged biography of the saint. Their first 
shock of surprise over, the Buddhists rallied again under the leadership of 
Sariputta, an eminent divine learned in the pi takas, and he began, under 
projxir safeguards against magic and trickery, a disputation also with the 
devotee of Sambandar who had caused the death of Buddha-Nandi. Here 
is Sekkilar’s summary of the arguments urged on both sides : 

911. “All those Buddhists who in fright had fled afar were wonder- 
struck, but soon they gathered again and thought in their bewilderment 4 Is 
this trickery or is thh an instance of the might of their Saiva truth?* They 
said ‘ Without resorting to downright sorcery, will you agree to meet us to 
discuss religious doctrines ? ’ So saying, they came back with the eminent 
Sariputta himself at their head. 

912. 11 Graciously listening to their statement, the Victorious Lion of 
tv'Hibai fell in his heart 4 This is well and rejoicing greatly, he hurried 
forth. Descending from his palanquin of white pearl, he ascended the 
pillared hall of another choultry and was graciously seated among long rows 
of Saivites. And then he said, ‘ Invite hither the Buddhists who have 
come ; whereupon those who stood in his gracious presence went forth 
bearing the commands of that chieftain of Pugali. 

913. Those who went out thus came to the congregation of Theras 
and said : ‘That victorious and youthful tusker of ours, the Lord of Sap- 
bai, who has sailed across the sea of Vedic Knowledge, and is a prince of 
proficients in the three branches of Tamil, is well pleased to invite you to 
speak out the doctrines of the creed which you have been proclaiming. So 
hurry up . Thereupon Sariputta accompanied by other heretical Buddhists 
of equal eminence came thither in front of the pillared hall of the choultry. 

914. When they reached there, the Divine Child stood in that pillared 
hall with the Buddhists close by his side. Then that incomparable friend, 
who blew up into fragments the big head of the Bauddha who forbade the 
blowing of the sacred trumpet, worshipped at the feet of the chieftain of 
Pugali whose renown is ever expanding ; and, by his gracious; leave, he said 
to Sariputta, 4 Tell us who your Lord is and what your creed \ Then he 
too took up the challenge and said in reply : ”. 



46 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Note that in this account, Sambandar who is present throughout and 
whose permission is sought by the Saivas for everything that they do, takes 
no direct part in the argumentation and leaves this to his favourite disciple, 
who starts by asking Sariputta to state his creed. Sariputta's answer fol- 
lows the usual Theravada position regarding the Buddha, his Enlightenment 
and the nature of release. 

915. “ 1 In all the Kalpas where everything is born, dies, and goes 
through many a transformation, and thus every moment is constantly under- 
going a change, He performed well Charity which is glorious, Penance and 
Meditation which seeks to be alone, and thereby achieved the Eternal and 
heavenly Mukti, inseparate from Knowledge, which is spoken of in the 
Holy Books ; He. who proclaimed the Dharma so that all diverse Beings 
may be saved and be redeemed — He is the supreme Ix>rd whom we worship.' 

916. “ As Sariputta spoke thus, that distinguished devotee who had 
lxnrformed severe penances, went up to him and said : ‘ Well, then, what is 
this Mukti of yours which you assert your I^ord has achieved ? ’ Whereupon 
the Pi taka -scholar replied, ‘Constant Uruvam (Form) Vcdanai (feeling), 
Kurippu (Perception). Scykai (latent tendencies to action) and the true 
Jftanam (Intellect) are the five elements which together form the skandha 
(body ) ; their annihilation is Mukti ’ 

The objection raised by the Saiva protagonist to this view is well known 
to have engaged Buddhist writers for long, and turns on the difficulty of 
reconciling the denial of the soul and the life after death postulated by the 
doctrine of Karma. It takes the form here of questioning the continued 
existence of the Buddha after his death and his capacity to receive and 
reward the worship offered to him by his devotees. As Keith has pointed 
out : 9 4 The problem of the continued existence of the Tathagata after death 
is in the ultimate issue the same as the problem of the existence of a true 
self ; if such exists, then the enlightened one must necessarily, as the highest 
product of the world, be the possessor of such a self 

The Buddha never answered these questions fully and relegated them to 
the region of indcterminat.es. But the relation of the disciple to the Buddha 
is of a very peculiar character, and does need quite a lot of explanation. 
It can be taken in fact, to be nothing more than the natural reverence in- 
spired by the memory of a noble path-finder, and before proceeding to the 
details of the discussion that follow in SCkkilar's account, it may be useful 
for the reader to pursue the following summary by Keith of a discussion of 
the very problem debated here which occurs in the Milindapanha : 4 A 

question of importance ’ says ‘Keith 9 10 , ‘is presented by the attitude of the 

9. Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 61-2. 

10. Keith, op. cit., pp. 210-11. 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 47 

Milindttflanha to the difficult problem of the efficacy of gifts to the Buddha. 
The issue is clear ; the Buddha is absolutely departed ; neither in life, nor 
yet more in death can he accept gifts ; if there be no recipient, how can 
homage to him avail ? But Nagasena insists on the merit of acts of homage 
and seeks to explain this quality by similes ; if a great fire goes out, men 
kindle one for themselves ; so men by erecting a shrine do homage to the 
supreme Cod under the form of the jewel treasure of his wisdom and win 
rebirth as a* man, or god, as even release. Seed sown on the earth grows 
into trees, though the earth is unconscious. Diseases come to men without 
their consent from former evil deeds ; hence, it follows that a good deed 
must bear fruit apart from consent, just as ill deeds done to a saint, bring 
retribution without his desire’. 

Another point that comes up for discussion between Sariputta and the 
saiva protagonist is the omniscience of the Buddha ; the Buddhist canon 
contains many passages which affirm the omniscience of the Buddha ; but 
he does not reveal everything, but only ‘what redounds to the benefit of 
man desirous of salvation, both as regards the past, the present and the 
future. He knows whatever throughout the world is discerned, striven for, 
accomplished, or devised, by gods or men ; all that he spoke between his 
enlightenment and his passing away was true ; as he does according to his 
word, and his word is according to his going, he is styled Tathagata.’ 11 He 
is reticent on many issues ‘not merely because knowledge of these matters 
does not tend to Nirvana. but because men hold various opinions regarding 
I hem V 

After this somewhat lengthy explanation of the points at issue and the 
Buddhist position regarding them, the rest of Sekkilar’s account may be given 
without further comment. 

917. “ The devotee who heard this speech, repeated his words and 
turning to him asked, ' If all the live skandhas including the supporting 
Juana be annihilated altogether, then how can you say * The Lord is here 
and build viharas and fashion tall images of him for worship and celebrate 
festivals in his honour ? Who is he that receives all this worship ? Answer 
pray And he replied ; 

918. '“Freed from this Karmic body made up of the five skandhas, 
our Lord has become merged in Mukti Whereto the devotee said : ‘ The 
sensory organs namely the eye and others being absent, he could have no 
consciousness (at all)' ; which he refuted saying ‘Just as when a person is 
unconscious in sleep, those who abuse him and dance upon his person, do 
reap the fruits of their deeds, similarly may not Good result to those who 
offer reverent worship (to our Lord) ? ’ 


11. Keith, op. cit., p. 44. 



48 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


919. “ That devotee graciously listened to these words and said ; 

‘When he who receives continuously many an adoration, can neither accept 
it nor reject it, then, surely he cannot be said to have received it'. To 
which the other replies : ‘ When a person, neither accepting nor yet re- 

jecting whatever is presented before him, is immersed in deep slumber, — if 
one should kill him in anger, would it not lead to loss of his sweet life and 
constitute murder ? Even so will worship touch our Lord 

920. “ ‘ Does it reach him thus ! ’ exclaimed he. ‘ As in thP case of the 
sleeping man of your analogy, you postulate that your Lord is irossessed of 
all the organs of sense and of life. If so, then the annihilation of the five 
skandhas ceases to be true ; and it is clear that Me could not have attained 
changeless Mukti. Further if, among the five skandhas Intellect (arivu) 
is destroyed, Bliss cannot be associated with Mukti ’. 

921. “ When he heard this speech he had no answer ; and sUxid deeply 

concerned that even His Lord’s mukti should have come to naught. While 
he stood thus, that -devotee of him who was like the nectar of the ocean of 
Knowledge (Sambandar) faced him and said : ‘ You sjioke an untruth 

when you said that he attained to Mukti. You said also that he long ago 
knew all things and proclaimed them long ago ; how could he have known 
everything? This too is an untruth. Still speak out, let us see.’ 

922. “ ‘ Knowledge is twofold, general and particular. The first is, to 
know that a thing is a tree ; to know which is which among the trees is 
knowledge of the particular kind. Thus also among all other things which 
are limitless. Whether you heap the faggots of wood you have gathered in 
a pile, or whether you place the hacked pieces separate, each distinct from 
the other, yet a consuming sprout of fire does seize upon them and burn 
them, even so does the Ancient One reveal everything both in the mass and 
in detail.’ 

923. “ To the Bauddha, who set forth this argument, that devotee re- 
plied : ‘You mentioned the fire as an analogy to Knowledge. Now'. Know- 
ledge has no form at all ; while the fire that you sjroke of has a form, as you 
know. While your Lord, you say, can visualise not merely the present but 
also the past and future together, yet the raging fire can burn only what is 
put in it in the present, and cannot touch (anything) in the unseen times 
(Past and Future). 

924. “‘Therefore your statement that your Ix>rd is omniscient fares 
exactly like your statement about his Mukti. And the precepts revealed 
through this Knowledge are faulty too ’. 1 hus graciously did he tell him in 
an acceptable manner. Whereat tne Bauddha, having no argument in reply, 
was defeated. Having thus graciously vanquished him, that devotee bowed 
down at the lotus-feet of the chieftain of Pugali : and all the Buddhists gave 
up their creed ; and humbly fell prostrate. 



AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF BUDDHISM IN SOUTH INDIA 49 

925. 44 When that devotee in his wisdom had shown by logical argu- 
ment the untrue nature of the doctrines they held, he, who knew the subs- 
tance of the glorious limitless Vedas and of the Agamas, and of all the other 
arts, was graciously pleased to speak to the dull-witted (Bauddhas) saying 
‘Nothing is true but fcuvisni’. Thereupon the Buddhists heartily accepted 
it, and approaching the hoi? Brahmin of Sanbai, laid themselves low at his 
feel. • 

920. “<)n that day the gracious look of the Prince of the Kauiniya 
dan fell upon them ; and so their ignorance disappeared. Then they humbly 
bowed down before him, and falling prostrate, got up again and became 
teivites. And everywhere (lowers rained in torrents. The Prince of Sanbai 
then graciously revealed to them the truth, that all things stationary and 
moving are but manifestations of Siva. Thereafter going forth thence to 
worship at the holy cities of Lord Siva, he reached the outskirts of Tiruk- 
kaduvfir." 

Analogy fills an important role in this disputation as in that of Naga- 
sena in the MUindapmVia summarised above ; but the present account is that 
of a Saiva writer meant to celebrate the victory of Saivism : as often happens 
in history, we Tiave only one side of the story before us. What the Baud- 
dhas of South India felt and said on their side we have no means of know- 
ing. We must also remember this— that as the account of Sekkijar is se- 
parated by four to five centuries from the date of the occurrences it narrates 
and as oral tradition in such matters is apt to distort events considerably, 
all that we can take for certain is the general facts that Jnanasambandar up- 
held the cause of Saivism not only as against the Jainas of the Paindyan 
country, but as well against the Buddhists of the Coja-rajya. We may also 
accept the presence of Theravada Buddhists in considerable numbers in those 
days in South India, a fact even otherwise attested. 


5 



VISAKHADATTA 

By 

Dr. S. K. DE. m.a., d.utt. 

Of Visakhadatta, author of the Mudrd-raksasa, 1 we know only what he 
himself tells us in the Prologue to his play, namely, that he was son of Maha- 
raja Bhaskaradatta (or according to most manuscripts, Pjthu) and grandson 
of Samanta Vatesvaradatta ; and in spite of all the conjectures and theories 
that have centred round his date and personality, we shall probably never 
know anything more. In the concluding stanza ( vii. 21), which, however, 
is not an integral part of the play but is meant to be spoken by the actor and 
hence called Bharata-vakya, there is a mention of a king Candragupta, whose 
kingdom is said to be troubled ( udvejyamdna ) by the Mlecchas. As a refe- 
rence to Candragupta Maurya, who is the subject of the play itself, would 
be unusual in the Bharata-vukya. it is taken as the eulogy of a reigning 
sovereign ; and some scholars are inclined to see- in Visakhadatta a contern- 

1. Ed. K. T. Telang. with comm, (written 1813 a.i>.) of Dhundiraja. Bomb. 
Skt.. Scr. 1884 (7th ed. 1928) ; ed. A. Hillebrandt. Breslau 1912 ; ed. K. II. Dhruva. 
2nd ed., Poona 1928, with English trs. All the known commentaries are of corn 
paratively modern date ; for an account, see Dhruva, introd., p. xix. On the MSS 
material and an edition of the Prakrit verses, see Hillebrandt, Zur Kritik des 
Mudra-raksasa in Gottingisrhe Gelehrte Anz eigen, 1905, pp. 429-53. No good Eng. 
trs., except Wilson’s Iree rendering in Select Specimens vol. ii ; French trs. by V. 
Henry, Paris 1888 ; German trs. by L. Fritze, Leipzig, 1883. -The Cdmkyakathd 
of Ravi-nartaka (ed. S. C. Law, Cal. Orient. Ser. 1921), like Dhuqdi raja's summary 
printed in Tdang’s ed., is a resume of the traditional story, although the work pro 
tends to derive its material front a prose original, and gives some new points of 
interest. 

2. K. P. Jayaswal in M. xlii, 1913, pp. 265-67 ; Sten Konow in 1A, xliii, 1914, 
p. 66 f. and Ind. Drama . p. 70 f . ; Hillebrandt in ZDMG. xxxix, 1885, p. 130, f., 
Ixix, 1915, p. 363 (4th century a.d.) ; S. Srikantha Sastri in IMQ, vii, 1931, pp. 163- 
69. The difficulty, however, of taking the term mleccha in the sense the Hunas 
(even though they are mentioned as allies of Malayaketu in v. 11) and of explain- 
ing the word udvejyamdna satisfactorily in terms of the known facts of Candra- 
gupta’s time should be recognised ; while Jayaswal’s identification of Parvataka 
and Malayaketu are wholly fanciful. J. Charpentier in //MS, 1923, p. 586 f. (also 
1HQ , vii, 1931, p. 629), would, however, take Visakhadatta to be a contemporary of 
one of the later Guptas, probably Samudragupta, but he confesses inability to ad- 
duce much historical or literary evidence in support of his theory. Raghu ° vii. 56 
and SHu° i. 47 are adduced as parallels to the stanza in question (vii. 21), as well 
as Raghu° vii 43 to Mtuhd* v. 23 ; but it is admitted that such literary coincidences 
by themselves are of not much use in fixing a date. The presumption of Konow 
and Charpentier that the drama must have been composed before the destruction 



V1SAKHADATTA 


51 


|K>rary of Candragupla II of the Gupta dynasty (cir. 375-413), and appa- 
rently of Kalidasa. But since the readings Dantivarman, Rantivarman or 
Avantivarman. instead of Candragupta, are also found, no finality is reached 
on the question. The first two of these names cannot be traced anywhere ; 
hut since two Avantivarmans are known, the author’s patron is identified 
sometimes with the Maukhari king Avantivarman. who flourished in the 
7th Century 1 * and married his son Grahavarman to Harsavardhana’s sister 
Riijyasri, artf sometimes with Avantivarman, king of Kashmir, who reigned 
in the middle of the 9th century.’ From Ilillebrandt’s critical edition of the 
lext, however, it appears that the variant Avantivarman is most probably a 
later emendation ; and if this is so, the theories based upon the name lose, 
much of their force. In view of these difficulties, the problem must still be 
regarded as unsolved ; but there is nothing to prevent Visakhadatla from 
belonging to the older group of dramatists who succeeded Kalidasa, either as 
a younger contemporary, or at some period anterior to the 9th century a.d. 5 

Whatever may be its exact date, the Mudra-rdksasa is undoubtedly one 
of (he great Sanskrit dramas. In theme, style and treatment, however, it 
stands apart from the norma! Sanskrit play, even to a greater degree than 
the Mrcchakatika. It is partly for its originality that its merits have been 
even less appreciated than those of sudraka's play by orthodox Sanskrit 
theorists. It breaks away from the banal subject of love, having only one 
minor female character : and poetic flights are naturally circumscribed by its 
more matter-of-fact interest. If the Mrcchakatika gives a literary form to 
the bourgeois drama, its theme is still an affecting story of love and suffering. 

of t?Htalipiura. because the town plays an important part in it, should not be 
pressed loo far in view' of the conventional geography which we often find in Sans- 
krit imaginative writings. — The assumption ( JASB . 1930, pp. 241-45) that the 
drama is a Bengal work is purely gratuitous and conjectural. 

3. K. H. Dhruva in WZKM. v. p. 25 f. (end half of the 6th century) ; V. J. 
Antani in I A. li, 1922, pp. 49-51. Dhruva rightly points out that the way in which 
the king of Kashmir is mentioned in the play itself would preclude any reference 
to Avantivarman of Kashmir. 

4. Telang. introd. to his ed. ; Jacobi in WZKM, ii, pp. 212-16. Jacobi adduces 
also passages which Ratnakara, who flourished in Kashmir at about the same time, 
is said to have imitated from the Mudra ° ; but Dhruva points out that the. pas- 
sages are not conclusive. By astronomical calculation, again, Jacobi would identify 
the eclipse mentioned in the play as having occurred on December 2, 860 A.D., 
when, he holds, Aura. Avantivarman’s minister, had the play performed. Some pas- 
sages from Mudra 0 occur, with some variation, in other works, c.g., Mudra ° ii. 13 
"- Tanlrdkhayika i, 46 ; ii. 18 = Bhartfhari’s Niti 27, and Pancatantra, etc. but 
there is nothing to suggest that Vi&akhadatta could not have utilised the floating 
stock of Niti verses, and such passages are of doubtful use in questions of chrono- 
logy. See also Hertel in ZDMC, Ixx, 1916, pp. 133-42 ; Keith in JRAS. 1909, p. 145 
(9th century). 

5. The earliest quotation from the work occurs in Daiariipaka (10th cen- 
tury A.D.). 



52 


B. C. T AW VOLUME 


and politics merely forms its background ; the Mudra-raksasa, on the other 
hand, is a drama of purely political intrigue, in which resolute action in vari- 
ous forms constitutes the exclusive theme. The action, however, does not 
involve actual fight, war or bloodshed / 1 There is enough martial spirit, but 
there is no fondness for violent situation, no craving for fantastic adventures 
and no taste for indecorous affrightments. The action takes the form essenti- 
ally of a conflict, of wills, or of a game of skill, in which the interest is made 
to depend on the plots and counterplots of two rival politicians, One may 
wonder if such a subject is enough to absorb the mind of the audience, but 
the action of the play never lags, the characters are drawn admirably to 
support it. and the diction is appropriate in its directness, force and clarity. 
The Pratijiiayaugandharayana is also another drama of political intrigue, but 
the plotting in it centres round the romantic legend of Udayanas love for 
Vasavadattfi. both of whom do not make their appearance indeed, but of 
whom we hear a great deal throughout the play. The Mudra-raksasa is 
unique in avoiding not only the erotic feeling but also the erotic atmosphere. 
It is a drama without a heroine. There is nothing suggestive of tenderness 
nr domestic virtues, no claim to prettiness of romance, no great respect, even 
for religion and morality. Politics is represented as a hard game for men ; 
the virtues are of a sterner kind ; and if conduct, glorified by the name of 
diplomacy, is explained by expediency, its crookedness is redeemed by a high 
sense of duty, resolute fidelity to a cause and unselfish devotion. There is 
a small scene between Candanadasa and his family indicative of affection, but 
it is of no great importance to the development of the plot, and there is noth- 
ing of sentimentality in it even in the face of death. 

Perhaps the suggestion is correct 1 that the Brhaikalhd of Guriadhya 
could not have been the source* of the plot of the Mudm-rdksasa ; for the 
events narrated there might have supplied the frame (as Visfikhadatta did 
not certainly invent the tale ), 0 but the main intrigue appears to be the work 

6. The antecedent incidents of the drama are noi indeed bloodless, for we are 
told of the extirpation of the Nandas and of the murders of Sarvarthasiddhi and 
Paivataka but in the drama itself Caoakyas policy is directed rather towards 
preventing the shedding of blood. 

7. Speyer, Studies about the Kathasa(ilsa&ara t p. 54 ; the dram- is held here 
to belong to the 4th century A.l). 

8. In the printed text of the Dasarupaka (i. 61) wc have the statement in 
Dhanika’s Vrttt : brhatkatha-mulam mudrarakfasam, followed by the quotation of 
two verses ; but these verses are obviously interpolated from Koemendra’s Brhat- 
katha-manjari (ii. 216, 217). See G. C. O. Haas, Introd. to Dasarupaka (New 
York, 1912), p. xxiii. 

9. The story' of the downfall of the Nandas and the rise of the Mauryas occurs 
also in Hemacandra’s Purisi$ta-parvan and other works, and is probably traditional 
The details of Ca^akya’s intrigue, and even the name of Rak$asa, are not found in 
these sources. The very name of the drama, derived from the signet ring (Mudra) 
which plays an important part in the winning over of Rak$asa, as well as the em- 



VISAKH ADATTA 


53 

0 j the dramatist himself. It is also not necessary to assume that the drama 
is historical in all its details, or to see in the working out of a political plot 
a tendentious piece of literature, which may be conveniently referred to 
this or that, period of Indian political history. It is unquestionable that 
Candragupta and Canakya arc historical personages, and so are possibly 
Kaksasa and Sarvarthaskldhi, although these latter names do not occur in 
the tiadilional accounts we possess ; but how far they are historically or pur- 
posivcly presented is a different question ; at least, the occurrence of historical 
tacts or persons docs not justify the designation of a historical drama to the 
work of art. which must necessarily owe a great deal to the author's imagi- 
nation in the ingenious maturing of the story. 

The main theme of the drama is the reconciliation of Kak$a$a, the faith- 
ful minister of the fallen dynasty of the Nandas, by that traditional master 
iff si alec raft, Canakya. who wants to win him over, knowing his ability and 
honesty, into tiie service of Candragupta Maury a, who has been established 
ini the throne by Cauakya's cleverness and his own bravery. To the crafty 
machinations of Canakya are inseparably linked the almost, co extensive plots 
of Kakfasa, acting in alliance with Malayaketu. son of Candragupta \s former 
ally, now alienated by the treacherous murder of his father by CanakyaT 
agents. The detailed development of the plot of the drama is complicated, 
but perspicuous ; ingenious, but not unnecessarily encumbered. The first 
act plunges at once into the story and gives us a glimpse into Canakya’s 
usolution and his deeply laid schemes, cunningly devised and committed to 
properly selected agents, which set the entire plot in motion. The second act 
shows, by way of contrast, the counter-schemes of Rak$asa and the character 
of his agents, as well as the traps of Canakya into which lie unsuspectingly 
walks. The next act is an ably constructed dramatic scene of a pretended 
but finely carried out open quarrel between Candragupta and Caiiakya, 
mrynt as a ruse to entiap Raksasa further into the belief that Canakya has 
fallen from royal favour. In the next three acts the plot thickens and move* 
rapidly, drawing in Malayaketu s suspicion of the treachery of his own 
friends, execution of the allied Mieccha kings, and dismissal of Raksasa, who 
2s left to soliloquise deeply on the heart breaking failure of his aims and 
efforts, and on the fate of his friend Candanadasa who is led to death. The 
misguided but valiant and pathetic struggle of Rak$asa perhaps suggests 
tragedy as the natural end, by making him a victim of the misunderstandings 
created by Ciiqakya ; but the intrigue is developed into a happy end. not in 
a forced or illogical manner, but by a skilful handling of the incidents, which 
are made to bring about the denouement in the natural way. Capakyas 
intention from the beginning is not tragedy but a happy consummation. He 
makes, therefore, an accurate estimate of both the strength and weakness of 

ployment of the old idea of a token in this particular form, appear* to be entirely 
Visakhadatta’s own. 

5a 



54 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


his opponents character and prepares his scheme accordingly. Canakya 
knows that the only way to subdue Riik$asa and impel him to a supreme act ol 
sacrifice is through an attack on his dearly loved friends, especially Candana 
dasa, whose deep affection and spirit of sacrifice for Kaksasa is equally great. 
In the last act. cornered and alone, Raksasa is ultimately compelled to accept, 
with dignity, the yoke which he never intended to bear, not to save his own 
life, but. to protect those of Candanadasa and his friends. The acts are 
complete in themselves, but they are not detached ; no situation il forced or 
developed unnaturally ; all incidents, characters, dialogues and designs are 
skilfully made to converge towards the denouement, not in casual strokes, 
but in sustained grasp ; and there is no other drama in Sanskrit which 
achieves organic unity of action and inevitableness with greater and more 
complete effect. 

In characterisation, Visakhadatta fully realists the value of contrast, 
which brings distinctive traits into vivid relief ; and one oi the interesting 
leatures of his delineation is that most of his characters are dual portraits 
effectively contrasted, but not made schematically symmetrical. Both 
Capakya and Raksasa are astute politicians, bold. lesourceful and unscrupui 
ous. but both are unselfish and unflinchingly devoted, from different motives, 
to their respective cause. Any possible triviality or sordidness of the plot is 
redeemed by the purity of their motives and by the great things which are at 
stake. Both are admirable as excellent foils to each other ; Canakya is clear 
headed, self -confident and vigilant, while Raksasa is soft, impulsive and 
blundering ; the one is secretive, distrustful and unsparing, while the other 
is frank, amiable and generous ; the one is feared, while the other is loved 
by his friends and followers ; the hard glitter of the one shows off the pliable 
gentleness of the other. The motive of Canakya s unbending energy is not 
any affectionate sentiment for Candragupla. for in his methodical mind there 
is no room for tender feelings ; Raksasa, on the other hand, is moved by a 
willing admiration even of his political adversary. It is precisely Raksasa's 
noble qualities which prompt Canakya to go to the length of elaborate 
schemes to win him over ; and it is precisely these noble, qualities which lead 
ultimately to his downfall. He is made a victim of his own virtues. ; and the 
pathos of the situation lies not in an unequal fight so much as in the softer 
features of his character. Raksasa is, of course, also given to intrigue, but 
he does not live and breathe in intrigue as Canakya does. There is, however, 
no feeling in Cat.takya’s strategy ; there is too much of it in Rak$asa’s. Al- 
though sharp and relentless, Canakya is indeed not a monster ; and whatever 
one may think of his deception, impersonation and forgery, one ad- 
mires his cool and ingenious plotting. But our sympathy is irresistibly 
drawn towards the pity of Rak^asa’s stumbling and foredoomed failure, his 
noble bitterness on the break up of his hopes and efforts, his lofty desire to 
sacrifice himself for his friend, and his dignified but pathetic submission. The 



viSakhadatta 


bb 


same contrast is seen in the presentation of Candragupta and Malayaketu. 
Although they are pawns in the game, they are yet not mere puppets in the 
hands of the rival statesmen. Though low-born and ambitious, the Maurya 
is a sovereign of dignity and strength ol character, well trained, capable and 
having entire faith in his preceptor and minister, Canakya ; but the caprici- 
ous young mountaineer, moved as he is by filial love, is conceited, weak and 
foolishly stubborn, and has his confidence and mistrust equally misplaced. 
It is clear dLhat the characters of this drama are not fair spirits from the far 
olT and unstained wonderland of fancy, nor are they abstract embodiments of 
perfect goodness or incredible evil. Even the minor characters, none of whom 
is fortuitous or unmotived, are moulded skilfully with a natural blend of 
good and evil. The secret agents of Casnakya, Bhagu rayaiia and Siddhar- 
Ihakn, faithfully carry out their commissions, not with spontaneous enthu- 
siasm, but from a feeling of awe and meek submission ; they are, however, 
finely discriminated as individuals, for while the one hates his work and feels 
secret compunctions, the conscience of the other is more accommodating. 
Rak^asa’s agents, the disguised Viradhagupta and the honest snkatadasa, on 
tiie other hand, are moved by a sincere attachment to Rfiksasa and honest 
desire to serve One of the most touching minor characters of the play is 
( andanadasa, the head of the guild of lapidaries, whose affection for Rak$asa 
is as sincere as that of indusarman for Canakya, but it is strong and un- 
dented enough to rise to the height of facing death for the sake of friendship, 
and to be used, for that very reason, as a lever by Canakya to play upon the 
magnanimous weakness of Raksasa. It is true that the characters of the 
drama are not always of a pleasant type, but they have a consistent indivi- 
duality. and are drawn as sharply and coloured as diversely as the shady 
characters in the Mmhakatiko. 

The mastery of technique which the work betrays is indeed considerable, 
but there is no aggressive display of technical skill nor any wooden conform- 
ity, so far as we know, to fixed modes and models. Nor is there any weak 
ness for the commonplace extravagances of poetic diction affected by some of 
his contemporaries. Visakhadatta's style is limpid, forcible and fluent ; and 
he appears to be fully aware of the futility of a laboured and heavily embel- 
lished diction for the manly strain of sentiment and vigorous development of 
character which his drama wants to attain. His metrical skill 10 and literary 
use of Prakrits 11 are considerable, but in no way conspicuous. Perhaps as a 

10. The metres most employed (besides the Sloka), in order of frequency, 
are Sardulavikri<Jita, Sragdhara, Vasantatilaka and Sikharini. Other metres are 
sporadic, but no rare kind is attempted. 

11. The usual Prakrits are Sauraseni and MaharaStn, but Magadhi also occurs. 
Hillebrandt rightly points out that, as in Sdkuntala . Mrcchakatika and other earlier 
plays, theie is no justification in this case for the assumption that Sauraseni was 
exclusively employed for prose, or M3hara$tri for verse. 



56 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


stylist he does not claim a high rank with his great, compeers, and yet some 
of his stanzas stand out among the loftiest passages in Sanskrit literature. 
We do not indeed find in him the poetic imagination and artistic vigilance of 
Kalidasa, the dainty and delicate manner of llar$a, the humour, pathos and 
kindliness of sudraka, the fire and energy of Bhatta Narayana, or the earnest 
and tearful tenderness of Bhavabhuti ; but there can be no doubt that his 
style and diction suit his subject, and, in all essentials, he is no meaner artist. 
He uses his images, similes and embellishments with considerable skill and 
moderation ; and, if he does not indulge profusely in elaborate poetical and 
descriptive passages, it is because his sense of dramatic propriety recoils from 
them. The soliloquy of Raksasa is indeed long, but it is not longer than 
some of the soliloquies in Hamlet. It shows, however, that the author was 
not incapable of truly emotional outbursts : and the paucity of citations from 
his work in later rhetorical and anthologica! works need not prove that his 
drama is devoid of poetical or emotional touches. The kind of poetry and 
sentiment, which are normally favoured, are i>erhaps not to be found here ; 
but in easy and subdued elegance of its own poetry and sentiment, the work 
is certainly successful. Visakhadatta never thinks less of his subject and 
more of himself, so as to make his work a convenient vehicle for the display 
of his literary ingenuities ; nor does he pitch his voice too high and exhaust 
himself by the violence of his effort. He has the gift of projecting himself 
into the personality of his characters ; his dialogues and stanzas have the 
dramatic quality necessary for rapidity and directness of action and charac- 
terisation ; and if his work is necessarily of a somewhat prosaic cast, it still 
conforms more to the definition of the drama as the literature of action than 
some of the greater Sanskrit plays. The only serious defect is that the 
drama lacks grandeur, with a grand subject ; it also lacks pity, with enough 
scope for real pathos. The downfall of a dynasty and fight for an empire 
are concerns only of persona! vanity, wounded by persona! insult ; they are 
matters of petty plotting. Our moral sense is not satisfied even by the good 
result of placing Candragupta more securely on the throne ; and the atmos- 
phere of cold, calculated strategy and spying is depressing enough for a really 
great and noble cause. 1 * 


12. Passages from a drama, entitled Devbcandiagupta , are quoted seven times 
in the Nafya-darpatja of Ramacandra and Gunacandrit t 12lh century); ed. COS, 
Baroda 1929, pp. 71, 81, 86, 118, 141-13, 193, 194), and the work is attributed to 
Visakhadeva, who is probably identical with our author Visakhadatta (whose name, 
however, does not occur in it: in the anonymous quotations from the Mudra-rak$asa). 
The work has not been recovered, but it probably dealt with the story (cf. Raja- 
sekhara. Kdvya-mtmamsd , p. 46) of Kumara Candragupta’s rescue (in the disguise 
of a woman) of Dhruvadevi who had been abducted by a $aka prince. This is 
perhaps the same story as is alluded to by Bana in Har$a-carita ( art pure ra para - 
kalatra-kamukam kdm inv resa - gup Lax candraguptah sakanrpatim a&atayal) ; see M, 
lii, 1923. pp. 181-84. where this Candragupta is taken to be Candragupta II of the 



ViSAKI 1 ADATTA 


tiupta dynasty. From the citations it appears that the drama extended at least to 
five acts. Abhinavagupta also quotes the work, without the name of the author, in 
bis commentary on Bharata ; so does also Blioja in his $r»R dra-fnakasa (see S. K. 
IX 1 in HSf)S. IV, 1926, p, 282). Another work of Visakhadcva’s, entitled Abhisii- 
rikaraheitaka (“band hi taka) is also cited by Abhinavagupta and Bhoja. It. 
appears to have been based on another love-legend of Udayana, in which Padma- 
vatT win» back the lost affection of Udayana. who suspects her of having killed his 
son, by disguising herself as a Sabari and in the role of an Abhisarika. making her 
lender minded husband fall in love with her again ! It is curious that a drama 
called Pratima- rSnukya on the same theme, appears to have been composed by one 
Rhima. as we knew from its citation also by Abhinavagupta and Bhoja : apparently 
it was modelled on Visakhadatta’s play < See R. Kamamurthi in fOR Madras iii 
1929. p. 80). " 1 



KALIDASAS USE OF THE INCARNATION THEME 

By 

Mr. C. W. GURNER. c.s.i., i.c.s. p 

The foundations of belief in one era of civilisation will often be found to 
play a secondary part in the cultural or philosophical ideas of a different age. 
The doctrine of transmigration of souls ( in the form of Karma and Rebirth ) 
is one of the foundations of classical Indian thought : it plays a secondary 
and exotic part in that of Greece and Rome. The doctrine of Incarnation 
is the essential basis of religious belief and of the cultural ideas integrated 
with religious consciousness in the Christian era ; it fills a definite and recog- 
nisable but nevertheless a secondary place in the intellectual atmosphere of 
classical, and perhaps one might add of modern, India. 

It is the object of this article to ascertain exactly what content this con- 
ception stood for in the minds of a cultured qnd thoughtful Sanskrit poet.- 
the mirror of his age, Kalidasa’s philosophical and theological ideas lie out 
side our scope except so far as necessary for definition and comparison with 
Christian interpretation of this particular theme. 

By the idea of Incarnation in this article is meant the apprehension ol 
the appearance through birth of the Godhead in human form for the purpose 
of relief of Evil, followed by reabsorption in the divine origin. This defini- 
tion excludes embodiment of the deity in non-human forms, such as some of 
the Avatars of Visnu. And it is necessary to distinguish the sense of Im- 
manence of the deity in the physical world, including humanity, which is 
often associated with the Incarnation, both in Indian and Christian thought 
but implies an entirely different philosophical conception. The close colloca- 
tion of the two ideas of Immanence and Incarnation in the Bhagavadgita is 
apt to result in confusion between the two. 

It is an open question to what extent the cultured thinker of Kalidasa's 
time accepted the Incarnation, in this sense, as a vital factor in Ivs religious 
consciousness. The same question is raised about Brahmanic Hinduism of 
to-day by A. C. Bouquet in his book on Comparative Religion. 1 “ But it is 
doubtful whether the devout believer in the Avatara is really satisfied with 
that (a doctrine of Illusion). Rama is probably as real to him as Jesus to 
the Christian. ’* But even as an article of belief the Incarnation would 
remain in Indian culture, should one say a secondary feature of theological 
reality rather than the essential basis of the religious system which it is for 
Christianity. 

1, Comparative Religion by A, C. Bouquet, p. 106. 



Kalidasa’s use of the incarnation theme 


59 


This idea appears in two forms in Sanskrit literature both associated 
with the God Vi®nu, his Incarnation in Rama, and in Kr$i?a. In both cases 
l he expression of this conception whether in the Ramayapa or in the Bhaga- 
vadgila must, almost by consensus of scholarship, precede its appearance in 
the New Testament by one or more centuries. A derivative form of the idea 
exploited and possibly invented by Kalidasa lor purely literary purposes is 
(he propagation of the divine element by Siva through Parvatl in Skanda for 
I he destruction of demonic activities corresponding to those of Ravatja in 
the Rama legend. 

Kum. Sam. VI. 27. 

At the outset one must ddinc more closely this element of the relief of 
Kvil its :m essential element in the Incarnation theme. It stands on two 
levels. One is that of the ethically lower strata of the Ramayaiia. The 
object of the deity incarnate is to destroy the material interference by a physi- 
cally existent power of evil, Ravana, 

a With the. gods themselves. 
b. With sacrifice to the Gods. 

wf I 

Ram. VI. 117/2H. 

it is an implication of this basic idea that the demonic activities should 
ihernsclves have originated with the consent, of the Godhead in some form. 
Vi$i.m has only acquiesced in Havana's activities because of the Brahma's 
boon 

agrofipng 

Kalidasa RV. X. 42. 

Havana in relation to the Ksis is Job's Satan of the Old Testament. 
" And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold all that he hath is in thy power ” 
i Job I 12). It is the samo crude treatment ol the problem of evil. 

But there is a higher conception ol the evil for which Incarnation alone 
can provide the remedy than that of the physical activities of a malignant 
power. It is that of the moral-religious evil involved in the confusion of 
Ohamia. This idea is, of course, essentially that of the BhagavadgTta (in 
which the motive for Incarnation never touches the lower plane), eg. 
Bhagavadglta IV. 7 : — * 

It docs appear, however, also in the more philosophical stratum of I he 
Ramayaria whether concurrently with or derivatively from the Bhagavad- 
K>ta, e.g. 

sfB^s^WRf 5T% 51% I 

Ram. VII. 8. 27. 



60 


B. C. LAW volume; 


Both authorities no doubt contribute to the expression of the same thought 
in Kalidasa 

Raghu XV. 4. 

The object of the Incarnation is no mere business of “ killing Ravapa " but 
the Salvation of Dharma in a deeper sense. 

« 

Two comments may be made at this point by way of comparison with 
the western conception of Incarnation. The recurrent process essential to 
the Pnranic idea is entirely absent from and incompatible with the speci 
fically Christian interpretation of the same theme. - And though in a pas- 
sage such as that last quoted the functioning of the deity incarnate may be 
far removed from the original crude conception of “ killing Havana though 
the process of relief of evil through Incarnation begins to assume the sense 
of a Mystery, there is in Hindu thought, at least as embodied in the author 
under study, not the remotest conception of the New Testament principle of 
Redemption. The only element in the specifically Christian interpretation of 
the theme of Incarnation which can be traced in its Indian counterpart is 
that of divine favour as the sole motif for the Descent. 

Raghuv. X. 3*1. 

(“So God loved the world that he gave ” ). 

The earthly parentage is an aspect of the Incarnation de.veloi>ed by 
Kalidasa only in the Vi$i}u-Kama theme. Coincidences with the New Testa- 
ment story are in fact far more marked in the legend of the infant Kr^i.ia and 
in those associated with the Buddha. But the Visnu-Rama birth is more 
directly concerned with the mystical problem of sel (-procreation by the God- 
head through earthly parentage. And here arises a point of great interest 
in the contrast between the Indian and Christian interpretations. 
For Christianity interest centres on the maternal side and the act of parent 
age vests the Mother with an immense religious significance of her own. The 
essential features in the Visiui Incarnation are on the other liana, firstly, the 
emphasis on the male parent rather than the mother, and. secondly, as the 
logical result of this trend coupled with polygamy, the distribution of the 
divine element Incarnate to the offspring of several mothers. Both principles 
are embodied in a single Sloka of the Ramayana 

2. For the recurrent process as taking shape in the Visgu cycle see A. C, 
Bouquet, Op. dt. p. 101. Though essentially incompatible with Christian doctrine 
the same thought may creep into Christian writings. E. G. Cook, Rebirth of 
Christianity (Penguin Series), p. 163 : "Ordinary processes of growth and repair 
reach their height in divine, acts of regeneration, redemption and atonement.” 



KALIDASA'S USE OF THE INCARNATION THEME 


61 


tidlfUW 

ftcTt *Ptoll*lW I 

Ram. I. 15. 31. 

Four mothers shared in the divine birth but it was none of these so much as 
the Father whom the divine being blest with his choice. 

The plural incarnation is given its full significance in the birth of Rama 
and his brothers in the Ramayaiia, where the individual blessing on each 
mother is particularised in slokas imitated and elaborated by Kalidasa 


sBteRarr 5pg* bt gspnfof&srai i etc - 

Ram. I, 18.12 etc. CP. Ragh. X. 69 ff. 
and in one passage at least the Ramayana puts Rama and Lak$mapa on an 
equivalent plane of divinity 


HSWpft SlRfd I 


R. IV 31.45. 


For Kalidasa only the figure ol Rama is invested with religious signi- 
ficance. 

The distribution of the divine element between the consorts of Dasaratha 
is elaborated with full literary value in the tenth Sarga of the Raghuvaihsam. 
All carry the embryo of divine origin as the solar tubes (of Puranic physics) 
carry water (Ragh. X. 58). All participate in dreams conveying the pre- 
sence of Vi$nu, with attributes and consort, which are the Sanskritic equi- 
valent of an angel choir in a Madonna painting (Ragh. X. 62). But no one 
can interpret such passages as more than literary embroidery ; and so far as 
one can sense any expression of genuine feeling it is Dasaratha whose exalta- 
tion recalls the sentiments of a Magnificat more appropriate in Christian 
thought to the Blessed Virgin. 

Raghuv. X. 64. 

“ He considered himself blessed in the fatherhood of the Father of the world.” 
This predominance in sacred interest is marked by the fact that it is to him 
and not to the Mother that the Messenger of the Annunciation bearing the 
mystic “ Payas ” appears. 

(Ram. I. 16.18, Ragh. X. 50). 

The principle of plurality of Incarnation assumes a more fantastic form 
in the subsidiary incarnations of other deities in the beings destined to attend 
on Rama. There is not one deity incarnate (and He in four persons) but 
several deities descending into human and sub-human forms to follow Him. 

sitkSfligGH gfeiigAw. I 

Ragh. X. 49. 



62 


13. C. LAW' VOLUME 


“ following Vi$nii with parts of their selves as trees follow the wind with 
flowers.” 

And they arc not forgotten on their way back when the earthly mission is 
accomplished (Raghv. 'XV. 102). Wc are obviously drifting away here 
from any kind of religious content to that of traditional convention ; but 
Kalidasa's approach to the idea of Incarnation will not be fully understood 
unless this elaboration is comprised in the account. 

In the representation of the divine infant Kalidasa emphasises an ele- 
ment which whether by coincidence or continuity of tradition played an 
essential part in the Christian era, namely, the Halo. The origin of this 
convention needs a study in itself : but it is sufficient for present pui poses 
to say that for Kalidasa the Halo was an attribute of royalty which he 
transferred impartially to the divine infant, male or female. The Rama babe 
dims the chamber lights ( Ragh. X 68). The infant Parvatl sparkles like 
jewels on the mountain side ( KS. I. 21). Contempoianeously the Byzan- 
tine mosaics were investing the Infant Jesus and all other divine figures with 
the heavy gold halo which passed down all the centuries of Christian art till 
it was refined to a gleam of chiarorcuro round the cradle. The same 
feature reappears in the Krsna infant as portrayed by “ Bhasa " more speci- 
fically as a miracle ad hoc. 

m 

arowrtg: § wr far i Bil - 17 

The infant creates a light in darkness to reveal the path of escape. 

But in an article devoted to the study of the idea of Incarnation as em- 
bodied in Kalidasa one must not go further afield. It would be more rele- 
vant to fix the point at which the Halo round the Infant Christ appears in 
Christian writings. 

There is a well established convention in ^Sanskrit epics and Kavya 
poetry that any event of special significance in human affairs, such as a 
royal birth or a victory should evolve a sympathetic response both in the 
natural and the supernatural world. The winds are stilled, disease vanishes, 
heavenly flowers fall and heavenly voices arc heard etc. It is only natural 
that similar manifestations should mark the birth of Visnu incarnate and it 
might prove to be more than a mere verbal coincidence that some of them 
at least are so reminiscent of the Nativity in Christian tradition. A few 
words in the Ramayana create in fact an exact Indian counterpart to the 
angels above the Cradle. 

5ig: 3*3 ^ *lTfsft SfSgftlMKMli: I 

Ram. I. 18.17. 

Candharvas sang and Apsaras danced in the Heavens. Kalidasa associates 
these natural manifestations, in closely parallel verses, again both with the 



KALIDASA’S USE OP THE INCARNATION THEME 


63 


birth of Parvati (Kum. I. 23) and with the birth of Rama (Ragh. X. 72). 

In the latter case making all allowances for the difference in religious 
values between the Puratjic Svarga and the “ Heaven ” of Christianity one 
cannot miss the impart of what may be described as the Christmas day 
feeling in the thought of Heaven descending with the Godhead to earth. 


3TKTOlfcl% flt nef gviftWR i 

* Ragh. X. 72. 

Moreover Jvith the excessive formalism characteristic of Sanskrit literature 
precisely opposite manifestations of natural sympathy mark events of un- 
favourable significance. The sky rains blood not flowers down at Havana’s 
birth (Ram. VII. 9. 31.) and the sun fails, as on Good Friday. 

Sppft ^ tjqf t I 

The earthly personality of the deity Incarnate in Sanskritic thought, 
whether it be Rama or Krsna. is so far disparate from its Christian counter- 
part. that comparison is of little value. The essential point to be remembered 
is that for Kalidasa as an exponent of classical literary ideas the Vi$nu Rama 
story serves the purpose of exciting the emotions primarily of heroism and 
wonder, not tenderness or even peace (if the ninth Rasa be admitted to the 
categories of his time). 

The characteristic of the deity incarnate in Rama is the divine force 


*ir irrer ?rsr --tut 'Wre; 


(Ragh. XL. 85). 


with the access of superhuman powers, esix;cially in combat, to which this 
gives rise. That was what the Incarnation in Rama meant for classical 
literature just as it does for the Durwan reading his Ramayan on the door- 
step to-day. The Bhagavadgita gives a glimpse of the “ despised and re- 
jected " conception (though the verbal coincidence might easily mislead) 


arsRFTfar *ri >ijei cfjf*nfadT i 

Bh : G. IX. 11 


But it was not one which appealed to Kalidasa, and the philosophical study 
of the Itrana Incarnation is another matter which does not concern us here. 

There remain the aspects of the Transfiguration and the Ascension, the 
sell revelation in transcendental form to mortal eye of the deity incarnate 
and the return from the human to the divine. The “ VisvarupadarSanam " 
in the Bhagavadgita. in its resemblance and contrast with the Transfiguration 
in the New Testament offers one of the most striking and instructive counter- 
parts between Indian and Christian ideas. Kalidasa, though closely in con- 
tact with Bhagavadgita. from which he consciously quotes a line* 

WratTOT : R G. X. 25 ; Cp. Kum. VI. 67. 


3. In the Ram&yana the supremacy of the Himalaya is one of the several 
similes in praise of Rama. See Rama IV. 11. 93. 



64 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


finds no place in the Riima story for the transfiguration theme during Vi$gu’s 
earthly abode ; though his elaboration of the lconology of Visuju ( for instance 
in the Stuti verses in Sarga X of the Raghuvamsam) may owe something to 
this influence. In fact the Ramayana itself shows perhaps more conscious- 
ness of the mystical sense of Maya which is predominant in the Bhagavad- 
ffltn (e.g. 

Ram. V. 54.37) than will be found in the rather more material conception 
of the Incarnation in Kalidasa. 

Similarly his expression of the return to Godhead is materialistic rather 
than mystical a matter of change from one body to another 

sf: rtk-SlRlWH, I 

Ragh. XV. 103." 

This somewhat materialistic tone is well brought out in one of Kalidasa’* 
most remarkable similes from religious ideas, with which these notes may 
end. The fifteenth Sarga of the Raghuvariisa ends with Rama Vispu’d 
return to his M true body foundation of the world ” in the words quoted 
above. The capital of Ayodhya remains deserted till one night the City 
personified as a Widow appears to Kusa, now resident in Kusivatf, appealing 
to him to reoccupy the ancient capital. A highly wrought descriptive pas- 
sage ends in the prayer to return to capital of the Dynasty “ as Kusa’s 
Father had abandoned his mortal body to return to his fonn in the Absolute.” 

tiding# ert *wr gs ^ i 

Ragh. XVI. 22. 

It will be noticed how the simile acquires its maximum power from the 
reminiscence of a phrase in the Bhagavadgita coupled with its appropriate 
ness as an, appeal to Rama’s descendant. And yet, powerful as the illustra- 
tion is for its literary purpose, the very fact that it could be used on this 
worldly plane leaves some suspicion as to the true depth of its religious 
content in the poet’s mind. It is as if some modern Milton had appealed to 
Lord Hardinge to “ take back his Government to the ancient cs»»vtal of Delhi 
just as the Redeemer had returned to Heaven ", and it is probably not too 
sensitive a feeling that no poet with Milton’s sense of devotion could have 
forced his pen to such an ornament. 

At the end of it all therefore one is left asking what did this Incarnation 
theme mean to Kalidasa, the supreme model of the cultured Indian of his 

4 . Kalidlsa here uses one of the rarer names of Vispu found in a Smti Stuti 
passage of the Ramayana (VI. 117 . 14 ) in conjunction with “ Kp»a *’ but not in 
the Bhagavadgita. 



kaudasa's use of the incarnation theme 65 

age ? Does he profess to have given expression to true religious feeling and 
genuine belief at any point in his use of the Rama-Vi$tju Incarnation, or is 
it all to him merely a doctrinaire convention drawn on for its literary values. 
The question concerns not his ultimate faith in Vi§iju (as in Siva), but his 
immediate belief in the incarnation of the Godhead in this, or other human 
forms. The only answer that can be given is that, like Shakespeare, Kali- 
dasa is tfco great a literary artist to reveal his personal consciousness on any 
particular Article of faith. 



DEVELOPMENT OE TRI PIT AKA-TRANSLATIONS 

IN CHINA 

By 

Mr. FACHOW 

The institution of translating Buddhist Tripirakas into Chinese from 
both Sanskrit and Pali sources has a long history ever since the formal intro- 
duction of Buddhism into China in A.n. 67, when Emperor Ming-ti of the 
Han dynasty accorded his imperial welcome to the first two Indian sages 
Kasyapa Matanga and Dharmananda at l o- Yang, capital of the Han 
dynasty. It is recorded in several historical and non-canonical works that 
the first Buddhist text, translated into Chinese by them was the * Siitra of the 
Forty-Two Chapters 1 along with Buddhacarita Sutra. Dasa-Bhumi Klesa- 
cchedika-Sutra, Dharma-Samudrakosha-Sutra. Jataka and other texts of the* 
Vinaya. However, except the first one, the remaining texts, so far as our 
knowledge goes, were either lost or disappeared without any trace. Under 
the auspicious inauguration of Matanga. the noble sages of both the countries 
labouring constantly for a long period of fifteen hundred years did perform 
a great wonder in bringing about the monumental work of the Chinese Tri- 
pitaka. It may not be an exaggeration if we say that it is a rare, priceless 
relic of Indian culture being carefully preserved and protected in the soil of 
China. Not only by its highly developed philosophy and literature it did 
influence the thought and mode of life of the Chinese people to a large 
extent, but also it furthered the intimate and ever-lasting cultural relationship 
between the two great sister nations, India and China. To the? scholars who 
toil in the field of ancient Indian history and culture, it will prove to be an 
inexhaustible mine, because it is directly connected with all subjects and 
branches of Indology. Owing to the misconception that the Chinese language 
is the most hard one in the world, the foreign scholars, therefore, are barred 
from reading these translations directly, and as a matter of fact, they have 
been ignored blissfully by the outside world. 

To have a clear idea of the development of these canonical works, the 
following iioints may be added here. 

A. The Three Stages of Development . 

I. The First Stage. 

The inception for such meritorious enterprise, as we have mentioned 
above, is dated back as early as the first century a.d. At that time Buddhist 
missionaries began to pour into China from different Kingdoms of the Western 



DEVELOPMENT OF TRIPITAKA-TRANSLATIONS IN CHINA 67 

Region— Central Asia, viz., An-Shih-Kao from Parthia (a.d. 148-170), Loka- 
rakasha from Yueh-Chi (a.d. 164-186), Kang-Chu from Kang Ch’u or 
Ulterior Tibet (a.d. 187), Kumarajiva from Kharajar (a.d. 401). Buddha- 
yasas from Cabul (a.d. 403) and so forth. During this short period from 
a.d. 67 to the arrival of Kumarajiva in a.d. 401, it was little more than 320 
years yet we had about sixty foreign Buddhist masters whose translations 
were counted to be over 400 separate works. In these books we find every 
branch of 'Buddhist doctrine which belongs to both Hinayana and Mahayana 
schools, though the former has been delineated comparatively in a more domi- 
nant form. Of course, it is impossible to expect perfect translations at this 
experimental stage either in accuracy or in style. We are given to under- 
stand that they were confronted with great difficulties which could not be 
easily overcome. 

Firstly, they had no manuscripts with them. Probably, it was not their 
custom to translate a work from a written or printed copy, as we do it to-day. 
but simply depending upon their wonderful memory, they did it. Howsoever 
strong might such memory be, sometimes it would betray them and the text 
thus translated may not. be in accordance with the original one. To have the 
sacred texts written down on paper or other materials was a very late practice. 
We know' the whole collection of the Pali Canon was committed to writing 
only in b.c. 25 in the reign of Vattagamini Abhaya in Ceylon. And there, 
was no written Vinaya text in Northern India till late in a.d. 400. That 
is what Fa-Hasien informed us in his Travel and we believe it to be true, if 
we just compare the following record which states how the Abhidharma- 
vibhasha-sastra was first translated into Chinese : 

“The text 1 was recited from memory by Sanghabhuli (a.d. 381- 

385), put down in Sanskrit by Dharmananda, orally translated into 

Chinese by Dharmarakhasa and finally made into a Chinese version by 

Aramana Ming-Chih of the Eastern Chin Dynasty, 2 (a.d. 317-420.)” 

Under such circumstances, there would not be the least surprise, if slight 
mistakes were found in the translations. 

Secondly, when the foreign missionaries came, to China their first diffi- 
culty was the language. They, of course, in a short time could not hope to 
speak Chinese correctly, nor the scholars of the country could easily master 
Sanskrit, especially its most complicated system of grammar. As their urge 
of preaching and spreading the Buddhist doctrine was very great, so they had 
somehow or other to get the work done through the co-operation of the 
Chinese scholars. The result of such translation was partly comprehensible 

1. This Sastra is different from Nanjio Nos. 1263 and 1264. 

2. See 'The bibliography of eminent Buddhist teachers.’ Ch. I. Nanjio 
No. 1490. Shangliai Tripitaka Edition, bungle 35. vol. 2, p. 5, 



68 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and partly ambiguous, because, at that time, the Buddhist doctrine and its 
terminology were absolutely foreign to the mind of the Chinese people. 

Thirdly, at the beginning the translations were not carried out on a grand 
scale nor in any way critical or systematic. It continued to be a private 
enterprise of the missionaries for a long time. During such period they had 
no proper residence to work nor any support or protection from the govern- 
ment. They had, therefore, to complete their undertakings in a hurtied way, 
even at the cost of extracting the essential parts from the bigger' works and 
calling them by their original titles. There were also cases that the trans- 
lators often forgot to put down their names on the works which they had done. 
Why it was so. is still a puzzle to many of us. 

Fourthly, we suspect that some of the translations were not directly 
translated from Sanskrit, but indirectly from the language of Central Asia, 
for instance, the Chinese term for ‘ Upadhyfi ’ is ‘ Ifo-shang,’ which may be 
a transliteration of ‘ Hua-She ’ in the language of Haskal and a direct im- 
port from Khotan. because in Khotan * UpadhySya ’ is called ’ Ho-Shang.’ 1 
It would not be improbable, if some works in the Chinese Tripitaka were 
translated from the languages other than Sanskrit or Pali. 

The above facts show how hard it was for the forerunners to proceed 
with such an important task with the little imperfect knowledge they had at 
that stage. It is universally recognised that An-Shih-Kao and Dhamia- 
rakhasa were the two great representatives of this period. 

II. The Second Stage. 

This stage probably began from the arrival of Kumarajiva in China in 
a. I). 401 and lasted upto the days when I-Iaiian-chwang returned to China and 
began to translate the works which he had brought with him in A.D. 645. The 
rich experiences of the forerunners who toiled in the first period of Tripitaka- 
translating for over three hundred years had certainly facilitated Kumarajiva 
and his co-workers in their own works, so far as Buddhist terminology, idioms 
and phrases are concerned. As a sign of general improvement, the foreign 
teachers by then could understand a good deal of Chinese, and the scholars 
of the. country also learnt sufficient Sanskrit. When setting to work, they 
could proceed very smoothly, without feeling any difficulty about the langu- 
age. However, there were occasions for heated discussions over a certain 
philosophical topic such as ‘ Is an Icchantika also possessing the nature of the 
Buddha ? ' and the like. 

Another feature of this period was that the general public, especially the 
intelligentsia, took a great interest in Buddhism and Buddhist activities. To 
undertake any service in connection with translating Buddhist scriptures was 

1. See 1 The bibliography of eminent Buddhist teachers of the Sung Dynasty.’ 
( a.d. 960-1127} Ch. III. Nanjio No. 1495, 



DEVELOPMENT Of TRIFITAKA-TKANSLATIONS IN CHINA 69 

considered a meritorious deed, and also it used to be a spell of protection for 
those who were bored and tired of the political chaos at the time. From the 
political point of view, the history of China from a.t>. 302 to 589, was not a 
very happy one. During this period we had fourteen dynasties which wete 
established in different parts of the country by different rulers, and most of 
them were * alien ’ or ‘ Hu - the barbarians in origin, as the historians used 
to call them. It is interesting to note how Kumarajiva came to China. 
Fu Chian^the ruler of the former Tshin dynasty (a.d. 350-394) ordered his 
commander-in-chief Lu-kwang to bring Kumarajiva to Chang-an. The latter 
went to Khar ajar, conquered the kingdom, killed the king and brought 
Kumarajiva with him as a captive. But fortunately or unfortunately, the 
aforesaid ruler was dethroned by another powerful king just before their 
arrival. In such a state of affairs, Kumarajiva had however to put up with 
his surroundings and could not set to work, it was in a.d. 401 after the: 
capital and headquarters of Lu-kwang had been destroyed by the second ruler 
of the later Tshin dynasty (a.d. 384-417), he arrived at Chang-an. This 
shows the political tumult at that time and the unrest of the country. 

In spite of all these, the. rendering of Buddhist Canon had a good pro- 
gress and bright prosperity. Under the king’s patronage in the later Tshin 
dynasty, Kumarajiva translated over 50 works in the famous Hsiao yao 
garden with the help of only one penman who put down the translated sen 
fences in the Chinese language. The most important works of Buddhism 
such as Alahaprajfiapaiamita-Sutra (Nanjio No. 3), Saddharmapundarika- 
Sutra (No. 134), Vimalaklrtti nirdesa (No. 146). Sata -sasfra ‘No. 1188), 
Dvadasamikaya-Sastra (n. 1 1 86 > , J^ayamula-sastra-tlka (n. 1179) and 
Mahxiprajhapfuamitff-Sasira in. 1169) and others were translated during this 
period by Kumarajiva. It was his mastery over both the languages of 
Sanskrit and Chinese, his excellent style and subtle rendering of the texts that 
had given a new impetus and spirit to the world ot translation. 

The representatives of great translators in the second stage were Kumar a 
jiva (a.d. 401), Buddhabhadra (a.d. 398*421) and Paramartha (a.d. 548- 
557) . Moreover, this period is considered to lx* a period of co-operation 
between the foreign Buddhist teachers and Chinese scholars. 

III. The Third Stage. 

Gathering from what has been shown in the previous two stages, it is 
very clear that the foreign missionaries took the initiative. Undoubtedly they 
had their own merit, so far as their enthusiasm for spreading Buddhist 
doctrine and their religious aspiration in undertaking such noble services are 
concerned, yet there was nothing short of defects in the translations which 
they had done. Even great experts such as Kumarajiva would not escajie 
criticism, if some of his works were compared with the original texts, not to 
speak of others who were not as critical and efficient as he was. Taking a 
6a 



70 


B. C. LAW, VOLUME 


distrustful attitude towards the translations. Fa -Hsian was the first person 

among the Chinese Buddhists to come to India in search of Vinaya texts and 

Sutras in a.d. 401. And in A.r>. 518 anothei Chinisc traveller. Sung Yun by 

name was sent by the Empress ol Northern Wei dynasty (A.t>. 886-534) to 

India to seek for scriptures of Buddhism. Following their steps, a large 

nusnbei of Chinese Buddhists did come to India for the same purpose at 

different times. The most celebrated among them was Hsiian-Chwang who 

£ 1 

came to India in a.d. 631 and stayed in the holy land for 15 yqlrs. 1 2 The 
Indian sages honoured him with the title ol Maliayanadeva. Me was a great 
Sanskritist and used to defeat learned Indian Pundits. While returning, he 
brought with him 520 bundles of 057 separate hooks and translated 73 of 
them, consisting of 1330 fasciculi. The most voluminous work among them is 
Maliaprajnaparamita-Sulra. It consists of 600 fasciculi arid 200,000 slokas in 
verses.- By his perfect knowledge of both the Sanskrit and Chinese languages 
and his deep penetration into the vast ocean of Buddhist philosophy and 
literature, he laid once for all the reliable and authentic foundation for inter- 
preting the Sanskrit scriptures into Chinese. It. is he who created a revolution 
in the field of Tripitaka-renderings and snatched away, not. by force, but by 
merit, the sovereignty of the translation - kingdom from the hands of the 
foreign missionaries. By this time, the rendering of Tripi takas had reached 
its zenith of [xr feet ion in truthfulness, in reliability, in expression, in excel- 
lency of style and in so many other ways. 

This was called the golden age in the field of translation and Hsuan 
Chwang was the great, representative of the third period. Of course, there 
were at that time, so many other good scholars knowing both Sanskrit and 
Chinese like 1-tsing and Atnoghavajra who also contributed much of their 
merits to the glory of the Chinese Tripitaka. 

At the end of the T ang dynasty (a.i>. 618-907). there was a tendency 
ol decadence in this noble seivice, though in other aspects such as copying the 
Sutras and printing the canonical works there was good pi ogress. It is only 
in the Sung dynasty (a.d. 960-1127; there showed a flash of light in reviving 
such undertakings. That is to say. there were a few learned Indian teachers 
namely: Fa-thien (Dhannadeva) or Fa-hhien of Nalanda (a.d. 973-1001), 
Tien-si-tsai of Jalandhara (a.d. 982), Danapala of Udyana (a o. 980) and 
Fa-hu (Dharrnarakhasa) of Magadha (a.d. 1001), who came to China in 
quick succession and together translated 269 separate works. Along with 
their contributions, the history of Tripitaka-translations came to a close. The 
glow of a lamp, at the moment of its extinction, as we know, is usually brighter 
than ever. But, alas ! it shines no more. 

1. See Samuel Peal's introduction to Si yu-ki, p. \v. 

2. For hi.y other voluminous translations see Nanjiu Nos. 1201, 1267. 1263 and 
1265. 



DEVELOPMENT OF TRIPITAK A.- TRANSLATIONS IN CHINA 71 

The table given below will furnish us with a concrete idea regarding the 
scriptures translated by different persons at different periods. 


Date 

Translators. 

Works. 

Fasciculi 

A.D. 67 730 

176 

986 

4507 

A.D. 730 — 789 

8 

127 

242 

A.D. 789- -1037 

6 

220 

532 

A. 15^1037 - 1285 

4 

20 

115 

Total . 

194 

1335 

5390* 


flow the Texts Were Translated ? 

To have more than four persons labouring over a text in lire earlier 
stages of scripture rendering was not a luxury, but a sheer necessity. Later 
on, it developed. The number of office -bearers was steadily on the inciease, 
from three to lour and finally it went up to nine. This very complicated and 
systematized organization has a characteristic of its own. and it claims our 
attention for the purpose of rendering modern literature into different latigu 
ages. 

In the first period, beginning from the first century a.d. to the fourth cen- 
tury At)., a translation was generally completed through the efforts of four 
persons. That is : A. one recites the Sanskrit text from memory, B. one re- 
cords the recitation in Sanskrit, C. one orally interprets it into Chinese and 
D. one makes a Chinese version. And three persons would suffice if a manus- 
cript was available. In that case, A. and B. would be replaced by a person 
who could read out the text and explain its meaning, and the rest would 
remain as they were. 

When it entered into the second stage with Kumarajlva taking a leading 
role on the scene of action, the translations became critical and refined, and 
more members were admitted to such translation-committee, especially, the 
works which were complete after Kumarajiva's time. During this period, the 
new member being added was called Cheng- 1, whose office was to examine the 
meaning of the translated manuscript and see whether it would agree with 
the original text. Between a.d. 590 and 907 we have the following additions : 
one specialist was appointed to verify the correct significance of the trans- 
lated text, another to examine it from the linguistic point of view. And also 
there used to be a proof-corrector, a revisor, and general directors.^ 

Some time later, by the order of the Emperor Tai-Chung (a.d. 976-998) 
of the Sung dynasty, a Translation-Hall was established in a.d. 982. In that 
hall, we are told that there were 9 members who sat side by side in rendering 

* The above statistics arc based on the ‘ Comparative catalogue of the Bud- 
dhist sacred bodes in the Chih-Yuan Period a.o. 1264-1294.’ See Nanjio No. 1612. 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


72 

? Buddhist work into Chinese. Below, we shall see the function of each 
member therein : 

1. I chu or the translator- in-chicf, who ux)k his seat in the centre, 
facing outside, and would loudly recite the Sanskrit text. 

2. Chengi or the examiner of meaning, who sat on the left of T-chu 
and discussed the sense of the text with him. 

3. Cheng-wen or the examiner of text, who sat on the riglV^of I-chu 
and listened carefully to his recitation of the Sanskrit text, in order to find 
out mistakes if there were any. 

4. Shu tzu or the transcriber, who listened attentively the recitation of 
the Sanskrit text and wrote, down its pronunciation in Chinese characters, viz., 

’ Ha-ri-da-ya ’ for * llrdaya 

5. Pi-shou or the penman, who translated the transcribed letters into 
the Chinese language, viz.. ‘Usin' mind or heart lor ‘llrdaya'. 

6. Cho-wen or the text-composer, who arranged the translated words in 
syntactical order and made suitable Chinese sentences. 

7. Ts’an-i or the text -comparer, who compared both the original and 
the translated texts and saw that there was nothing wrong in the translations. 

8. K’an-ting or the text -censor who cut oil all the suj>erfluous expres- 
sions and would decide finally the doubtful meanings of the sentences. 

9. Jun-wen or the revisor of the composition, whose function was to 
improve the language and made the translations more excellent and refined 
in style..' 

When all these had been properly executed, the text then was sent to be 
printed and later on to be distributed. 

Having read the descriptions above, we cannot but admire the scientific 
spirit and religious zeal of these workers in engaging themselves in the vast 
ocean of Buddhist literature. It is said that before their setting to work, they 
had to perform various sorts of rituals, which included homa, matvdala, 
arghya and offerings of different kinds : taking a bath daily, wearing three 
garments, behaving as properly as possible and so forth. No doubt, they 
were supivuted by the state, but they would not take what was more than 
necessary for their simple life and maintenance. They were self-denied sages 
for the noble cause of Buddhism. 

Principles of Translation. 

Before Hsiian-Chwang's taking part in the field of translation, there was 
constantly the question regarding stiff translation and paraphrase. As a 

1 See Fu-tsu-t’ung-chi or 1 Records of the lineage of Buddha and Patriarchs.’ 
Ch. 43. Nanjio No. 1661. 



DEVELOPMENT OF TRIP! TA K A -TEA NSLATIONS IN CHINA 73 

matter of natural consequence during the earlier stages, the translations could 
not be helped to be stiff. In the first, place, there was the difficulty of gain- 
ing mastery over both the languages. Secondly, they dared not make the 
style literary on account of religious piety. So they had to let the translations 
remain in the simple, faithful, straightforward but unpolished state. 

Tau-an (about a.d. 330-386), a very learned and authoritative. Chinese 
BuddhisP^cholar was of the opinion that except the following live points, the 
translation should strictly be faithful to the original text. 

The points are : 1. The syntactical order, 2. The habit of employing 
literary words, 3. The abridgment of praise repetitions, -1. The omission of 
explanatory sentences which could belong to the text proper and 5. The exclu- 
sion of paragraphical icpelitions. 

Besides, he also made remarks on the difficulties of translating a text. 
Firstly, as he used to say that, a translation should not merely be true to the 
original one. but also should be an easy approach to the common folks. 
Secondly, the profound wisdom of the Buddha is rather hard to make out its 
esoteric meanings. And thirdly, the Buddha who preached the doctrines had 
passed away long ago. therefore, the controversial views of Buddhism had very 
little opportunity to get corrected. 

The method of translation being employed by Kumarajiva was somewhat 
different from Tau-an. His works are mostly of paraphrastic type. When 
translating (he Sadharmaputidarika-Sutra, we are told that he was purposely 
following the phraseology of the Chinese language, though he made it a point 
not to allow the ideas of the original work to suffer any misinterpretation. 
Such a great Pandit as he was, we. of course, cannot expect him to be satis- 
fied with the simple frame of stiff translation. 

Hsuan-Chwang, the great Chinese Sanskritist was very particular about 
the transliteration of Sanskrit words. One will find, especially in his Si-yu-ki 
or the Buddhist records of the Western kingdoms, the corrections of proper 
names and he would point out that such and such transliterations were abso- 
lutely defective. While translating, he would simply dictate the penman to 
write down the sentences in Chinese as though he was reading typed sheets 
of such dictations. It is in no way exaggerating, if we say that his transla- 
tions are perfect in every aspect, and naturally, the question of stiff rendering 
and paraphrase would not in any case bo applied to them. However, there 
are rules laid down by him regarding certain Sanskrit words which may not 
be interpreted but transliterated only. In the first place, a word he would 
not translate, if it were in connection with esoteric doctrine such as 4 Dharanl." 
Secondly, if a word had many meanings like ‘ Bhagavan thirdly, if an article 
was not to be found in China such as 4 Jambu Tree? ’ ; fourthly, following the 
terms of the old, if it was widely known and adopted, and lastly, for the sake 
of producing good faith, viz., the word 4 Paniia ’ — PrajftS is much better than 



74 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


its translated words ‘ Chili-hui ' - wisdom, for, as he expressed that they would 
awaken the i>eople’s faith to believe in Buddhism. 

Leaving aside what lias been stated above, there were scholars who up- 
held the view that the best way of penetrating into the heart of Buddhism was 
to abandon the institution of translation, and learn directly the Sanskrit 
language. We too approve and agree with such proposal, but alas, the dream 
never came true. And the Chinese Tripitaka in the present day lyTs the for- 
tune of being regarded as one of the invaluable legacies of Sino lndian culture 
which will, undoubtedly contribute its proper offering to enrich the civiliza- 
tion of the world. 

Thus far. we have been able to gather materials as to how the Chinese 
Tripitaka -translation had its growth and development. It is our sincere hope 
that the Indian scholars should shoulder the burden in restoring them into 
Sanskrit or Pali, and translate some of them, if not the whole collection, into 
the different vernacular of modern India. One day, when this noble object 
shall fully be attained, we are quite sure that China would feel happier, because 
in preserving this priceless treasure of Indian culture, her effort was not in 
vain. 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN .BENGAL 

By 

Dr. SUNIT1 KUMAR CHATTERJI, m.a. (Cal.), u.Lir. (Lond.), 

V. R. A. S. B. 

In his article on Religion contributed by my friend and colleague 
l>r. Prabodh Chandra Bagchi to the first volume of the valuable and autho- 
rilativc History of Bengal published Irom the University of Dacca under the 
able editorship of Dr. Panics Chandra Majumdar, the author has given a 
very good survey of religion in early Bengal prior to the Turki conquest at 
the beginning of the 13th century. Dr. Bagchi has discussed the question 
ot the intioduction of Aryan or Upper Indian culture in Bengal, and has 
treated, with full reference 10 relevant documents, the various forms of Uppci 
Indian religion which found a home in Bengal — Brahmanical (in its various 
aspects or ramifications like Vedic and I ’uranic. the latter in its numerous 
forms or cults like Vaishnavisni. Saivism and others), Jain, and Buddhist, 
hor ilu.-se we have fairly abundant mateiials, and the ground of investigation 
consequently is sure. But there has taken place in both Upper India and 
Bengal a commingling of cults, in both their ideals and theories and their 
practices and rituals, among Puranic Brahmanism (including Tantricism), 
Buddhism in its numerous later phases, and Jainism ; and this has led to a 
tangle, particularly by the interaction of (he Puranic cults of Brahmanism 
on (he one hand and (he various forms of later Buddhism on the other in 
Bengal, which it is well-nigh impossible to untie. And the matter has been 
further complicated by a third ancl an independent group of cults and rituals 

entering into this tangle those of pre Aryan origin, which obtained among 

the Dravidian. Austrie and Tibeto Barman and other peoples of Bengal, 
recent and prehistoric, who formed the original inhabitants of Bengal upon 
whom Upper Gangetic Aryan Speech and Hindu (i.e. f Brahmanical or Vedic. 
Puranic and Tantric, as well as Buddhist and Jain) religion and culture were 
imposed, transforming them into an Aryan-speaking Hindu people by the end 
of the first millennium a.T). 

(We know next to nothing about these pie -Ary an cults of the people ot 
Bengal : yet a good deal of these have survived to our day, as the suppressed 
religion of the masses, being mostly forced to make a compromise with the 
official Aryan religions Brahmanism and Buddhism and to affiliate themselves 
to these in a vague sort of way, to obtain, if not active support from the ruling 
classes, at least a certain amount of toleration (sympathetic and understand- 
ing generally, and occasionally unthinking and contemptuous) from the upper 
classes 'professing the scriptural religions of Upper Indian provenance- a 



76 B, C. LAW VOLUME 

toleration which was so necessary for its very existence. The original or 
national cults of the pre-Aryan peoples are found in the worship of many 
caste or tribal deities, or village gods, who have no place in the official Hindu 
pantheon of pan-Indian acceptance ; at times they have just succeeded in 
finding a place in some Sanskrit Parana, but in other cases they have ad- 
vanced only as far as the threshold or the ante, chamber of the hall of official 
Hinduism by having their legends rendered in the vernacular oply. Thus 
there are village godtings of the type of Gdbhur Palau and Mo Gird Singh a 
worshipped in the South Bengal Delta, who are unknown to any Parana, and 
unsung even in the vernacular ; there are Daksin Ray and Knlu Gaji ( Ghdzi ). 
godlings who control the tigers in the Sundarbans of the forest lands of the 
southern Delta, whose exploits are narrated only in Bengali, and whose fame 
has not yet travelled beyond Bengal ; and, finally, there are deities of 
the type of Si tala the goddess of the smallpox and Manasa the. goddess of 
serpents, who have received admission into the pantheon of Puranie gods and 
goddesses, honoured, although they are newcomers, beside siva and Devi. 
Visnu and Laksnri. The nature ol pie Aryan religion and ritual, in its 
mythology and its ideas and practices, among, the various pre- Aryan groups 
of peoples, it has not been possible to establish as yet : most, of it now survives 
in the rites and cults obtaining in remote villages, which arc now always under 
the aegis of official Brahmanicul Hinduism. One of these pre,-Aryan cults, 
that of the God Pharma, has been connected by Bengali investigators of the 
last generation with Buddhism, the name of the presiding Deity or chief God 
of the cult, viz.. Pharma , being thought to be identical with the second entity 
in the Buddhist triad, Buddha, Dhanna and Sahgha : but a detailed study 
of this Dhanna cult as it survives in West Bengal villages will clearly show 
that it is quite independent of Buddhism, even independent of any Upper 
Indian Aryan association, to start with. ) 

The Austric (KoJ and Mon-Khmer) and Dravidian peoples, and finally 
the Sino-Tibetan or Tibeto-Chinese tribes in North Bengal and East Bengal, 
followed the Negritos, the oldest people of India and Bengal, and the Proto- 
Australoids. So far as rhese last two peoples are concerned, no vestige of 
their languages and culture remains. They were undoubtedly absorbed 
among the Ausirics arrd the Dravidians as well as the Tibeto-Chinese tvho 
followed them later. About the Austrics, who came next to the Australoids, 
there are two views as to their original homeland. According to one, the 
original Ausirics were characterised with their language and tire basic elements 
of their culture somewhere in Northern Indo-China. From there they spread 
west into India through Assam, and occupied the Ganges Valley, extending as 
far west and north as the Himalayan regions upto Kashmir, and in the south 
penetrating all over the Deccan right down to Malabar. In India they became 
the ancestors of the Kol or Munda and other connected fieoples : in Irtdo- 
Chifta and Assam, their speech and culture survived in the Rhasi and Mon- 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 77 

Khmer groups of peoples ; they penetrated into the Nicobar Islands ; and 
bands of them pushed down into Malaya and the islands of Indonesia, and 
further to the east into those of Melanesia and Polynesia. The Melanesian, 
Polynesian and Indonesian languages on the one hand forming an ' Austro- 
nesian ’ group of speeches, and the * Austro- Asia tic ’ speeches current mostly 
on thq main-land of Asia like the Kol or Munda speeches of India, the Mon- 
Khmer speeches of Burma and IndoChina Nicobarcse, and the languages of 
certain primitive peoples in Malaya, on the other, form together the great 
Austric Speech Family, which thus originated, according to this view, some- 
where in Northern Indo-China. The other view about the origin of the Austric 
speeches would take them to the West, to the East Mediterranean tracts ; 
according to this view, the Primitive Austrics were just a very early branch 
of the ancient Mediterranean race which travelled eastward into India through 
Chaldsea and Tran, and their language and culture became characterised in 
India, from where they spread with their language and the basic things of 
their culture into Burma and Indo-China, Malaya and Indonesia, and then 
beyond into Melanesia and Polynesia. Be it as it may, there is no doubt 
that the pre- Aryan people of India was largely of Austric origin (in its two 
branches of Kol or Munda and Mon-Khmer) : they were followed by the 
Dra vidian speakers from the West, and by the Tibeto-Chinese speakers from 
the North and the East. The Dravidians also had probably a good deal to 
do in the evolution of the present-day Bengali people and its language as it 
grew out of the Aryan Prakrit ic dialects from Magadha ; and Tibeto-Chinese 
influences were confined to the Northern and North-eastern fringes of Bengal 
only. 

It is now almost impossible at the present day, with the existing materials 
at our disposal, to form a clear idea of the elements contributed by the peoples 
of these different linguistic groups in pre- Aryan Bengal, particularly in reli- 
gion. The Dharma cult which formed such a strong religious current in 
Western and Southern Bengal throughout Middle Bengali times, finding an 
expression in a valuable literature of epic narratives (the Dharma-mangal 
poems) and another literature of rituals in Bengali, in temples and ceremonies 
and festivals, and which has survived to our day, was unquestionably going 
very strong in pre-Muhammadan Bengal, although only as a disorganised 
popular religion of non-Aryan origin, side by side with the much better orga- 
nised Brahmanical and Buddhistic cults. It is still a living faith in West 
Bengal, although its facade has been embellished with the outward decorations 
of Brahmanism. (See in this connexion the most recent article on the 
Dharma cult in West Bengal by Prof. Kshitis Chattopadhyaya in the JRASB 
for 1942). The late Mahamahdf&dfiyaya Dr. Iiaraprasad Sastri (and fol- 
lowing him others) thought that this Dharma cult was a relic of Buddhism 
in present-day Bengal, these scholars being put off their guard by the name of 
L the chief deity of this cult, Dharma, who is however described as the Supreme 



78 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Deity, Creator and Ordainer of the Universe, superior even to Brahma, Vi$nu 
and 6iva, and at times identified with them (particularly with Vispu) ; and 
he has nothing of the abstraction of the Buddhist Dharma about him. He is 
a deity who is white in colour, and to him white goats are sacrificed (accord- 
ing to mythology, the goat is a substitute for a young boy to be sacrificed to - 
him). Dr. Sukumar Sen of the University of Calcutta who is engaged in 
editing (in collaboration with Mr. Panchanan Mandal) the oldest, D/t«rma- 
mangal poem so far obtained - that by Uuparama Cakravarti < middle of the 
1 7th century)— and incidentally is collecting data about the Dharma cult with 
a view to unravelling as far as possible the origin and primitive character 
o t the cult,, thinks that very early, probably even in pre-Muhammadan times. 

i- 

this cult, of aboriginal (possibly Kol or Austric) origin, received influences 
from Brahmanism both Vedic and Puranic, that the story of the sacrifice of 
Sunaksepa, the son of the Brahman Ajigarta, in place of Rohita or Rohitasva 
the son of king Hariscandra who had offered him to the God Vanina, as 
narrated in the AUareya Bulhmana , which is found among the medieval 
myths of Dharma in its Brahmaniscd form, is probably in itself a myth of 
Austric origin which obtained n place in the Brahmana work in prr-Buddhic 
times. 

This deity Dharma was not only a Creator, but also a Sustainer of men. 
He is also a God of agriculture, and in Bengal we have a strange concep- 
tion of Siva as a farmer, a conception not found elsewhere in India, which 
appears to be an extension of this aspect of the divinity Dharma to Siva when 
the latter came to be identified with the former. I have to note one very 

9 

special thing about Dharma : his great annual festival is everywhere always 
accompanied by ritual dances, and sometimes by mimicry and drama : without 
these dances by his worshippers ( who usually taking up a vow and observe 
strictly some regulations in living for a month), this annual festival (g ajan, 
from garjana, as it is called ) cannot be held. These dances are accompanied 
by songs, and are performed by troups of devotees. Now, dance as a funda- 
" mental religious ritual is certainly not Aryan ; it is neither Buddhistic nor 
Brahmanical. It may be Dravidian, it may also be Tibeto- Chinese ; but it 
is emphatically Austric. Then, another point which has suggested to me, 
about the name of the god Dharma himself, as in this Dharma cult. If there 
’ is ground for a reasonably strong suspicion that the cult (with its myths) is 
pre-Aryan, then we may look upon the very vespectable Aryan name Dharma 
with equal suspicion, and may ask ourselves whether the name is a Sanskritisa- 
tion of some original non-Aryan name which had a similar sound with the 
Sanskrit word, or whether it is just a translation of the native non-Aryan name, 
into Sanskrit. The first alternative is the easier and more common one ; the 
second one is only, a little less likely. We may note how a primitive Drav’ 
dian word (as in Old Tamil av-manti) meaning 4 the male monkey ' was J 
all likelihood both translated, into the Indo- Aryan Vedic as Vrfa-ijiapi (meai 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 


79 


ing the same thing)* and then Aryanised into the Sanskrit Hanumant- or 
Hanumant - as the Great Monkey God ; and that Siva and Sambhu seem to 
echo certain Dravidian words (Old Tamil civah = 4 red and cempu - 
‘copper, red ); and. further, that Rudra may be an approximation to the 
Aryan (iod Rudra , the Roarer, the Father of the Maruts or the Storm Winds, 
from an original translation * Rudhra of the name of a Dravidian divinity 
meaning '.the Red God' (the description of Siva- Rudra as 4 the Red God 
with the Bi\ie Throat' mlaldhita in the Saia-rudriya section of the Yajur - 
i-eda is to be recalled ) . 

So Dharnm may be at its, basis just a non- Aryan word, either Sanskritised 
in sound or form, or translated into Sanskrit. Now. 1 throw in a linguistic 
suggestion as lo iis possible origin, 'lhe commonest symbol under which this 
Bengal deity Pharma has been and is still worshipped is the tortoise. Many 
ol the images of Dharma aie just a figure of a tortoise. The use of this 
symbol must have arisen among a sea -people, or a fisher folk, which the 
Austncs appear largely to have been. In the cosmogony of some, o! the A us trie 
( K ol ) and Dravidian trilxis. the tortoise plays an important pa it ; and the 
legend of creation centering tound the Dharma cull in Bengal (e.g. in works 
like the Suriya-purana) agree remarkably with some aboriginal creation 
legends, e.g. as among (he Gonds. One. ol the dialectal words for 4 tortoise* 
in Bengali, current over a good pan of the delta, is dura or dnrn ; this word 
usually signifies a tortoise of a small species. The word occurs also in 
Assamese. It is found in Old Bengali a>- dull ' female tortoise,’ and duti, 
dull are given by Monicr Williams as late Sanskrit words, meaning ‘ female 
tortoise.’ as well as dauleya ‘young tortoise.’ A Sanskrit word dadru, with 
a variant dam , meaning 4 tortoise,* also occurs: these presuppose vernacular 
words in ancient India like • dadda , 'da da* and *dma. in the Asoka Inscrip- 
tions, it occurs in the form duli or dudi (in Pillar ICdict No. V), For these, 
a form like ' did *dur- oi *dur~ or * dar, *dar, would be the. basic word. 
As a widely cm rent Bengali word (beside kachim Ski. kacchapa , kasyapa , 

- Hindi kachuwd . and kdthud , kdutha , with which compare Santali katkdm 
: ‘crab’, not occurring, as far as known, in other parts of India), it may 
be reasonably presumed to lx* of non-Aryan, probably Austric, origin ; 
although I have not been able to find a similar word in any of the 
Austric languages. Now, in the Kol speeches we have an affix dm added to 
nouns both animate and inanimate, which is perhaps just an expletive without 
any special force which has become a part of the word : e.g. merom ‘ goat, 
he-goat ot she- goat \ damkom ‘bull calf,’ katkdm ‘crab’, sadom ‘horse*. 
madkdm ‘the mahua tree’, sarjdm ‘the sal tree’, gdrdni ‘ grand child’, 
hatdm 4 father’s sister, maternal uncle’s wife \ tyardm 4 insect \ mudom 1 ring.’ 
g dtom * ghee \ datrom 4 sickle ’ (the last three appear to be early Aryan loans, 
respectively from muddd — mudrd , ghala ~ ghfta, and ddtra ) 9 ajgom * ladder *, 
parkdm * bed-stead kalom 4 year etc. Probably connected with this is 

V- * ' 



80 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


another affix - am : suiam 4 thread ’ (from Aryan suila =* sutra), sakam * leaf \ 
bottom ‘lute*, koram ‘breast ' (cf. Aryan krdda ), * dove \ etc. Among 

the pre-Aryan ancestors of the Bengali people speakihg Austria dialects, we 
can postulate the presence of a word \dul~. dur, *dur \ dor, dor - ‘tortoise’, 
as the source of the New Bengali dura . duro. and the Old Bengali and late 
Sanskrit dull, dull ; and could we further postulate an extension df it into *dul- 
dm, * dur oni, *dur-dm, *dul am, :i dur-ani. *dur-am, or * dor dm,. f dar-dm, 

* day-urn , * dur um as a specialised word or word-group meaning also ‘ tor J 
toise ’ ? So that an easy Sanskritisation of a name like *durom f duram or 

* durum, y darom, into Dharma (through a vernacular or semi-tatsama Aryan 
form like M dharuma as something intermediate), just after the Upper Indian 
Brahmanism and Buddhism came to Bengal and began to influence the local 
non Aryan religion, would be quite in the nature of things : the god symbo- 
lised by the tortoise in this way getting a Sanskrit name meaning 4 Law ' or 
4 World Order', only though phonetic assimilation. It is also to be question- 
ed if the translation of the Fish, the Tortoise and the Boar into incarnations 
of Vi$iiu is not the result of the influence of pie Aryan (Austric) religion on 
Brahmanical Hinduism. 

Any way, in speaking about Buddhist survivals in Bengal at the present 
day. we have definitely to omit the Dharma cult, although it has to be admitted 
that Buddhist ritualistic elements have modified its ritual. The ideologies and 
the mythologies of Buddhism in any of its numerous forms, and those of the 
Dharma cult, are quite different from each other. Dharma priests of Pom 
and other inferior castes originally were known as Pddit or Pdril (Panxjit), 
a pemi-lat&ama from the Sanskrit Pundit a. Devotees of Dharma were known 
by various names one of which was uni uni or dm ini, from Sanskrit dmnuyiku 
‘ sectarian 

Present-day Hinduism in Bengal is the gradual transformation of Puranic 
Hinduism as it was developing all over India during the first millennium 
after Christ. Hinduism or Brahmanism started with the Aryan religion and 
its scriptures the Vedas on the one hand, and with the non-Aryan religions 
and their lost or unwritten scriptures on the other. Against Vedism and non- 
Aryan religions both, but particularly against Vedism, were developed certain 
philosophical systems, prominent among which were Jainism and Buddhism : 
these themselves did not escape the influence of either the Vedic priests, 
the Brahmans, or those who followed the extra- Vedic non-Aryan religions, if 
not in their philosophical concepts, at least in the ordinary religious life of 
their followers. From about the middle of the 1st millennium B. C, some 
of these extra -Vedic religions, with their ideologies, their mythologies and 
their cults, began to assert themselves ; and although they were at first ignored 
and then reluctantly tolerated by the Brahmans, who knew only the Vedic 
ritual of sacrifice, and the Vedic gods and Upanishadic speculations, they 
gradually were accommodated in the new Brahmanism that was growing up 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IK BENGAL 


81 


in post-Buddhic times. The worship of Visi.ui, of Siva and of Uma or Devi 
came in ; Sri was one of the earliest of these extra- Aryan deities to establish 
her position. The ritual of the puja cof likely Dravidian origin) was given 
a place; beside the Vedic ritual of homo or the fire-sacrifice ^ in the Bhagavad 
Gita as a part of the Mahdbhdrata * which was the great scripture of this 
later and composite form of Brahmanism in which the Vedic world and the 
world of the. great Puranic gods were sought to be harmonised), we find the 
following veise (IX. 26): 

pair am puspam phalam toy am yd me bhaklyd pra-yacchali, 
tad ahum bhakty-upahrtmn asndmi prayaldtnwnah . 

" He who otTereth to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit, water, 
that. I accept from the striving self, offered as it is with devotion" (Trans. 
Annie Besant ). 

Taken in its context, Jt. appears to be just a defence of the puja ritual 
Wore hftnui- performing Brahmans who were sfil! looking askance, at non- 
Vedic rites and ritual. 

i 

/The first amalgamation that took place of Vedic and non Vedic vi*c.. 
non- Aryan) religions embrace*! the two pantheons and the two rituals, and 
the myths and legends of the two religious worlds were also combined. The 
Brahmans formally and officially always ^javc the superiority to the Vedas 
and Vedic cults and ritual, but the Puranic cults and the. Puranic ritual were 
also coming to be admitted by them. Then from the middle of the 1st millen- 
nium a.r, flic Brahmans had to make another big concession, by admitting 
Tantric rites and ideas. The origin of these Tannic ideas and practices is 
not known : but it seems that the esoteric ideology of the. Tantra , and its 
ritual, connected as these were from the beginning with yoga practices, re- 
presented the pre-Aryan, probably Dravidian, religion in excelsis. The mytho- 
logy of the Pmtmu and the simple ritual of the pujd were adopted first ; and 
then came the esoteric doctrine, and the elaborate practices of the Tantra. 
Upto about 800 a.d., the mixed Vedic-Puranic. Brahmanism as in the Pur anas 
appears to have been free from Tantric influences. But after that, Tantric 
ideas and practices were being given greater and greater recognition in Hindu 
life and in Hindu religion i.e., life and religion as directed by the Brahmans^J 
(This line of development of Puranic Brahmanism has been very ably indi- 
cated by Dr. Rajendra Chandra Hazra of the Dacca University in his Studies 
in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs f University of Dacca 
Bulletin No. XX, 1940, which is an admirable work of capital importance, 
covering over 350 pages in the study of the Pur anas as documents in the evolu- 
tion of Hindu or Brahmanical religion, which unfortunately is not as well 
known as it deserves to be as a work of exact and painstaking scholarship). 

Not I only Brahmanism, \yjth its great gods Vi$nu and Siva (with Uma! 
fully, established, but also Buddhism fell under the spell of the Tantric ideq- 
7 



82 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

logy, mythology and rituaJ. Mahdyana Buddhism with its pronounced bia> 
for mysticism and theism formed an equally fertile field for the seed of Tan- 
trie ideas to take root and to have a vigorous growth. Saktism, adopted in 
the Brahmanical Siva and (Jma cults of Puranic origin, became equally accept- 
ed in Mahayana Buddhism of Eastern India (including Bengal). IITnaj'ana 
Buddhism was current in Bengal side by side with the Mahayana, which 
appears to have been fully established in Bengal by the beginning of the filh 
century, as mentioned by Dr. Bagchi on epigraphic evidence. The' Mahayana 
as known to Hiuen Ts’ang in the 7th century was transformed in Bengal, 
with Tantric accretions, into the Tmlrayuna, and its ramifications the. fcafo- 
cakra-yana , the Vnjra-yfma i this concerning itself mainly with a new arid 
elaborate ritual and ceremonial of worship with blja-maniras or mystic 
syllables of power and tundras or gestures with the lingers, which formed a 
surer and at the same time much easier esoteric path -- sadhana-niafga tor 
the attainment of Bod hi or highest wisdom.;, and Saha ja-y ana, its latest pha* 
(of which the exponents were the 84- great adepts of mysticism known as thr 
Sid dims , who discountenanced ritual and outward worship of the gods or 
cultivation of the ‘ virtues ' and inculcated the culture of hidden powers 
within the body by yoga practices, including breath-control, leading to the 
condition of supreme bliss that is the natural sahaja state in which man 
feels that his essential unity with the inner Spirit of things is realised). The 
language of these later phases of the Mahayana in Bengal, which tutallv 
eclipsed the earlier Mahayana schools of Philosophy and Self culture like th<. 
Mcdhyamika and the Yogctcdra or Vipiana-vada , is replete with the Tan t no 

spirit, it is language and practice, and mystic outlook and symbolism even 

more than we note in the case of Puranic Brahmanism, under T antra influence. 
Till the last there was a certain amount of Brahman opposition to Tantric 
mysticism and symbolism, and to Tantric practices : but the Buddhists in 
Bengal succumbed to these completely : and in Tantric Buddhism, the Tantric 
symbolism and practices found another and a potent channel through which 
it could exert an indirect but nevertheless very effective influence on Puranic 
Brahmanism. Present-day Brahmanism in Bengal may be characterised as 
more, than three, fourths Tantric in its inspiration, outlook and ritual, and 
less than one-fourth Vedic, with a Pmanic background : and the greatest 
legacy of Buddhism in Bengal, in its latest phase before it d\J out officially 
or formally, has been this Tantric attitude and atmosphere. 

Buddhism survived as a 4 subsidiary ? religion, and under the Senas, who 
were staunchly Brahmanical Hindus, Buddhism was dethroned from its high 
place as the religion of the ruling house which it had enjoyed under the. Palas. 
But it continued to flourish even for some centuries after the Turki conquest. 
In the middle of the 13th century, a North Bengal Brahman Ramacandra 
Kavibharati declared his formal adherence to Buddhism— and he manifested 
in his. Bhakli sCilaka slokas . in Sanskrit, an intense* personal devotion to 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 83 

Buddha which was a Buddhist counterpart of the Bhakti movement which 
characterised the later Vaishnava and other tneistic schools centering round 
the figures of Rama and Krona. But Ramacandra Kavibharati found 
his own society uncongenial, and he went to Ceylon and settled there. Even 
as late as the thirties of the 15th century. Buddhist texts like the Bodhi- 
cmydvalma continued to be written in Bengal, and we read about Buddhists 
during the life-time of Chaitanya. But after Chaitanya, the Buddhists as a 
religion and community cease to have a place in Bengal. (The Chittagong 
Buddhists at the present day are to be affiliated to the Hinayana school of 
Arakan and Burma even their Pali learning was derived from Burma before 
recent reforms through connexion with Ceylon came in). 

A good many Buddhists appear to have been at least nominally converted 
to Islam after the establishment of Turki Moslem rule in Bengal. Bad blood 
and want of sympathy between Brahman and Buddhist which manifested in 
the decadent days before and after the Turki conquest was largely responsible 
lor this. But Bengali Buddhists (and Hindus) who adopted Islam did not; 
or could not adapt their mental make up to the atmosphere of Arabic or Irani 
or Turki Islam. Saint worship through their tombs (contemptuously des- 
cribed by the more orthodox or puritanical Bengali Mussulmans as (nr-pirasti 
or gor-pirasfi ‘worship of saints, worship of tombs 1 ), an Islamised version of 
the Buddhist worship of stupas or caityas built over the ashes or relics of 
great teachers and saints, forms an important cult in the Islam of Bengal and 
India : and it can legitimately be looked upon as an inheritance, Islamised 
no doubt, from Buddhistic ritual and practice. 

Among present-day Hindus in Bengal, even the name Buddha has been 

lost Probably the personal name Budhu or Buddhu is a tadbhava survival 

of the name Buddha i cl. Kami < Krsna ). This name we hear as an old- 

fashioned pet name, which is sometimes connected with Bud ha vitrei or 

' Wednesday/ but people do not know what it really means. Before the.’ 

curiosity of the West rediscovered the history or Buddhist Buddha for us, 

the average Hindu knew of Buddha only as an incarnation of Vi$nu, who 

came down on earth deliberately to mislead the sinful into the path of an 

anti-Vcdic faith, although he was moved to pity for the animals slaughtered 

at Vedic sacrifices, Sanskrit scholars and ]>ersons educated in English know 

about Buddha, but the Buddhist tradition about the master has strangely 
§ * 
passed away. /Even Buddha images are being worshipped in many places 

as Hindu god4 and goddesses by the Hindu populace. From the 19th cen* 

tury, names like A mi tab ha, Biidhi-sallva, Sakya-dmha, and Buddha- dev a, 

and Gdpa and Yasodhara are being revived. But two names of late Maha- 

yana inspiration, although used in Brahmanical or Brahmanised contexts, 

have continued all along : Lokanatha or Lokesvarc, believed to be a name of 

Siva', but really (at least in its origin) it would appear to be the name of the 

very popular Bodhisattva, Avalokitisvara ; and 7'Jrd, u$ually regarded as the 



84 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

Tantric goddess who is a form of Sakti, but really the name is of the equally 
popular Buddhist goddess who was the consort of AvalokitSivara. In fact, 
in popularity, among the Buddhist forbears of a good many present-day 
Bengalis, AvalokitUvara and Tara anticipated Siva and Durgd : the names 
have survived, and many of the attributes : only the mythological atmosphere 
is different. 

The old gods never die. nor do tile rituals. If worship of the saints’ 
graves survives, even the name for these saints lives in translation : the 
Buddhist sthavira > thcra is succeeded by the Islamic pir, which in Persian 
means the same thing as sthavira ( * old man'), and the lotus and sandal 

paste are just changed for the rose and rose-water coming from Islamic Iran. 

The second name in the Buddhist triad. Dharma, came down to Old 
Bengali in the proper tadbhava form Dharmay dhamma > dhdma. but it fell 
into disuse from Middle Bengali times, the Sanskrit word, never lost to the 
language (either in its tatsama form, or in its semi- tatsama variants like 
dharama, dhamma), taking its place. In Middle Bengali, dhdma survives in 
the word dhdnmt-karani or dhanidt-kann, a title for a priest in the ritual 
of the Dharma cult ( dharma -\ ayanta- or - dpayanta - : * dhdmdila, dhamut). 
We have the word in a place-name like Dhum rdi (--- Dharma-rdjikd). The 
Middle Bengali word dhatnali means ‘a particular kind of song, a kind of 
song accompanied by gestures, dance-song, dance-sport, jest and joke’ : its 
Assamese counterpart dhemdli means ‘ a division of the musical irerformancc 
with the Assamese khol and mridang (drums),' and then ‘sport’, ‘amuse- 
ment.’ These words seem to be akin to the Hindi dhamdr ‘ a kind of musical 
mode' which appears to be just another form of Hindi dhatndl, dhammdl 
‘jumping into or running through fire (a practice of faqirs and qalandars ); 
a musical measure : a kind of song (sung during the Holl festival): wild and 
tumultuous merriment, noise, tumult, uproar.’ Platts connects the Hindi 
words with dharma. Originally therefore *dharmala meant ‘some religious 
ceremonial,’ then ‘ music and dancing connected with that,’ and, finally, ' merri- 
ment ’ on the one hand, and ‘ a part icular kind of musical or poetic composi- 
tion ’ on the other : and the word may be of Buddhist antecedents, which has 
survived to our day— the meaning having degenerated. We may compare the 
fortunes of the name Vasisfha : originally as the priest of Rama's house, he 
was the messenger between Da $a rat ha and Janaka before Rama’s marriage 
with the latter’s daughter, Slta, as described in the Rdmayana ; and then the 
Middle Indo-Aryan form of the word, Vasittha, must have changed its mean- 
ing, so that its New Indo-Aryan equivalent in Hindi, basilh, finally came to 
mean ‘ a village headman, a master of ceremonies, an agent or messenger * 
( Arrur Khusrau, c. 1300 a.d., uses bas'd ft as an equivalent of the Arabic 
rasfd the Persian paighamtyar) and, finally, to degenerate into the sense of 
‘ a go-between, a tale-bearer, a mischief-maker,’ and even into ‘ a customer 
(among harlots).* 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 


85 


The word Sangha , on the authority of the late Mahamahopadhyaya Hara- 
prasad Sastri, survived in Middle Bengali in the word sanga (or sangha) 
meaning ‘a group of ships or boats sailing together for safety, a convoy.’ 
(In Pali also wd have the word sanghdla to mean ‘an array of boats’). 
We have in Modern Bengali the. word sdngdt 4 boon companion, close friend,’ 
and at first sight it would suggest a connexion with the Sanskrit sanga. But 
the Hindi equivalent shows gh and not g : sanghdti ‘ companion, friend, ally \ 
sanghat ‘union, companionship sanghatin or sanghatan 4 female friend.’ We 
have in Hindi the expression sang-sahghdti — 4 friends and associates *, where 
sanghdti is distinguished from sang in a synonym-corn pound. So here we have 
a folk-survival in Bengali and Hindi of the Buddhist sangha : sangha f 
vanla- Bengali sdngdt, and saugha-tva - Hindi sanghat , from which the 
nouns. We have here thus a generalisation of the specialised Buddhist term. 

( Buddha , D karma and Sangha have thus not been able to retain any hold 
on the popular or mass- consciousness of the people of Bengal. On the other 
hand, some Puranic deities and other figures have been able to do so^ e.g.. 
Bengali Kdnu < Krsna . Rat < Rdhi < Rddhikd , Ay an < Aihana <Ahivannu 
< Abhimanyu , Ind or Id < Indra , Dilgi < *Durgikd , Sdlh(i) < Sasfhi ; etc. 

In some place-names we have naturally enough reminiscences of Buddhist 
religious foundations or locations, e.g., Dhdmardi which has been noted above, 
Punclhupi ( Panca-slupikd ) , Bdjdsan ( Vajrdsana). Dharma daha , 
Dhdm-sdr , Udri or Wdri ( Upakdrikd , ‘pavilion, temporary pavilion for reli- 
gious festivities decorated with flowers and festoons’), Nabdsan ( Navd- 
sena ) , Mahdsthdn ; and a few more. It may not be insisted upon, but it is 
very likely that the annual festivities, centering round the worship of some god 
or goddess Dugi < Durgikd which are held all over Bengal and are known as 
Bdr-ivdri-pfijd , is of Buddhist origin. The main item in these festivities is the 
erection of a temjx)rary structure, a common gathering place, in wood, bamboo 
and matting, with flags, foliage and festoons, the udri, of Old Bengal, in which 
the performance of dramas and singing of songs for the people are held, and the 
image is installed in a coiner if there is no permanent temple. ITie cost is met 
by public subscription, the community taking active part in the whole thing. 
1 he word bar in Bar-wan appears to be added to the original word udri in 
later post-Muslim times, as an honorific embellishment, from the Persian 
(cf. Persian bar ‘country,’ bay ah ‘wall’; cf. danbdr ‘king’s audience or 
levee *). 

The Brahman tradition was to wear long hair and beards — wearing long 
hair may have been an Indo-European inheritance among the Aryan Brahmans 
of India. In contrast to that, the Buddhist monks were clean-shaven in both 
head and face. In post-Muslim times, the clean-shaven Buddhist monks and 
nuns were contemptuously known as Nddd (or Nedd) and Nadi (or Nedi), 
and these terms came to be applied by the orthodox Hindus for Vaishnava 
monks and nuns who also followed this practice of shaving the head, from post- 



86 B. C. LAW, VOLUME 

Chaitanya times, when Chaitanya Vaishnavism admitting monks and nuns 
became a strongly organised force in the country. The Brahmans, particularly 
laymen, were accustomed to be clean-shaven in the face and in the head, save 
lor a long tuft at the top (the sikha), and for this hygienic practice the^ 
example of the Buddhist monks may have been responsible : in post-Chaitanya 
times, as wc gather from a 16 th century literary reference, it was uncommon 
for a Brahman to wear a beard — more so when the Turks and other Muslims 
were cultivating this hirsute appendage to the face. Ordination of Vaisnava 
monks and nuns, which was a very simple ceremony, came to be described by 
an old word which would appear to be a relic of Buddhist practice : the monk's 
status of a bhikm ( bhikkhu ) or Buddhist monk, with the yellow garb and 
the begging bowl, was known as bhmksya ( bhekkha ), and from this wc have 
the vernacular (Bengali) word bhekh meaning the status of the Vaishnava 
monk, with his fu/ast-beads round his neck, his begging bag made of a knotted 
cloth, and his kaupina or loin-cloth. 

Certain cults which were going very strong in Middle Bengali times and 
have continued a moribund existence even to our day form an undoubted 
continuance of Tantric Buddhism, more or less mixed with other cults. Of 
these, the medieval Bengali Sahajiyd cult is one : later it affiliated itself to 
Chaitanya Vaishnavism. The Natha cult, with the Siddha Gorakh-nath at 
its head, is another : it appears to have been the result of a fusion of Tantric 
Sahaja-yana of the late Mahayana Buddhism with Sivaite Yoga. Gorakh- 
nath is one of those elusive persons who are claimed by more than one reli- 
gious sect. The Avadhutas are another order of religious devotees, frankly 
Sivaite, who appear to have emerged from Sahaja-yana. The Bauls are 
another group of Sahaja-yana origin or affinity, which until recently kept 
itself aloof from Bralimanical sects, and followed, its own ideologies and its 
own life : now it is slowly Vaishnavising itself. The Karla-bhaja or the 
* Creator i.e., Master worshipper ' sect is a very late form of the non-descript, 
extra-Brahmanical sects which grew up in a Vaishnava background. 

The present-day Tantric leaven in Bengal Hinduism largely came to it 
via the Buddhistic Kdla-cakra-ydna, the Vajra-ydna and the Sahaja-yana 
schools of the Tantra-ydna. One matter in which there lias been a very subtle 
influence from Tantric Buddhism upon Bengal Brahmanism would seem to be 
this : the rather exaggerated importance of the guru from whom Tantric ini- 
tiation is received. The Brahman has his proper Vedic initiation when he is 
invested with the sacred thread by the upanayana rite and is taught the 
Gdyatri prayer from the Veda : theoretically, he does not require any other 
initiation. But in practice, all good Hindus in Bengal should have a guru 
who will ‘ give him the mantra,' a Saiva, Sakta or Vaishnava mystic syllable 
and a name of a divinity to repeat : and the guru becomes almost as a god 
to him after this initiation. This mentality has become so thoroughly ingrained 



BUDDHIST SURVIVALS IN BENGAL 


87 


in the Bengali mind, Hindu and Muslim (the Muslims have developed in 
India and particularly in Bengal a similar Plr-Murid or Mur skid- Murid, i.e., 
Guru-Sisya relationship) that it directs the activities of even otherwise nor- 
mal people to the extent of blindly following a master, in intellectual as much 
as in spiritual matters. Now, the guru lias always had an honoured place 
in Brahman Society : but he was never an object of divine honours in 
Vedism. Whereas, as we see in Nepal, where the Tantric Buddhism as in 
Bengal of the 10th- 13th centuries still survives among the Newats. although 
the strong sakta or Saiva cult of the Gurkhas has been profoundly modifying 
it. a Buddhist is known as a Gubhdju or 4 a Guru worshipper.’ and a Brahma- 
nical Hindu as a De-bhdju or ‘a Deva-worshipper \ (The late MM. Dr. 
liaraprasad Sastri noted these words in Nepal and explained them in the 
above way, connecting them with the Sanskrit root him} ' to adore, to worship * : 
R. L. Turner in his Nepali Dictionary , however, gives Gubhdju or Gubhdjyu 
as meaning ‘a Newaii Buddhist priest', but not De-bhdju . and explains 
Gubhdju differently, as possibly being from Sanskrit guru and a Newaii 
hhdju ' master 'A 

Some of our middle- class non-Brahman surnames have a Buddhistic 
ring : Pdlita. Dhara , Ruksila . Kara etc., may be equally Brahmanical and 
Buddhistic, but Ptin may be Buddhistic ( Prdjiia or prajua - Middle fndo- 
Aryan Panda, panne Bengali Pan ) . A good few surnames occur in both 
the fuller Sanskrit form and in the modified Prakrit ic form : the former may 
be due to a Brahmanical context, the latter Buddhistic. But this is, it must 
be confessed. t<x:> theoretical : nevertheless, we may contrast Canda with 
Candra , Aic (from Aura) with Adilya , Hui for Bhuti i - bhuti U Gui (Guin) 
for Gomika or Gamin < Cf. Candra-gdmin Bengali Cad Gui). Da besides 
Ddm ( -- Daman), etc. 

The above are a few aspects of the very meagre survival of the Buddhist 
world (at one time so wide and so all-embracing) in the present-day Hindudom 
of Bengal, as they suggest themselves to a student of language. Closer and 
more specialised investigation is bound to reveal many more venues of Bud- 
dhist survival. 



KOK AM UKH A S V A M I N 


By 

P KOF. H. C. RAYCHAUDHURI. M.A., ph.d. 

(Carmichael Professor, Calcutta University.) 

An obscure deity called Kokfnnukhasvaniin is mentioned in a Damodar 
pur inscription of Budha Gupta . 1 2 3 4 Dr. R. G. Basak, who originally edited the 
record, referred in this connection to Kokamukha, a form of the goddess 
Durga, and to the Kokamukha lirtlui , both mentioned in tlie Mahabhdrala. 
Me did not, however, suggest any satisfactory identification of the god 
Kokamukhasvamin. My friend and pupil Dr. D. C. Sircar recently came to 
the conclusion that Kokamukha is a form of Siva .* 5 This theory is based 
on the supposed connection of the name “ Adya Kokamukhasvamin ”, as 
given in the Damodarpur inscription, with the appellations Adya and Koka 
mukha used in reference to Durga. the consort of siva, and on the tern: 
mmadmga which, according to Dr. Sircar, occurs in the epigraph in the sense 
of • a Linga established after someone's name,' and points to the god Koka 
mukhasv&min. The land donated in favour of the deity according to the 
Damodarpur grant, was situated on the Himavacchikhara.* Dr. Sircar rightly 
points out that the expression Himavacchikhara literally means ‘ a j)eak or 
summit of the Himalayas* ; but he adds : “ Here however it ap|)cars to refer 
to a territorial unit (called a forest, in f Inscription! No. 39). The situation 
of the land granted to the gods suggests that it was not far from Damodar- 
pur. There is as yet no proof that the Kotfvarsa district included the hilly 
region bordering on the northern fringe of Bengal .” 1 

Fresh light on the identification not only of Kokamukhasvamin but also 
of • Himavacchikhara \ where apparently the god’s temple was situated, is 
thrown by chapters 219 and 229 of the Brahma Pur ana.' The evidence 
furnished by the above sections of the Purapa prove beyond doubt that 
like Svetavarahasvamin, with whom he is associated in the mavrd, Koka- 
mukha is a form of the Vaifiha (Boar) incarnation of Visniu and that the 
Kokamukha tirtha was in the Himalayan region on the northern fringe of 
Bengal. 

1 . Basak, Ep. bid., Vol. XV, p. 138 ff ; Sircar, Select Inscriptions , p. 328 ft'. 

2. Op. cit. t 329 n ; cf. hid. Cult., April. 1939 (Vol. V), p. 432 f. 

3. Cf. Himavacchikharc K o kfmuk has i: d 7 ; wi a h catvarah kutyavdpdh etc. 

4. Sircar, Select Inscriptions, p. 329, fn. 2. 

5. Baftgabasi edition, pp. 860 ff, 928 ff. 



KOKAMUKHASVAMIN 


89 

In chapter 219 of the Brahma Puratja we have a legend about the origin 
of the place ol pilgrimage styled Kokamukha tirtha. It is unnecessary here to 
enter into the details of the story. In short it relates howVi$nu in his Boat 
form rescued the divine piljs who had been engulfed in the waters of the 
Koka, a stream that dashed through the Himalayan rocks (sisir-ddri). Cf. 

Verse 3 :• - 

Pura Kokdjale magndn pitrjnuddhrtavdn bibhuh 
Verse 17 : 

Kokeli pralliitd lake ilsiRMmsamdSritd 
Verse 36 : - 

koka ru uk he pilrganam sal He nimagnam 
Devo dadarsa sirasdlfut sildiii vahanlam 

Verse 39 : 

varaha damslrtlsamlagnah pitarah kanaka jjvald/t 
Kokdmukhe galabhaydh krld devena Visnund 

Verse 114 

Kokdpi tirlhasahild samsthild GIR1RAJANI 

It is added that the sanctity of the Kokamukha tirtha was due to tlie presence 
ol the Varaha form of Visnu. Cf. 

Vcise 106 : 

Koka nadili vikhydld girirdjasamasriUi 
lirlhakotimahdpuityd M A f >R Opa pa ripdlitd 

Verse 107 

asydmadya prabhrti vai nivatsydniyaghandsakrt 
\\RAH.\dmsanaih puny a tit pujanarii bhuktinvuklidam 

Verst: 116 : - 

evam mayoktam varadasya Visiiali 
KOKAMUKHE tfit/yff-VAKAHARUPAM 

It may be noted in this connection that according to the same legend Nara- 
kasura, who sprang from the union of Visnu in his Boar form with the goddess 
Mahi or Chaya, and was made lord of the city of Pragjyotifa by his 
Divine Father, was born in the Kokamuklia tirtha in the Himalayas.® The 


6. Cf. 

Verses 114-115 : 

Chaya mahimayi kruj't pindaprasanavrmhitu 
garbhamddaya sasraddb-a Varakasyaiva sundari 
tato' syah prabhavat puli a Bhaumastu Narakasurah 
Pragjyoti$anca ntigaramasya daftanca Visnurrd 



90 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


story apparently points to the proximity of the holy spot in question to 
Pragjyoti$a in Kamarupa (Lower Assam and North Bengal to the east of 
the Karatnya). In Uie Gupta period, the sacred site is known to have* 
fallen within the limits of the Kotivarsa visaya (district) of the Puiydavar- 
dhana bhukti (province) in North Bengal. 

Chapters 229 of the Brahma Pur ana also dilates on the Kokamukha 
i'ntha ; but it hardly adds much to the stock of our knowledge. This section 
only corroborates the information gathered from chapter 219. 

Cf. 

ityevamuklvd pilar am prana my a 
gaivu ca Kokdniukkamagrulirtham 
Vimtuh sanutradhya varaharupam 
avdpa siddhim manujai sabk o'sau 

Cl). 229, Verse 86. 

In passing it may be pointed out that the Damodarpur inscription noticed 
above is of great importance for the study of the religious history of ancient 
Bengal. In the first place, it points to the prevalence of the cult of the 
auataras of VLsnu in Bengal during the Gupta age. 7 Secondly, it demonstrates 
the existence, even in that early period, of a belief in different varieties (Sveta 
varaha, Kokamukha) of the Varaha form of Vhiiu. li is clear that as early 

7. Cf. my remarks on the disappearance of ihe independent worship of the 
vyuhas except Vasudeva. and tin* growing popularity of the avatarat s. Early History 
of the Vuishnirvu Sect., 2nd eel. p. 176. The votaries of the cull of Vishnu and his 
uvular as were doubtless styled Bhdgavala a sectarian designation that was known 
to Indian epigraphy from the lime of the Bcsnagar inscription of Heliodoros* to the 
age of the Guptas' and their successors. Another designation, Pdntardira . is met with 
in the Epic, the Pancarfiira Sawfiitth, the Harsacarita of B:ina the Brahma Pur ana 
and other works. A suggestion has been offered in recent Limes that Bhagavalism 
was completely different from the Pancaratra cult in the Gupta period, and tliat 
while the former was specially associated with the avatdravdda . the latter stotxl for 
the vyuhavdda . But the existence of the Pancaratras as a sect distinct from the 
Bhiagavatas in the Gupta age is extremely problematical. The epithet Pancaratra 
is not prefixed to the name of any personage of importance in Gupta inscriptions 
or coin legends m the same way as Saivata, or Bhdgavata, thus casting doubt on 
it« prevalence as a rival sectarian designation in the Gupta age. The Harsacartta 
which does make separate mention of Bhagavatas and Pancaratras i. <x post -Gupta 
work. The commentator on the words regards* both the sects as Visnuites ; but he 
never suggests that, the line of demarcation between the two follows the supposed 
cleavage between the upholders of tire avatdravdda and the vyuhavdda respectively. 
In the Pddtna Tantra, Bhdgavala and Pancarutrika are, referred to as synonymous 
terms, and the Pancaratra Swnhitds pay devotion to the avatar as as well as the 
vyuhas. Even in the Cat t anyacuritdm tin , there is no suggestion that the avatdravdda 
is the doctrine exclusively of the Bhagavatas and the vyuhavdda of the Kuicaratras. 
In the Brahma Pur ana the Malulbhdgavata Akrura pays homage to the four Vyuhas 
(ch. 190-192). The Panchar at ro- v id harm contemplates worship of the Vyuhas as 
well as the avatdras including Mahavaraha (Ch. 48-49). 



KOK AM UK HASVAM I N 


91 


as the fifth century a.i>. not only were avatar as worshipped in Bengal, but 
the conception of different variations of the same avatara had developed.® 


8. Gopinatha Rao {Elements of Hindu Iconography, Vol. I. pt. i, p. 132 ff) 
notices three different eonceptional types of the Vaiaha avatara , namely, (i) Bhiiva- 
raha. Adivaraha or Nrvaraha, Hi) Yajnavarnha and (Hi) Pralayavaraha. The rela- 
tion of these types with Svctavaraha and Kokamukha cannot be determined in the 
present state of our knowledge. The Eran inscription of Toramana (Fleet, Corp. 
Ins, hid .. Vol. Ill, p. 159) refers to the Boar form of Visartu ** who in the? act oi 
lifting up the earth (nut of the waters) caused the mountains to tremble with the 
blows of (his) hard snout; (and) who is the pillar (for the support) of the great 
house which is the three worlds." Cf. 

jayati dharanyuddharane ghanaghonaghdtaghurymitamahiddhrah 
devo Va rdhamurttht raUokyamahdgrhastambah 

The reference here may be to No. ( i ) of Gopinath. The cult of the boar 
may have been, like that of the divine apes, snake gods and goddesses, etc., of 
folk (popular) origin, later engrafted on Vaishnavism and other important creeds. 



THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL* 

By 

Dr. S. N. SEN, m.a., ph.d., b. utt. 

Vasco da Gama did not sail for an unknown land when he left Belem with 
his valiant band in the summer of 1497. India was not a terra incognita to the 
people of the west. For countless agts the route overland had been used 
by scores of travellers and traders. Only ten years earlier Cavilhao.' a 
compatriot of Vasco, had sailed from Aden to Cannanore, to find a passage 
across the sea, from Calicut to Africa where he gathered valuable information 
about Madagascar and a wide .stretch of the coast opposite. He was not 
destined to see his country again, but the results of his labours wen; not lost 
to his countrymen. A faithful friend carried Cavilhao's report, to Lisbon. 
'Hie once dreaded waters beyond Cape Non had no longer any terror for the 
Portuguese seamen. Sailor after sailor had dauntlessly defied the perils of 
the unknown for six decades and more, and crept along the west coast of 
Africa from cape to cape, creek to creek, carefully noting the prominent land- 
marks, rivers, islets and harbours as they pushed on further and further, 
until the southernmost limit was reached, and the eastern shores espied. The 
success of Gama’s voyage had been amply assured by the exploits of his 
precursors. The task .set by Prince llenry the Navigator was accomplished 
when Vasco cast his anchor off Calicut. 

Knowledge for its own sake, adventures for their perils alone, had no 
appeal to Vasco and his friends. They were after the good things of thi- 
world, and would secure, if they could, the blessings of the next. They came 
to this country in quest of commerce and Christians. Of Christians there 
were but few in this pagan land and that mysterious prince, Prester John ot 
the popular legends, was not to be found in India. But the Portuguese were 
not disappointed. If their evangelical zeal met with a set-back, their acquisi 
tive instincts were more than gratified in the rich marts of Malabar. Vasco 
da Gama had his own standard of business morality If peaceful traffic 
proved less profitable, he readily indulged in the use of sworj and fire. 
Human beings and their handicrafts were to him equally lucrative and 
legitimate articles of commerce. What he and his countrymen wanted was 
a monopoly of the eastern trade, and for twenty years Gama and Cabral, 
Almeida and Albuquerque, ruthlessly exploited the region of their first visit. 

It was not long before that other areas claimed their greedy attention. 

1. Danvers, The Portuguese in India . Vol. I, pp. 29-32. 

* This! paper, written for the Dacca University History of Bengal, has been 
contributed to this volume with the kind permission of the Editor. 



THE PORTUGESE IN BENGAL 


93 


The goods of Bengal were not unknown in the markets recently captured by 
them, but they found their way to Malabar in crafts other than Portuguese, 
and the profit, went to swell unchristian pockets. Albuquerque had already 
dwelt upon the bright prospects that trade with Bengal offered in a letter 
to his King and master, hut it was left to his successor, Lopo Soares de 
Albergaria, to send an expedition to the Bay, and in 1518, Dom Joao de 
Silveira appeared with four ships before the bar of Chittagong. lie had been 
shortly preceded there by Joao Coelho, another Portuguese agent. In 1517 
Femao Peres d’ Andrade had been commissioned to explore the Bay of Bengal 
and the neighbouring country, but lured by the reported wealth of thel Far 
East, he sailed first to Sumatra and thence steered his course for the ports 
of the Celestial Empire postponing his visit to Bengal for a future date. On 
the return journey, he sent Joao Coelho to his original dost ination. and Coelho 
arrived at Chittagong, a passenger in a Moorish boat, a few days earlier 
than Silveira. The first Portuguese mission to Bengal, however, proved a 
failure. Barros and other Portuguese historians found a satisfactory explana- 
tion of Silveira ’s ill-success in the habitual treachery and innate wickedness 
of the Bengalee character, but the Portuguese had to thank themselves alone 
for the cold reception they met with in Bengal. 

Silveira had encountered two merchant men on his way to the Maldives, 
and promptly made prizes of them. One of the captured boats belonged to 
a Muslim merchant. Golam Ali (Gormallei. known to be a relative of the 
governor of Chittagong, who himself was interested in the other. As he wa u 
apparently unfamiliar with the waters he was to navigate, the Portuguese 
captain pressed into his service a pilot from the boats he had seized and took 
into his confidence a young man, who introduced himself as the pilot’s brother- 
in-law. No wonder that his strange misdeeds on the high seas, which ill- 
accorded with the. peaceful character of his professed mission, were, no secret 
to the governor of Chittagong when Silveira arrived there, and the appearance 
of two Portuguese agents in quick succession, from opposite, quarters, gave 
ample room for suspicion. The Muslim captain with whom Coelho found 
a passage, gave him a good character but Silveira’s action, as reported to the 
governor, had all the apt>earance of piracy. He was accordingly considered 
to be an undesirable visitor, though Coelho experienced nothing but kindness 
and courtesy during his brief residence in Bengal. It will be unfair to assume 
that the high handed dealings of Gama and Cabral had not been reported 
by the merchants of Western India to their friends and partners in Bengal. 
The consequence was inevitable. Silveira was suspected to be a pirate and 
treated as such, and he had to fight “ desperately," as we learn from a Portu- 
guese official report, 1 ' against the “ perverse ’’ people of Bengal, who obsti- 
nately refused to do any business with him. Silveira found himself in an 


2. Sen, Early Career of Kmhoji Artgria and other Papers, pp. 88-95. 



94 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


unenviable plight, lie dared not leave the inhospitable shores until the 
monsoon was over, and he could not find the provision he needed by fair 
purchase. 

It may very well be asked why the Portuguese captain began his voyage 
with a highly indiscreet, if not positively unfriendly proceeding, which was 
liable to be- unfavourably construed by the very people whose good opinion 
it was apparently his interest to cultivate. The answer is not far to seek. 
The sovereignty of the eastern seas pertained by virtue of a Papal grant to 
the Portuguese crown, and the King of Portugal had solemnly assumed the 
title of “ ljord of the Navigation. Conquests and Trade of .“Ethiopia, Arabia, 
Persia and India."" According to the Portuguese way of thinking, every 
Portuguese captain was not only comwtent, but obliged to exercise the autho- 
rity that the title connoted. It never occurred to them that the Papal Bull 
might not possibly have any legal or moral sanctions in countries outside 
His Holiness's spiritual jurisdiction. But in the Portuguese eyes, there was 
an additional justification for the policy pursued by their officers in the east. 
Nothing was unfair to a fanatical Christian, and fanaticism was the order 
of the day, particularly in the comparatively less civilised lands of the west, 
when a Moor or Muslim happened to be the victim. They had waged a long 
and bitter war against the Moor in their native country, and Portuguese 
patriotism and Portuguese piety equally demanded the extermination of the 
hated Moor in the neighbouring tracts of Africa. Commercial rivalry added 
further zest to racial hatred and religious aversion, and a Moor was con- 
sidered to be a fair prey wherever encountered. The Indian export trade 
was, in those days, mostly in Muslim hands and the Portuguese captains 
made it their business to sweep the Muslim merchantmen out of Indian 
waters. Moreover, the tradition loft by the early Portuguese explorers had 
a sinister influence on the naval practice of their successors, who willingly 
emulated their pernicious example. While navigating the eastern waters of 
the Atlantic, the Portuguese captains often found it necessary to requisition 
the unwilling services of the natives of the neighbouring coast. Raiding 
parties were usually sent to bring captives of all ages and sexes, and the more 
intelligent of the unfortunate prisoners were employed as pilots, guides and 
interpreters, while the rest were sold into slavery. 1 In justice r- the Portu- 
guese, it must be admitted that some of the Negroes were converted into 
Christianity, given a good education, married in Portuguese families and 
more or less imperceptibly absorbed in Portuguese society. But it cannot 
be doubted that the great majority suffered all the afflictions of exile and 
slavery for no fault of their own. Silvcira was, therefore, behaving according 
to the moral codd of Cadamosto and Cao, Gomes and Dias, when he made 

3. Danvers, The Portuguese in India, Vd. I, p. 77. 

4. Prestage, The Portuguese Pioneers, p. 101. 



TIIE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 


95 


prizes of the Guj rat-bound boats from Bengal and pressed into his service 
the pilot and his youthful relative, not sustains for a moment that they 
might not prove so submissive and obliging as the less sophisticated and mnie 
helpless poople of Nigeria and Gambia. With a strange and perverse con- 
sistency, the Portuguese continued to offend the susceptibilities of a civilised 
society and a cultured court by their failure to conform to the higher standard 
of international conduct prevailing in India, and most of their misfortunes in 
Bengal were due to lawless habits contracted with impunity in the congenial 
climes of the “ dark ” continent. 

To return to our story, Silveira sailed back after a season of futile fight- 
ing and useless hostility, and nothing notable happened until 152f5, when 
Kuy Vaz Pereira visited Chittagong and captured a galliot owned by a rich 
Persian merchant, Khwajn Shihabud-din. (Logo Saba dim) with all its cargo, 
ft was alleged that piracy was committed by vessels built and fitted up after 
the Portuguese pattern and the blame was fastened on the unoffending Portu- 
guese, while the real culprit went scot-free, khwajn Shihab-ud-din’s boat 
had all the appearance of such a corsair and Pereira professed to have acted 
in. the inh rt *.t of his own countrymen and all. honest traders when he seized 
the wolf masquerading in a lamb’s garb.' 1 

Ill winds brought the next Portuguese visitor of note in 1528. Martini 
Alfonso do Mello Jusarte was cruising off Ceylon with a squadron of eight 
vessels when a violent storm scattered his fleet, and drove his boat to the 
eastern shores of the Bay of Bengal. Dc Mello found himself .ship- wrecked 
on the coast of Pegu, and made his way in a frail barque to a sandy bank 
where he and his men suffered the extremes of hunger and thirst. At last 
.some, fishermen offered to guide them to Chittagong but either by design or 
by mistake took them to Chakaria fon the Matamuhari river, 50 miles from 
Chittagong under the. Head Quarters sub-division, Chakaria still claims some 
importance having a police station, sub-registry and telegraph office) where 
Khuda Bakhsh Khan, (Codovascam), the local chieftain unceremoniously 
threw them into prison. According to the Portuguese accounts, Khuda 
Bakhsh offered them liberty in lieu of their military services in a feud he had 
with an unfriendly neighbour. The battle was fought and won but there was 
no improvement in the lot of the unhappy prisoners. Khuda Bakhsh trans- 
ferred them to his headquarters further inland in breach of his plighted 
word. Meanwhile, two of dc Mello’s lieutenants arrived at Chakaria but 
their efforts to ransom him proved of no avail, while an attempted flight re- 
sulted in greater rigours and de Mcllo's nephew, an immature youth of charm- 
ing looks, v/as permitted to be brutally .sacrificed by the local Brahmans. 
When things looked their ugliest, relief came, from an unexpected quarter. 
Khwaja Shihab-ud-din, that Persian merchant of whose ship Pereira had made 

5. Campos, History of the Portuguese in Bengal, pp. 30-31. 



96 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


a prize at Chittagong, now interceded with the chieftain of Chakaria rightly 
expecting that success would be rewarded with the release of his boat and 
chattels. It was through his good offices that de Mello was at last ransomed 
at the not inconsiderable price of £ 1,500, and sent to Goa where he arrived 
in 1530. after two years of misery and misfortune. 

One good turn deserved another and Nuno da Cunha, the Portuguese 
coventor, readily agreed to send another trading and diplomatic mission to 
Bengal when Shihab-ud-din approached him with a request to that effect. 
The Persian had some difficulties with the court of Gaur and would fain 
-hake off the dust of Bengal. He proposed tit take a berth in a Portuguese 
boat bound for Ormuz, and offered in return, to use his influence with the 
grandees of Gaur to secure for his Portuguese friends the much coveted license 
for building factories and forts at Chittagong and other sites. Da Cunha 
appointed Martini Alfonso de Mello Jusarte to head the expedition, and lie 
“ailed with live .ships and two hundred men to reach Bengal for a second 
time in 1533. lie was received well by the governor of Chittagong and started 
unloading his cargo. But it appears that all his past ex|x-rienccs had been 
completely lost on him and, instead of trying to win the confidence of the 
local authorities by fair dealing, de Mello did his best to alienate them by 
fraudulently smuggling bis goods to avoid paying the excessive custom duties 
levied at the port. He was equally imprudent in the choice of his presents 
foi the Sultan. Duarte de Azevcdo. his envoy, did indeed take with him fine 
horses, rich brocades and other gifts to the value of £’ 1200 to Mahmud 
Shah’s capital. Tf it was his intention to create a sensation by the variety 
and wealth of his presents, he achieved an astounding success. Rarely is a 
king expected to accept stolen goods and among the presents offered to the 
Sultan were found several bottles of scented water known to have come from 
a Muslim merchantman recently plundered by a notorious Portuguese pirate. 
Damiao Bernaldes. and neither de Mello nor Azevcdo had claimed it. necessary 
to take the elementary precaution of removing from the. offensive packets the 
labels of the; original owner.' 1 The Sultan drew the obvious conclusion, and 
ordered the buccaneer.-, for as such Azevcdo and his colleagues had appeared 
to him, to be beheaded. The pleading of a Muslim saint is said to have 
saved the Portuguese; from that dire end and they were consigned to a dungeon 
which Barros likens to the Inferno (hell). At. the same time the governor 
of Chittagong had been instructed to seize the Portuguese and their goods. 
He would have been perfectly within his rights if he had called de Mello and 
his associates to account for the fraud they had practised, but instead of 
placing them under arrest in a straightforward manner, the governor pre- 
ferred to resort to the safer, but more dubious, methods of those days. Tlie 
unsuspecting offenders were invited to a banquet, and all, but a few, who 

6. Whiteway— The. Rise of the Portuguese Power in India, pp. 232-234. 




THE PORTUGUSE IN BENGAL 


97 


preferred the diversions of a hunt to the pleasures of a feast readily stepped 
into the trap. Despite the desperate defence they offered, thirty of the Portu- 
guese, including de Mello, were neatly secured after ten had lost their lives 
and the prisoners were sent to Gaur to share the fate of the envoy and his 
staff. The Portuguese historians are loud in their denunciation of what they, 
in their wrath, describe, as a treacherous massacre of innocent guests, but it 
cannot be gainsaid that de Mdlo and his colleagues had richly deserved 
incarceration though the questionable method of apprehending the culprits, 
and the consequent casualty gave an altogether different colouring to the 
incident. 

The masterful spirit of Nuno da Cunha would not brook such an insult 
to the Portuguese power, and Antonio da Silva Menezes was promptly sent 
to Bengal, at the head of a powerful fleet, to demand an explanation of the 
extraordinary treatment that friendly envoys had received at the court of 
Gaur, and to obtain the release of Martim Affonso de Mello and his men by 
peaceful persuasion, if possible, and by force, if necessary (1534). On his 
arrival at Chittagong da Silva Menezes sent an envoy to Gaur with his 
masters message, but when a month elapsed before a reply arrived, he set 
lire to Chittagong and put a large number of the Sultan's people to the 
sword. Violence v;as not calculated to improve the embittered relations and 
Diogo Rebcllo who arrived at Satgaon shortly afterwards (1535) tried a 
peaceful blockade. His representatives received a better hearing at Gaur, 
not because.' the Sultan had repented of his past policy, or the naval demons- 
trations of the Portuguese had made any impression, but because Mahmud 
Shah had for sometime past been anxiously looking for new allies against the 
powerful aggression of Sher Khan Sur. Drowning men clutch at straws. 
The Sultan promptly released his prisoners, and Martim Affonso suddenly 
found himself in the honoured position of a trusted military" adviser of the 
King of Bengal. In the war that followed, the Portuguese are said to have 
performed w-onders of valour, but neither their bravery, nor their .skill, vitally 
influenced the course of events and Mahmud Shah had to purchase peace on 
the terms dictated by his inexorable enemy. Everybody knew that Sher was 
not likely to rest on his oars longer than was necessary, and Bengal would 
once again have to experience the terrors of a cruel invasion in the near 
future. Affonso Vas de Britto, who visited Bengal in 1538, brought the 
disappointing news that the Portuguese were too much embroiled in Gujarat 
to be of any service to the King of Bengal. The inevitable followed. Mahmud 
Shah was chased out of Gaur and died of his wounds. Ilumayun was out- 
manoeuvred and worsted. Slier became the King of Delhi and sovereign of 
Bengal. But the Portuguese had gained their end before the final discom- 
fiture of their ally. Mahmud Shah in his anxiety to enlist their support had 
permitted the Portuguese to build factories at Satgaon and Chittagong, tire 
“porto pcqueno” (little port) and the “porto grande’* (great port) of the 
8 



98 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Portuguese historians. The conclusion of the war which proved so disastrous 
for their allies found the Portuguese securely established at both the places 
with custom houses of their own. In fact when the local nobles contended 
with Sher Shah's nominee for the possession of Chittagong, Nuno Fernandes 
Freire, the officer in charge of the Portuguese custom house, conceived the 
bold project of seizing the town and the harbour in the name of his King, 
and Castanheda holds that had Freire received the support he deserved from 
Vasco Peres de Sampayo (who had arrived with nine vessels in 1538 too late 
to defend Mahmud Shah’s cause) his scheme might have been .successfully 
carried out. After an armed skirmish with some Moors. Sampayo left for 
Pegu and died there- With his passing away ends the first, chapter in the 
history of the Portuguese infiltration in Bengal. 

II 

The next twenty years form a blank in our history.. Not that tire rest- 
less spirits of the Portuguese knew any respite. Their trading vessels con- 
tinued to visit the i>orts of the east, and their captains, doubtless, made up 
for any deficiency in their legitimate profit by their usual filibustering opera- 
tions. The Portuguese historians found nothing worth recording during these 
two decades and the chroniclers of the country did not as yet take any notice 
of the new-comers. But something must have happened in the meantime to 
demand a revision and reorientation of commercial policy of the Portuguese 
in Bengal, for in 1559 we find a deliberate attempt on their part to divert the 
trade of Chittagong to another ix>rt. Quite likely the Portuguese were not 
pulling on well with the new masters of Chittagong. Some light is thrown 
on this obscure point by a treaty rescued from oblivion by the industry of 
that great archivist, Julio Firminio Judice Biker. The document was signed 
on behalf of a Bengali prince, the Raja of Bakla (Paramananda Ray) by 
Niamat Khan (Nematcao) and Gannu Bysuar (Kanu or Ganu Biswas?), 
who seem to have made a journey to Goa to negotiate a subordinate alliance 
on the part of their master with the Portuguese Viceroy of India (Dom 
Constantino de Braganza). 7 The treaty of the 30lh April 1559, provided for 
a mutual military and commercial alliance. The Raja was to throw open 
his port of Bakla or any other suitable port of his principality to the Portu- 
guese trading fleet, treat the Portuguese tradesmen who might visit his country 
with kindness and consideration, provide the visiting fleet with a full cargo of 
the produces of the coast land stretching from Bakla to Paigao, and refrain 
from raising the custom duties of his ports. The Portuguese, in their turn, 
offered to discontinue their trading voyages to Chittagong, to pay the lawful 
duties levied at the Raja's port and to grant licence to four of his trading 
boats for visiting Goa, Ormuz and Malacca every year. The alliance ob- 
viously placed the Raja in a subordinate position. While he was precluded 

7. Sen, Studies m Indian History, pp. 3*10. 



THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 


99 


from dealing with their enemies in any way, the Portuguese retained the right 
of concluding similar treaties with other ruling princes of this region. In lieu 
of the military co-operation, which the Portuguese promised him in his wars 
against his neighbours, Paramananda agreed to pay an annual tribute in 
a specified quantity of rice, butter, oil, tar, sugar and finer products of the 
loom. Obviously the Portuguese wanted to secure the monopoly of the trade, 
of the country through the agency of the local Rajas, whose weakness and 
ambition readily lent them to the new plan. 

The port of Bakla exists no more, we do not know where Paigao was. 
It was not within the limits of Paramananda’s domain, for the treaty refers 
to other princes of this coast, nor is it certain whether Paigao was situated on 
the Bay of Bengal. Bakla was a riverside port far from the sea. It may not 
be unreasonable to identify Paigao with Paigram in the modem district of 
Khulna. The place is near the Bhairab river which might have been flowing 
by it four centuries ago. If the Portuguese expected that Bakla, with their 
backing, would one day rob Chittagong of its preeminence as a centre oi 
inland and overseas trade, they were sorely disappointed. But they had no 
reason to repent of the alliance of 1559, for in Paramananda and his succes- 
sors they found unfailing friends in the darkest days of their adversity. 

From Paramananda let us turn to one of his successors. Forty years 
after the conclusion of the treaty a Christian missionary of the Society of 
Jesus, Melchoir da Fonseca, visited the court of Bakla on his way to Chandi- 
kan ( Ciandocan) . His account of his interview with the king is worth 
quoting : “ I had scarcely arrived there, when the King ( who is not more 

than eight years old, but whose discretion surpasses his age) sent for me and 
wished the Portuguese to come with me.. On entering the hall, where he was 
waiting for me, all the nobles and captains rose up, and I, a poor priest, was 
made by the King to sit down in a rich scat opposite to him. After com- 
pliments, he asked me where I was going, and 1 replied that I was going to 
the King of Ciandcca, who is ‘ the future father-in-law of your Highness, but 
that as it had pleased the Lord that I should pass through his kingdom, it 
had appeared right to me to come and visit him and offer him the services 
of the fathers. of the Company, trusting that his Highness would give per- 
mission to the erection of churches and the making of Christians. The 
King said, * I desire this myself, because I have heard so much of your 
good qualities ’ and so he gave me a letter of authority, and also assigned a 
maintenance sufficient for two of us." s The boy king of Bakla or Chan- 
dradwip has been rightly identified by Henry Beveridge with Raja Ramachan- 
dra, son-in-law of the great Pratapaditya of Jessore. 8 9 It is interesting to note 
here that his friendship for the Portuguese drew upon him the wrath of the 

8. Beveridge, District of Bakarganj, p. 31. 

9. Beveridge, District of Bakarganj, pp. 175-177. 



100 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


King of Arakan who " suddenly threw himself upon that of Baeoia, of which 
he possessed himself without difficulty, as the king of it was absent and still 
young." 

Fonseca’s mission supplies an apt illustration of the faith following the 
flag. But the missionaries were not alone in the fidd. Fonseca's prayer 
“ for the erection of churches and the making of Christians ’’ was so readily 
granted because the boy king of Bakla had in his service a captain, and 
other people of Portuguese extraction and Christian faith. Nor was he the 
only prince to enlist these foreign adventurers in his army. His father-in-law, 
for instance, and the powerful chief of Sripur welcomed these daring sailors 
and employed them to command their fighting fleet. Whether the Portuguese 
adventurers in the service of the Bhuiyans of Bengal tried, like their French 
and English successors of the eighteenth century, to further the political 
interests of their country while improving their own fortunes, we do not 
precisely know. But some of them certainly made the most of their opportu- 
nities and earned by their exploits a permanent place in the history of their 
times. Of these Domingo Carvalho, was by far the ablest, and he did not 
miss any opportunity of serving his country’s cause when one was available. 

Carvalho was a native of Montargil in Portugal. We do not know when 
he came to India and in what capacity. He must have entered the service 
of Kedar Ray, the famous chief of Sripur, sometime prior to 1602. He dis- 
tinguished himself by the conquest of Sandwip which, if Du Jarric is to be 
credited, belonged of right to the Sripur prince. The island was in those 
days an important centre of salt industry, and formed a battle-ground for 
the Moghuls, the Maghs and the Portuguese. Situated off the coast of 
Chittagong its strategic advantages could not be overlooked either by the 
Moghul rulers of Bengal or the Magh Raja of Arakan. When Caesar 
Frederick visited Sandwip in 1569 the island was inhabited by the Muslims and 
he found ’’the king a very gtxxl man of a Moore King.’’ 30 How it was 
annexed by Kedar Ray, and when it passed into Moghul hands remain yet 
to be ascertained. In 1602, Domingo Carvalho conquered Sandwip in his 
master's name, but unable to hold it against the natives of the place, he 
invited the co-operation of Manoel de Mattos, the Portuguese captain of 
Dianga. The island was then completely reduced and divided between Car- 
valho and Mattos. The annexation of Sandwip was hailed as a great feat of 
Portuguese arms and the two heroes were rewarded by the King of Portugal 
with the knighthood of the Order of Christ and the rank of the gentlemen 
of the royal household (Fidalgos da Casa real). Their triumph, however, 
proved shortlived. The King of Arakan, who had extended his dominion 
to Chittagong, led an expedition against Dianga and inflicted a defeat on 


10. Purckais His Pil grimes, Vol. X, p. 137. 



THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 


101 


Mattos. Carvalho hurried to the rescue of his colleague and captured the 
Arakanese fleet with all its arms and ammunition (Nov. 1602). The Magh 
king wreaked his vengeance on the Portuguese citizens living under his 
jurisdiction, and fitted up a second fleet to retrieve his honour. Carvalho did 
indeed achieve a second victory, but this pyrrhic success rendered his posi- 
tion in Sandwip utterly untenable. He abandoned the island and retired to 
Sripur with some of his followers, while the rest of the Portuguese and native 
Christians betook themselves to the friendly courts of Bakla and Chandikan. 
While at Sripur. Carvalho had to fight a Moghul fleet of hundred masts. 
With thirty armed Julia boats Carvalho put the invading armada to flight and 
saved Sripur from Moghul subjugation. We next find him at Hughli where 
the Portuguese had a flourishing settlement. Obviously he wanted to enlist 
the support of his countrymen of that colony in another enterprise against 
Sandwip. While sailing up the Hughli river his fleet was, without any provo- 
cation, assailed from the batteries of a neighbouring Moghul fortress. 
Carvalho retaliated by storming the place and putting the garrison to the 
sword. This was tire last battle that the famous veteran was destined to 
fight. Shortly afterwards he visited Chandikan (Dhumghat?) where he was 
treacherously put to death by Pratapaditya, in order, it is said, to propitiate 
the King of Arakan, whose conquest of Sandwip and Bakla had brought him 
perilously near the territories of the Jessore prince. 

Sandwip naturally recalls the exploits of a romantic ruffian whose name 
has been writ large in letters of blood in the unhappy annals of that island. 
Ilis courage, cruelty and cunning placed Sebastiao Gonsalves Tibau (better 
known as Gonzales in Bengal) in a class by himself. Born in an obscure 
village near Lisbon of peasant stock, Gonzales came to India in 1605 and 
enlisted as a soldier. Before long he gave up the less remunerative profession 
of arms for the more lucrative trade in salt. He seems to have prospered in 
his new venture, and his profits soon enabled him to jnirchase a Jalia of his 
own. We find him and his boat at Dianga in 1607. He somehow survived 
the massacre of that year, and set up as a free-booter with a few dozens of 
his mote daring countrymen. 11 The small islands of the deltaic region pro- 
vided suitable bases of operation from where he carried on plundering raids 
against the Arakan coast, not missing such defenceless merchantmen as came 
his way. The Government of Sandwip had in the meantime passed to Fateh 
Khan, a Muslim captain formerly in Portuguese employ. Unwilling to brook 
any rival, he murdered the Portuguese and the Christian inhabitants of his 
island, and set out with a fleet of forty sails in search of Gonzales and his 
pirates. While busy dividing their spoils in the island of Dakhin Shahbazpur 

11. According to Fariya Y Sousa, " Some few escaped into the Woods, and 9 
or 10 vessels got to Sea, whereof one was that of Sevastian Gonzales ” Asia P<ntu- 
gueza Tr. by Captain J. Stevans, Vol. Ill, p. 154. 



102 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

(in the District of Bakarganj) they were surprised by Fateh Khan. 14 Better 
seamanship however prevailed over greater number, and Fateh Khan was 
defeated and slain. The victory gained for Gonzales the unquestioning obe- 
dience of his companions, and he was formally elected their leader. Success 
added to his ambition, and he next made himself the master of Sandwip 
(1609). In this enterprise, as in his earlier buccaneering exploits, he relied 
not a little on the support of the friendly Raja of Bakla. The spoils of his 
piracy used to be disposed of in the Raja's country, though the treaty of 
1559 had positively provided against such a misuse of his ports. The Raja 
sent two hundred horsemen and some armed boats to help Gonzales in the 
conquest of Sandwip on condition that the revenue of the island would be 
equally shared by the two allies. Gonzales was not the man to honour his 
promise once his object was gained. He ruled Sandwip as an independent 
ruler and his fame soon attracted fresh adherents until his forces swelled to 
one thosand Portuguese, two thousand Indian soldiers, two hundred horsemen 
and eighty armed boats. The unfortunate Raja of Bakla was now to feel 
the might of his faithless friend, and was forcibly dispossessed of the islands 
of Dakhin Shahbazpur and Patelbhanga. Fortune continued to favour the 
bold bad man and the arrival in Sandwip of a princely fugitive of the Araka- 
nesc royal house. Anaporam, after an unsuccessful bid foi power considerably 
added to the prestige of Gonzales. His intervention in favour of his new 
iriend proved futile, and his troops had to beat a retreat before the superior 
forces of Arakan. The death of Anaporam paved the way for peace, and the 
progress of Moghul arms in the south-eastern districts of Bengal provided the 
motive for a close alliance between the rulers of Arakan and Sandwip. 
Fidelity however was not one of the failings of Gonzales, and the narrow 
straight course of rectitude was not to his taste. He not only betrayed the 
King of Arakan while engaged in fighting the Moghuls, but se.ized his fleet 
and ruthlessly massacred his men. This treachery cost him only his nephew's 
life. The unfortunate youth had been sent to the Arakanese camp as a 
hostage for his uncle’s good faith and the king avenged his wrongs by driving 
a stake through him. “But he who had no Honour valued not at whose 
loss he advanced his own Interest.’’ 11 

But the good stars of Gonzales were already on the decline. His tyranny 
and oppression had alienated most of his adherents, but his ambition knew 

12. Fariya Y Sousa says that the surprise was not complete. as the pirates 
were forewarned by Sebastian Pinto who bad quarrelled with them over the division 
of the spoil and “ leaving them in a River of the island of Xavaspur met Fatecan’s 
fleet and gave them notice. They engaged and fought desperately all night, the 
morning discovered 80 Portuguese victorious over 600 Moors and Patanes and 10 
Vessels over 40.” Stevens, op. cit.. Vol. Ill, pp. 155-156. 

13. Stevens, op. cit., Vol. Ill, p. ,161, Fariya Y Sousa calls Gonzales a monster. 
Stevens Vol. III. p. 153. 



THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 103 

no satiety as yet. In 1615 Gonzales felt that he could add Arakan to his 
conquests, if his plan was supported by the Portuguese Viceroy of Goa. He 
immediately offered to return to the allegiance of the. King of Portugal, and 
to pay him an annual tribute if his proposals were favourably accepted. The 
Viceroy, Dom Jeronymo de Azcvedo, readily agreed and a fleet of sixteen sails 
under the command of Dom Francisco Menezes Roxo appeared in the Bay of 
Bengal (October 1615). Unfortunately for the Portuguese the King of 
Arakan was not so helpless as they had imagined, and Menezes Roxo un- 
expectedly found himself confronted with a Dutch squadron of superior num- 
ber. The fight continued' for two successive days in which the Portuguese 
Commodore lost his life. His successor in command Dom Luiz de Azevedo 
sailed to Sandwip while the battle was still undecided and in spite of all the 
importunities of Gonzales left him to his fate and returned to Goa. He was 
accompanied by many of Gonzales’ followers who were glad to be rid of their 
hard-hearted master. Next year the King of Arakan conquered Sandwip and 
Gonzales faded out of history. His infamous career covered a brief period 
of ten years. Gonzales had the making of a great leader, but his training 
and environments made of him a pirate of the lowest type. For unrelieved 
cruelty and treachery his record has hardly any parallel, but with better edu- 
cation under more favourable circumstances, he might have been a Raleigh 
or a Drake. 

Here we may bid good-bye to the buccaneers of the Bay though Gonzales 
was by no means the last or the worst of them. The story of the Feringhec 
pirates of Chittagong is to be told at another place by another writer. 

Ill 

The loss of Sandwip did not mean the loss of Bengal trade. The Portu- 
guese had many settlements of greater or lesser importance, scattered all over 
the province. The prowess and professional skill of their seamen had won 
for them positions of trust and responsibility at the courts of the more promi- 
nent chieftains (Bhuiyans), and small Portuguese colonies flourished under 
their patronage at Bakla (Bakarganj), Chandikan (Jessore), Sripur (Dacca). 
Bhulua (Noakahali) and Katrabo (Dacca and Mymensingh). Some of these 
settlements had been visited by Fonseca, Fernandes and Sousa in the closing 
year of the sixteenth century. The King of Chandikan provided funds and a 
site, and the first Christian church in Bengal was constructed in his princi- 
pality. 14 The Jesuit fathers had full freedom to preach the Gospel wherever 
they went, and if their flock did not live a truly Christian life, it was no fault 
of the local rulers. The Portuguese, however, had not limited their com- 
mercial and martial enterprise to the semi-independent region under the govern- 
ment of the Bengali princes. They could not possibly ignore, the principal 


14. Purdies , His Pilgrims, Vol. X, p. 206. 



104 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


trading centres of the country and had their factories at Dacca, Tamluk, 
Hijili and other convenient places. Two ports, however, demanded their 
attention most and absorbed the major part of their investments. Despite 
the abortive attempt of 1559 to rob it of its commercial eminence, Chittagong 
remained the leading place of Portuguese trade in Bengal. From the begin- 
ning to the end it was their Porto grande, the great port. Next in import- 
ance was Porto pequeno the little port in west Bengal. "When Caesar Frederick 
visited Bengal in 1567 Satgaon was the little port of the Portuguese. As 
early as 1537-38 the Portuguese built their factory and custom house at 
Satgaon with the permission of the King of Bengal, and within thirty years, 
it attracted sufficient business to keep thirty to thirty-five merchant men 
fully employed. 1 * The Venetian merchant informs us : “ In the port of 

Satgan every yuere they lade thirtie or five and thirtie ships great and small, 
with Rice, Cloth of Bombast and of divers sorts, Lacca, great abundance of 
Sugar. Mirabolans dried and preserved, long Pepper, Oyle of Zerzeltne, and 
many other sorts of merchandise.” The prosperity of Satgaon, however, 
proved short-lived and when Ralph Fitch came to this country barely three 
decades later (1583-91) “Hugeli" had become the “ Porto Piqucno’’ 16 of the 
Portuguese, though he found Satgaon “ a faire Citie for a Citie of the Moores, 
and very plentiful] of all things.” 

It is not difficult to guess why llughli was preferred to Satgaon as an 
emporium of west Bengal trade. Satgaon owed its rise and fall not to the 
whims of man, but to the freaks of nature. The big river, that made it a 
convenient meeting place for the merchant fleets from far and near, 17 had 
gradually silted up, and trade dwindled as the stream diminished. Even 
in 1563 the Portuguese found it necessary to build temporary quarters at a 
village down stream during the trading season as their bigger boats were 
unable to reach Satgaon. Says Caesar Frederick : “ A good Tides rowing 
before you come to Satagan, you shall have a place which is called Buttor. 1 * 
and from thence upwards the ships doe not goe, because that upwards the 
River is very shallow, and little water. Every yeere at Buttor they make 
and unmake a village, with Houses and shops made of Straw, and with all 
things necessarie to their uses, and this Village standeth as long as the Ships 
ride there, and till they depart for the Indies, and when they depart, everie 
man goeth to his plot of Houses and there setteth fire on them, which thing 
made me to marvaile. For as I passed up to Satagan, I saw this Village 
standing with a great number of people, with an infinite number of Ships and 

15. Pure has His Pit grimes, Vol. X, pp. 113-14. 

16. Purchas His Pjlgrimes, Vol. X. p. 182. 

17. According to Kavi Kankan Mukundaram so much foreign trade it used 
to attract that merchants of Satgaon never left their home-town. 

18. Betor, near Calcutta, has been twice mentioned as a place of importance 
by Kavi Kankan Mukundaram in his Chandt . 



THE PORTUGUESE IN BENGAL 


105 


Bazaars, and at my retume comming downe with my Captaine of the last 
Ship for whom I tarried, I was all amazed to see such a place so soonc razed 
and burnt, and nothing left but the signe of the burnt Houses.” Making and 
unmaking of temporary villages do not lead to comfort or economy, and the 
Portuguese were naturally anxious to shift their “ little port ” to a convenient 
place on a navigable river with sufficient anchorage and Hughli replaced Sat- 
gaon as the principal Portuguese settlement in west Bengal. 

The Portuguese settlement of Hughli is associated with the name of the 
greatest Moghul ruler of India. A serious student of comparative theology, 
Akbar wanted a competent interpreter of the Chirstian faith at his court and 
naturally turned to the Portuguese of Bengal about whose commercial enter- 
prise he had heard so much. At his request a Portuguese missionary. Father 
Juliano Pereira, and a Portuguese man of affairs, Pedro Tavares (Partab 
Bar Feringui of the Akbar Nama), made their journey to the imperial court. 
Although we do not know whether Tavares preceded Pereira to Agra, it will 
not be unreasonable to assume that the worldly interests of the merchant were 
suitably reinforced by the spiritual influence of the missionary, and a Fartnan 
was in due course obtained and the. Portuguese removed their factory and 
custom house from Satgaon to Hughli about 1580. Tavares was in all pro- 
bability the fust governor of the new settlement. The new “ Porto Pequeno ” 
quickly rose in importance and became a flourishing business centre before 
long. The settlement expanded and the Portuguese merchants acquired landed 
property on both banks of the Ganges, if Father Sebastian Manrique is to be 
credited. The main articles of trade that Hughli provided were rice, sugar, 
silk and cotton goods. Rice in particular was exceptionally cheap in Bengal 
during the sixteenth century. 

Akbar doubtless expected that the Portuguese would devote their energy 
and resources entirely to the improvement of their commerce, and their armed 
fleet would prove a better instrument for policing the Bay than any his govern- 
ment had so far been able to provide. Jahangir shared his father's hopes 
and left the Portuguese in undisturbed enjoyment of their rights and privi- 
leges at Hughli. Shah Jahan however found it necessary to revise the policy 
of his father and grandfather. Within five years of his accession to the 
throne, Hughli was seized (1632) and a large number of prisoners were sent 
to Agra where they suffered great misery. 

The Portuguese had their own explanation of the implacable hostility 
of the new emperor. As a law abiding people they had sternly repulsed all 
the approaches made by Prince Khurram, then a rebel against his father, an 
insult which he neither forgave nor forgot. According to Father Cabral. 
Shah Jahan became incensed with the entire Portuguese community because 
in the days of his adversity one individual had been guilty of faithless deser- 
tion. It is also said that the. Portuguese of Hughli had failed in the common 



106 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


courtesy expected of the Emperor's subjects, and did not send the usual 
message of loyal congratulations when he ascended his fathers throne. The 
enormous loss, in men and money, in his war against Bijapur was also sup- 
posed to have been attributed by Shah Jahan to Portuguese co-operation with 
Adil Shah, and a quick retribution was the result. All these causes singly 
and collectively would hardly account for the strong measures taken against 
the Portuguese of Hughli. Shah Jahan could afford to forgive any incivility 
of the ordinary type, but he could not possibly tolerate the lawless conduct 
of the Portuguese without prejudice to his sovereign authority. 

Far from suppressing the piracy in the Bay, the Portuguese of Hughli 
were themselves accused of “ kidnapping and purchasing poor children and 
sending them as slaves to other parts of India. ” Their commercial policy 
had, according to the local authorities, totally impaired the prosperity of 
the ancient port of Satgaon to the detriment of the emperor’s revenue derived 
from the customs of that place. Nor could they look upon the Portuguese 
practice of levying duties on all boats passing by Hughli with indifference 
or equanimity. Above all, the Portuguese of Hughli were suspected to be 
in close alliance with the Maghs of Arakan, and their own countrymen of 
Chittagong, who had rendered life and property absolutely insecure by their 
piratical activities in lower Bengal. Moreover, the missionary activities of 
the Portuguese priests could not be to the liking of the Muslim zealots and 
the Emperor did not yield to anybody in his zeal for the faith of his fathers. 

A modem apologist argues that the Portuguese of Hughli were neither in 
league with the pirates of Chittagong nor guilty of piracy themselves. 1 '’ But 
it cannot be gainsaid that the Portuguese of west Bengal shared the evil 
reputation of their confreres of the east for their lawless habits and predilec- 
tion for piracy. A Bengali poet of note 5 ” pointedly referred to the dread with 
which a journey along the Feringui coast was commonly viewed when he said 
that the boatmen rowed ceaselessly night and day in fear of the Harmad 2 ' or 
the pirate-fleet. The Portuguese empire had expanded with phenomenal rapid- 
ity and the mother country had not the necessary surplus population for the 
development of the far-flung colonies. Convicts were, therefore, given the op- 
tion of serving their terms at home or seeking their fortune in the east, and it 
is no wonder that some of the worst criminals found their way to Bengal. It 
is to be noted that contemporary European travellers had not a good word 
for the Portuguese, and Van Linschoten likened them to " wild men ” and “ un- 
tamed horses. ” If some of the bad characters of Portugal were annually 
drafted to India, the worst of them according to Linschoten, left the more 
orderly and better governed settlements on the west coast for the ports of 


19. Campos, History of the Portuguese, in Bengal, pp. 130-131 

20. Kavi Kankan Mukundaram Chakravarti. 

21. Portuguese armada. 



THE PORTUGUSE IN BENGAL 


107 


the Bay of Bengal which knew neither order nor discipine.** Fernandes says 
that many of them “ lived in Piracie and loose lusts It is, therefore, futile 
to argue that the Portuguese settlers of Hughli were orderly people with a 
healthy respect for law, who would scrupulously avoid any dubious method 
of making money, ft is admitted by all that if Ilughli was not a nest of 
pirates, it was a slave-market to which both Magh and Portuguese pirates 
had free access. It is there that they disposed of their unlucky prisoners. 
Slavery, it is true, was an institution recognised by Muslim and Hindu law, 
but it is the elementary duty of every state to provide for the security of life 
and property of each and every one of its members. Shah Jahan could not 
permit his subjects to be bought and sold like cattlesi in the slave-market of 
Hughli, simply because his officers had proved unequal to the task of defend- 
ing their (xusons against the rovers of Chittagong and Arakan. The Portu- 
guese of Hughli undoubtedly shared their guilt morally and legally when 
they trafficked with them in their offensive spoils. If Shah Jahan found it 
impossible to clear the- Bay and the rivers of Bengal of these human sharks, 
the least he could do was to dost? the market where they brought their vic- 
tims, and to eliminate their partners in this dismal business. 

Into the military details of the capture of Hughli we need not enter. 
Suffice it to say that the Portuguese had no chance against the superior forces 
of Qasim Khan, but they stood their ground with courage and resolution 
worthy of a better cause. The prisoners should have been more humanely 
treated, but the. standards of the seventeenth century required that an 
example should be made of these unfortunate iieople because some of their 
compatriots had made slaves of Muslim women and children of noble birth. 
But it was not long before the Emperor relented. The Portuguese were per- 
mitted to return to their old settlement in 1633. They had felt the full 
weight of the Emperor’s displeasure and might be' reasonably expected to have 
a wholesome respect for his authority in future. No miracle was needed to 
convert Shah Jahan to a more merciful policy. 

The fall of Hughli marked the beginning of the end. The pirates of 
Chittagong were exterminated in the next reign, but the Portuguese com- 
munity still survives in Bengal. Even in the eighties of the eighteenth cen- 
tury (1786). they claimed special rights and privileges on the strength of the 
established custom and their contention was accepted by the Government of 
the day.** The later rulers sometimes found their services useful, and Raja 
Rajballabh settled a small Portuguese colony at Padri Sibpur in the district 
of Bakarganj.'-* At Calcutta and Hughli, Dacca and Chittagong, the Luso- 
Indian citizens still form a link with the past, though they enjoy neither the 
prestige nor the prosperity of their adventurous fore-fathers. 

22. Purchas His PUgrimes, Vol. X, p. 205. 

23. Calendar of Persian Correspondence, Vol. VII, pp. 199-201. 

24. Beveridge, District of Bakarganf, p. 106. 



108 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


IV 

Our review of the Portuguese relations with Bengal has been so far 
greatly to the discredit of that nation. Their courage was vitiated by cruelty, 
their inquisitiveness was marred by greed, and their progress in the province 
was ordinarily marked by disorder and lawlessness. But in fairness to the 
Portuguese we cannot leave the credit side out of account. 

In spite of all their shortcomings the Portuguese did not suffer from the. 
colour prejudice so common in the west, and freely intermarried with the 
natives of the country. Some of them permanently settled in this land and, 
if they failed to make any marked contribution to our civilisation and culture, 
they tried their best to improve the agricultural resources of the country of 
their adoption. Good peasants at home, they had a keen eye for the useful 
plants of other lands and a wonderful knack for acclimatizing exotic flowers 
and fruits in countries far from their original home. It is seldom realised 
that many of our common flowers and fruits were totally unknown before 
the Portuguese came. “ The noxious weed that brings solace " to many and 
now forms a staple product of Rangpur was brought by the Portuguese as was 
that common article of food — potato which is relished by princes and peasants 
alike. Tobacco and potato came from North America. From Brazil they 
brought caschewnut ( Anacardium Ocridenlale) , which goes by the name of 
Hijli badam because it thrives so well in the sandy soil of the Hijili littoral. 
The cultivation of this valuable nut is limited to a narrow strip of the sea 
coast, but the papaya (Carica Papaya) and the pine-apple have taken more 
kindly to the soil of Bengal and few are aware that they are aliens of com- 
paratively recent domicile. Wc arc indebted to the Portuguese for Kamr'anga 
( Averrhoa Carambola) which find so much favour with our children. To 
this list may also be added Peyara ( Psydiutn Guava), which found an ap- 
preciative poet in Monomohon Basu. The little Krishnakali ( MirabUis Jal - 
apa) that cheers our countryside in its yellow, red, and white is another gift 
of the once dreaded Feringui. This does not exhaust the list, of plants that 
the Portuguese introduced in Bengal, but, incomplete as this inventory is. it 
fairly illustrates their zeal for the art and science of Agri-horticulture. 

No less important is the Portuguese contribution to our vocabulary. About 
fifty Portuguese words have found a permanent place in the spoken language 
of Bengal. Articles of common use often go by their Portuguese names (eg. 
Chabi, Haiti, Perek, Saban, Toulia, Alpin etc.), and such Portuguese words 
os. veranda and janela have completely replaced their indigenous synonyms. 
It is no wonder that chairs and tables should have once been known as Kedara 
(Port. Cadeira) and mej (Port. Mesa) for these furniture were originally in- 
troduced into Bengali homes by the Portuguese. They have not only enrich- 
ed our orchards but added to the wealth and vigour of our mother-tongue. 

When two races or nations intimately associate with each other, as the 



THE PORTUGUSE IN BENGAL 109 

Portuguese and the Bengalees did, they naturally borrow from each other’s 
vocabulary, and it is no wonder tliat so many Portuguese words found cur- 
rency in our language. But the Portuguese did something more substantial 
for the development of our prose literature. For the first printed book in 
Bengali we are indebted to a Portuguese. It was a Portuguese who wrote 
the first Bengali prose work, and it was left to another Portuguese to compile 
the first Bengali grammar and dictionary, an achievement of no mean merit, 
an achievement of which any people might feel proud. About 1599 Father 
Sosa translated into Bengali “ a tractate of Christian Religion, in which were 
confuted the Gentile and Mahumetan errours : to which was added a short 
Catechisme by way of Dialogue, which the Children frequenting the Schoole 
learned by heart, . . ."- 5 Sosa’s tractate has been unfortunately lost, but an- 
other dialogue written by a Bengali convert has been preserved for us. Dom 
Antonio do Rozario belonged to the landed aristocracy of east Bengal. In his 
early youth he was carried by the Magh pirates to Arakan where he was 
sold as a slave (1(563). A Portuguese missionary, Manoel do Rozario ran- 
somed him and later converted him to his own faith. It was under Portu 
guese inspiration tliat the new convert wrote a dialogue, the first Bengali work 
of its kind that has come down to us.- ,; Dom Antonio’s work might have 
shared the same fate as that of Sosa but for the devoted care of Manoel da 
Assumpgao and George da Apresentagao. Manoel had Antonio’s manuscript 
transcribed in Roman script, and sent the transcript to Evora probably with a 
view to publication. He himself wrote a Dialogue in Bengali and compiled a 
grammar and dictionaiy of the Bengali language for the benefit of his fellow 
workers in the province. Manoel da Assumpgao was for many years the 
head of St. Tolentino mission of which Dom Antonio was the founder. 
Crepar Xastrer Orth Bhed, for such was the title of Manoel’s dialogue, wa‘ 
printed by Francisco da Sylva at Lisbon in 1743. The same year witnessed 
the publication of his grammar and vocabulary.'-' 7 The Portuguese had there- 
fore tq their credit two dialogues, a grammar and dictionary long before any 
of our countrymen had attempted anything of this kind. Even in recent 
times the Luso-Indian community has produced teachers and scholars of De- 
rozio and Percival’s eminence. 

If their literacy and scientific achievements in other parts of India are 
taken into consideration, we cannot withhold our ungrudging tribute to the 
valuable pioneer work done by the Portuguese. The first printing press in India 
was set up by the Portuguese at Goa as early as 1556. 18 It was at Goa that the 

25. Purchas his Pilgrimes, Voi, X, p. 205. 

26. Sen, Brahman Roman Catholic Samhad , introduction. 

27. Sen, Brahman Roman Catholic Sambad ; also Sen, Early Career of Kanhoji 
Angria and other Papers, pp. 125-128. 

28. J. B. Primrose, The First Press in India and Its Printers. (The Library, 
December, 1939, pp. 241-266). 



110 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


first scientific work on Indian medicinal plants by a European author (Garcia 
da Orta) was published. 29 The Portuguese discovered the all-sea route to 
India, they explored the western and eastern coast of this country, they de- 
monstrated the superiority of the western methods of warfare, they experi- 
mented in empire-making by commercial penetration and subordinate alliance, 
they exploited the resources of the small indigenous states through Portuguese 
sailors and soldiers in Indian employment. In short they anticipated the 
great pro-consuls of the East India Company in many respects, and they 
may fairly claim that where Portugal led other European countries followed, 
where they sowed others reaped, where they laid the foundation others built 
a magnificent superstructure. 


29. The first edition of Garcia da Orta’s ColoquAos Dos Simples e Drogas e 
Cousas Medicinas was printed at Goa in April 1563, by Joannes de Endem. 



KIMVADI SAMMASAMBUDDHO ? 

By 

Kevd. A. P. BUDDHADATTA, Colombo, Ceylon. 

“ Kirpvadi, bhante. Sammasambuddho ’’ ti ? “ Vibhajjavadi, Maharaja ” 
ti Pariha-vissajjanam Samantapasadikayarp Vinayatthakathayaip dissati. 
Vibhajjavado ti pana na koci patekko vado sassatavadadisadiso ; ekappaha - 
ren ’ eva ' ama ’ ti va ‘ no ’ ti va avatva vibhajitva bhajctva vyakaranani 
'Vibhajjavado’ nama. Yattaka imasmin loke vada sassatuccheda-adhiccasa 
muppannadivasena. tesani ekam pi Bhagava na patiggaphati. Kasma ? Sabbe 
pi'ime vada sassatapakkhe va ucchedapakkhe va patanti. Sassatapakkho 
nama : ayarti loko atta ca nicco, avinasadhammo, sadakaliko ti gahaajatp. 
Ucchedapakkho nama ; ayam loko atta ca uddharp jiviapariyadana vinassati, 
na puriaruppattiip upeti ti gahanam. Na pana Bhagava imam antadvayam 
ahgikaroti. Atta ucchijissati vinassissatiti va, atta nicco dhuvo sassatoti va 
so na pakaseti. 

Atha kim so pakaseti, deseti ? “ Anattavadi Sammasambuddho," " Anat- 
tavado Buddhadhammo ” ti bahavo pandita vadanti. Na mayam tarn patik- 
khipama. Atha ca pana " Atta ce natthi, puggalo ce natthi, kathaip punarup- 
patti hoti ? Ko silarp rakkhati ? Ko visujjhali ? Ko nibbaparp papupati 7 ’’ 
ti imc dubbijatanlya panha apatham agacchanti. 

Sabbe va pan’ahne sattharo titthakara attdnan anugacchimsu, pariyesiipsu ; 
pariyesitva attano attano patiblvananurupena “ Idiso atta, Idiso atta " ti paka- 
sayirpsu. Bhagava pana Sammasambuddho annani maggatp ganhi. Atta pana 
lokiyasattehi lokiyabhasaya kathanci pi kadaci pi na vitthariyo, na vyakaranu- 
pago, na bodhanlyo ti so aMasi ; lasma so anatta-dhamme nidasscsi. Lokika 
pana mayarp cakkhusotadi-indriyeh ’ eva arammanam gahetva tad anusaren ’ 
eva cintetum, anuvitakketutp samattha homa ; na pana mayaip indriyavisayam 
atikkamitva cinteturp va takketurp va pahoma. Atha ca pan’amhakaip indriya 
bahiravisayam eva gahanasamattha, na pana tc attano yathasabhavatp jananti. 
Bhagava pan' afvnasi : imani sabbani pi indriyani anatta,' aniccadhammataya ; 
rupavedana-safiM-sahkhara-vinnaoasahkhatifi paflcakkhandha pi anatta, anic- 
cataya. Yattaka sankhara imasmirploke vijjanti anantaparimaaja-cakkavaja- 
dayo, yattaka satta deva-brahmadayo, sabbe p’ime anatta, addhuvatSySti 
annasi. Yiavatadhamma anatta sabbe te “ attena va attaniyena va sufina ” ti 
pakasesi. So nianappakarena anattadhamme vittharetva tesu attasaro va 
sukhasaro va natthi ti dassesi, Tesu anattadhammesu pajahitesu, durika- 
tesu niccasukharp laddhuip sakka ti vadanto tesaip pajahanaya savakanarp 
nirantararp ovadi : “ Cakkhurp, bhikkhave, na tumhakarn, tatp pajahatha. ; taip 
vo pahuiatp digharattaip hitaya sukhaya bhavissatT " ti adina nayena. 



112 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Ke pana dhamma anatta ? Cakkhu-sota-ghana-jivha-kaya-mana, rupa- 
dayo paficupadanakkhandha, sabbe cakkavaja, sabba lokadhatuyo anatta. 
Y at taka satta savinilapaka deva va mannussa va. tiracchana va apayika va, 
sabbe te imehichahi indriyehi paincahi ca khandhehi sangayhanti. Sabba pi 
anantaparimana lokadhatuyo rupakkhandhena sangayhanti. Sabbe p’ime 
savinnapav ifinaiiaka-sankhara anatta uppadavaya-dhammataya. Yam pan’ 
annasattharchi atta ti pakasitam tarn sabbam pi aniccataya anatta ti Bha- 
gava pakasesi. Tasmla so anattavadi ti pakato ahosi. 

Imani chajindriyani pafica ca khandhc vajjetva kim anfiam lokc avasit- 
thaip? Natthi kinclti vattabbam. Yadi kifici indriyam va indriyavisayarp va 
navasissati, pancannarn khandlianam eko pi navasissati, tada sattassa ucchedo 
bhavcyya ti ekacce vadcyyum- Napana Bhagava tan anujanati. Satto ucchij- 
jati vinassatiti so na vadati. Yava satto pancakkhandhavasagato, chajin- 
driyavasagato, tava so panappunain uppajjamano samsare samsarati, dukkham 
anubhavamano ti Tathagato pakaseti. Yadi pana so samsaradukkhato mucci- 
tukamo, tena chapi indriyani panca pi khandha pahatabha. Atha yam cak- 
khundriya-mulakarp dukkhaip tam sabbham nirujjhati. Sesindriyesu pi es’eva 
nayo. Yam rupakkhandhamulakam dukkham anantam aparimanam aharaga- 
vesanad ivasena, tam sabbam nirujjhati. Sesakkhandhesu pi es’eva nayo. Sab- 
basmim dukkhe sabbatha niruddhc amissam anakularp sukham avasissitabbaip 
Idam vuccati nibbunam- 

Cakkhusmim avijjamane. sotadisu avijjamanesu, manasmim avijjamane 
kim sukham atthl ti lokiyajana puccheyyum. Te pana dukkham eva sukham 
ti kanhanti, cirakalaparicitataya. Mayam cakkhum nissaya subharammapam 
pi asubharammanam pi passama ; subharammane rajjama, asubharammape 
dussama. Sabbada va subharammanam laddhum na sakkoma ; subharamma- 
nalabhaya ussahanta punappunam nanavidham dukkham papupama. Sesin- 
driyesu pi es’eva nayo. Na pan’etassa arammana-gahapassa anto pannayati ; 
tasma dukkhassa pi nivutti na hoti. Yada pana arammanagahapam tassanu- 
vitakkanam pi nivattissati. dukkham pi tada nivattissati. 

Kasma mayam idam iirammanam. subham. idam asubhani ti gaphama ? 
Ka pana yutti tatha gahane ? Ko paricchedo tesam ? Kim miftanam va tulanam 
va? Sabbani pi arammanani maha bhuta (-dhatu-) sambhutani ; tesu eka- 
ocam subham ekaccam asubham tu gahetum yutti paramatthavasena natthi. 
Avijjaya sammujhla mayam yathzisabhiavam ajananta tatha karoma. Yada 
pana avijjam vidajetva yathabhutafiaijam Iabhama tada’mhakam subham ti va 
asubham tiv3 gahanam na paftftayati. Subhasubhavasena gahaipe avijjamane 
rajjana-dussanam pi na vijjeyya ; rajjana-dussane avijjamane dukkham niruj- 
jheyya ; dukkhe niruddhe kevaia-sukham eva avasisseyya. 

Na-y-idam yathavutfasukham lokiyam lokayattam ; na indriyavisayam ; 
na amhakarp Iokiya bhasaya vittharetabbam. Tam pan'idam sukham lokutta- 
ram ( = Jokato uttaram), niccam dhuvam aviparipamadhammarp. ‘Satto’ ti 



KINlVADl S A M M ASA MBVJDDHO 


113 


lokavoharo, ‘ atta * ti lokavoharo : tam lokavoharaip atikkamitva, Iokato utta- 
rilva lokuttarasukhalabliaya Bhagavato anusasana. Tattha satio atthi, natthi 
ti, attd atthi, natthi ti panlianatp okaso na vijjati. 

Pancasu pi khandhcsu avijjamanesu ko nibbfinasukham labhati ti cc ? 
Panca pi khandha anicca, tasma dukkha, dukkhatta anatta. Tasma ekanta- 
sukhakamena te pahatabba va honti. Pahcakkhandha-vinimmutto puggalo 
nibbanam adhigacchati. Tadsa ycva sattassa yathatathabhuto lokuttaro saro 
avasissatlli natabbam. 

Katham idarp lokuttarasukhan adhigantabbarn ? An ye atJharigikamagge 
pafipajjanena. Tampa tipajjanam kimattbam ? Dnkkhaheiu-bhutaya tarihaya 
pahanatthatp. Kfi pan ’csa tanha ? Rupadassanc tanha, saddasavnne, gandha- 
ghayanc, rasasayane, phoUhabbagahane taiiha, dittha-suta-mutanarn anuvita- 
kkane tainha, attano dehe, puttadaresu, khettavatthusu. vatiliabharanesu. 
yana-vahanesu. hatthi-gavassadisu, dasl-dasadisu tanha, rajjasampattiya, dcva- 
-ampattiya, brahmasampattiya. punaruppattiya. tanha. Imasam tanhanam hetu- 
n;"i punaruppatti hoti ; punaruppattiya indriyapaiiKibho, indriyapatilabhena 
r: » i jana-dussanam, raj jana-dussancna dukkhuppado. Y adi panayarp tanhfi 
-abbaso pahlna ucchinnamula, tad a punaruppatti na bhaveyya, taya asati 
indriyapaiilfibho tammiilakaip rajjana-dussanan ca na sarpvijjeyya. Tada 
Inkuttaraip avyumissaip anuttaram nibbanasukham avasisseyya. 

Atisarikhitta panayarp katha. “ Kirpvadi Sammasambuddho ? ” ti purtbc 
“ Idam-vadI ” ti ckarn vadam nidasseturn na sakkoma. Vadapathatito pana so 
Uhagava ; tasma. 44 vibhajjavadl ” atha va vibhajilva-vadl ti vattabbam. Kim 
tassa vibhajitva vacanam ti upari vuttanayena natabbam panditehi. 

Bahu pan ’idani Sugatanikaya hlnavana mahayanadi vascna. Aparima- 
na tesam ayattagantha. Bahusu pi nikayesu bahusu pi matabhecio.su vijjama- 
nosu ayam ova Buddhadhammassa sararnso, na panayarp kenaci nikayikena 
paccakkhatabbo ti vadami. 

Vangadese Kalikata-nagare vasantassa Buddhasamayopatthambhaka- 
anekaganthanarp kattubhutassa Vimalacarana Ldhd - namassa panditavarassa 
pahcapanhasa-vassaparanaip nimmittarp katva sampadita ’yam hpi LankadTpe 
Ambalangodanagare Aggaramavasina Buddhadattatthorena. 

VimalacaranayuWo Lahd-n amo sudhlso 
Vidita-Sugatadhammo Vangadese vasanto 
Suvidita-Jinadhammayatta-ganthana katta 
Jayatu sucirakalarn sabba-atankamutto. 


9 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYA- 
NAGARA FROM THE ACCOUNTS OF EUROPEAN 
TRAVELLERS 

By 

Dr. B. A. SALETORE, m.a., d.phil. (Giessen), p h.d. (London), 
(Gujarat College, Ahmedabad.) 

The Vijayanagara age (1346 A.D.-1646 a.d. ) witnessed not only great 
political activity but also continued commercial enterprise. We are concerned 
in this paper with one phase of the commercial history of Vijayanagara — that 
relating to the contact of Vijayanagara with the lands beyond the seas to the 
East and South-East of India. Elsewhere I have shown that, so far as inter- 
nal trade was concerned, the Vijayanagara Empire could boast of very many 
good harbours through which a prosperous trade was conducted. 1 2 3 4 5 6 I shall add 
here further details to the same subject with a view to make the account more 
complete. The following remarks are based on the writings of foreign travel 
lers, — Portuguese, Dutch, and English, - many of whom had intimate dealings 
with the Vijayanagara Empire. 

But before I proceed with the subject, it may not be out of place to note 
a few facts concerning the limits and longevity of the Vijayanagara Empire. 
Founded in 1346,- the Vijayanagara kingdom expanded into an empire, which 
survived the tremendous shock of the battle of Raksasa-Tangadi (1565), and 
continued uninterrupted till the flight of sri Ranga Raya in 1646 to Ikkeri. 1 * 
The Ikkcri or Bednur chiefs, who had planted themselves on the western parts 
of the Vijayanagara Empire, continued to l)e called as the feudatories of the 
Vijayanagara rulers till 1650.* In the centre, a Vijayanagara viceroy ruled 
over Srlrangapattana till 1610, when that city fell into the hands of the 
rising chiefs of Mysore/’ In Madura and Tanjore the Vijayanagara viceroys 
called Nayakas became independent in 1602.° But on the G)romandel coast, 
the Vijayanagara Emperors still maintained their hold, although in certain 
places, like St. Thome, they had allowed the Portuguese, the English, and 
the Dutch to build factories in the first quarter of the seventeenth century. 

1. Saletore. Social and Political Life in the Vijayanara Empire, I, pp. 58-59, 
69-82. 

2. Saletore, ibid .. I. pp. 18-19. 

3. Saletore, ibid. t I. pp. 141-142. 

4. Sewell. A f orgotten Empire — Vijayanagar . p, 220. 

5. Rfce, Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions , p. 124. 

6. Sewell, ibid . p. 220. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 115 

According to European witnesses, the overseas trade of Vijayanagara 
began to increase in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, and reached its 
highest level in the first quarter of the sixteenth century, when it showed 
signs of decline which marked it till the first quaiter of the seventeenth cen- 
tury. That is to say, roughly speaking, we see the overseas trade in the 
ascendant from about 1414 till about 1514, — which age, it may be noted, 
marks the highest point in the political history of Vijayanagara — , and it con- 
tinued to exist, although decreased in volume and profits, from 1514 till about 
1614. This latter period, we may likewise observe, marks the downward 
curve in the political fortunes of the Empire of Vijayanagara. 

Certain factors which will not be discussed in this paper, necessitated the 
shifting of commercial gravity from the western parts of the Vijayanagara 
Empire to the eastern shore in the first quarter of the fifteenth century. 
Geographically this meant closer relations of Vijayanagara with the great 
centres of trade in the East and South-East, notably with Tenncsscrim, Siam. 
Malaya, Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. I shall take one by one these centres 
ol foreign trade, so that we may be better able to appreciate the remarks of 
European travellers and historians. 

Tennesserim. Fernao Nuniz in his Chronicle writes thus about Tennes- 
setim : “ At his <i.e„ of a king of Vijayanagara whom he calls Visarao identi- 
fied by Sewell with Vijaya Raya ) death he left a son called Deorao (Deva 
Raya), who reigned twenty-five years. He determined to collect great trea- 
sures. but owing to constant warfare he could not gain more than eight 
hundred and fifty millions of gold, not counting precious stones. This was 
no great sum, seeing that in his time the king of Coullao (identified by Sewell 
with Quilon), and Ceyllao (Ceylon ) , and Paleacate (Pulicat. near Madras, 
which, according to Sewell, was an important province of Vijayanagara in 
later years), and Pegu and Tenagary (Tennesserim). and many other coun- 
tries, paid tribute to him.” 7 8 

Nuniz's testimony may be verified with the help of the evidence supplied 
by other Portuguese travellers. Although he. is by no means an infallible 
chronicler,' 5 ' yet in this instance he has given, among others, two details, which 
are of significance in our estimate of the over-seas trade of Vijayanagara. 
These two details are, firstly, that relating to precious stones, and. secondly, 
the reference to Tennesserim. 

In another context Nuniz mentions the precious stones of Vijayanagara. 
This is when describing the successful campaign of Sultan Ismail Adil Shah 
in the opening years of Emperor Acuta Deva Raya’s reign. The Bijapur 
Sultan had come to the well-known suburb of the great capital of Vijaya - 

7. Sewell, op. dt.. p. 302, and nos. 1-4, 

8. Saletore, Indian Antiquary, LXI, pp. 2-3. 



116 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


nagara, by name Nagalapura, which he razed to the ground. The Vijaya- 
nagara Emperor at once sued for peace, and accepted the humiliating terms 
of Ismail Adil Shah. Nunis proceeds to relate these details thus : — “ The King 
l(Acyuta Deva Raya) accepted these terms, and the Ydallcao departed well 
pleased with this money ; and after all was done the King sent to him a 
diamond stone weighing 130 mangellinis ( — 162 carats) with fifteen other 
similar ones weighing fully a lakh 

Then, again, Nuniz relates the following, while describing the great barons 
of the Vijayanagara Empire in the reign of the same Emperor Acyuta Deva 
Raya (1530-1542). Concerning a great noble, whom he calls Adapanayquc 
(Adapa Nayaka, Iladapada Nayak?), Nuniz writes thus : — “Another cap- 
tain, called Adapanayque, who is the chief counsellor of the King, is lord of 
the country of Gate, whence come the diamonds, and many other territories 
which yield him three hundred thousand gold pardaos, excluding the precious 
stones which form a revenue by themselves. lie pays to the King every year 
forty thousand par'daos, with the condition that all diamonds which exceed 
twenty mangelllitiis (about nineteen carats) in weight shall be given to the 
King for his treasury.” 1 " 

That Nuniz is correct in his estimate of the supply of the precious stones 
in Vijayanagara is proved by Paes, who writes thus about the wealth of the 
great capital of Vijayanagara. “ In this city you will find men belonging 
to every nation and people, because of the great trade which it has. and many 
precious stones there, principally diamonds." 9 10 11 

Sewell, who has a valuable note on the diamonds of the Vijayanagara 
Empire, has amply corroborated the evidence of these two travellers with 
that given by other European writers, and has identified the place which sup- 
plied diamonds to Vijayanagara with Vajra Karur. otherwise called “the 
mines of Golconda." 12 

From the chronological point of view we may note that the remarks of 
Nuniz refer to the reign of a king whom he calls “Deorao,” who may be 
identified with king Deva Raya II. This monarch ruled from a.d. 1419 till 
a.d. 1446. 1:1 It is during the reign of this monarch that precious stones 
figure very conspicuously in the accounts of foreign travellers. The ques- 
tion with which we are concerned is - Which was the outlet through which 
these precious stones were exported? Almost a century later we get the 
answer from a letter written by the great Affonso de Albuquerque to the king 
of Portugal. In this letter dated the 11th December 1513, Affonso de 

9. Sewell, ibid, p. 368, and note (1). 

10. Sewell, op. cit., pp. 388-389. 11. Sewell, ibid, p. 2S6. 

12, Sewell, ibid, p. 388, n. (71) and App. A. pp. 399-401. 

13. Rke, op. cit., p. 112, 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 1H 

Albuquerque recommends to his royal master the necessity of dinging fast 
to the ports of Cochin and Calicut, which places were capable of supplying 
cargoes to the Portuguese fleets “ until the Day of Judgment.” Albuquerque 
goes on to say thus : “ Now that that treacherous coward, the Zamorin, is 
dead, is the opportunity to cultivate a trade with those two ports which are 
the emporium of ginger, of the whole of the pepper of Malabar, and of the 
precious stones of Narsinga.”' 1 The name “ Narsinga ”, we may note by the 
way, was the general appellation which the Europeans gave to the Vijayanagara 
Empire. 

A striking testimony to Affonso de Albuquerque’s statement that Calicut 
and Cochin were the export centres for the diamonds of Vijayanagara, is 
provided in a set of instructions from Hugh Frayne to Nicholas Downton in 
the Red Sea. These instructions, which relate to the trade in the Moluccos 
and which are undated, but which are assignable to 1610-1611, contain the 
following. “ At Malabar you shall buy pearls, rice, sapphires, diamonds, for 
which you shall sell tin, lead, iron, “ s of 8, powder, rapiers, and head pieces.” 1 ' 

Both the Portuguese and English accounts are silent about the volume of 
die diamond trade of Vijayanagara. It cannot be understood at the present 
stage of our investigations, why the diamonds from Vijayanagara should have 
been exported from the two well known Malabar ports when the Vijayanagara 
Empire itself possessed excellent lXirts through which they could have been 
sent to the different markets of the East and the West. We may conjecture 
that the Vijayanagara diamonds found their way to the two great ports of 
Malabar because these latter were then under the influence of the Portuguese, 
and were far away from the Muslim danger of the north. And the Portuguese 
were as much interested in the Vijayanagara diamonds as the Flemings (the 
Dutch) and the English were in those from Sukadama near Borneo. What- 
ever that may. be, the fact remains that by the first quartet of the sixteenth 
century, the precious stones of the Vijayanagara Empire had received a sort 
of an international interest ; and that one of the greatest of European states- 
men of that age in the East— Affonso de Albuquerque— was very keen in 
securing for Portugal control over the two prominent centres that exported 
them. 

Let us now pass on to the next point mentioned by Nuniz that relating 
to Tennesserim. Historians of Vijayanagara have not understood till now 
why Nuniz should have mentioned Tennesserim in the list of places which 

14. Danvers, The Portuguese in India. I.. p. 285. 

15. Foster, Letters received by the East India Company from its Servants in 
the East, I, 1602-1613, p. 73. (London, 1896). 

16. In fact, according to the English, the diamonds found at Sukadama (or 
Succadama) near Borneo, were the best in the world. This place yielded a great 
store of diamonds’ of the best quality. Foster, op. cit., I. pp. 22, 79. 



118 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


are supposed to have paid tribute to the Vijayanagara Emperor. But the 
accounts of European traders enable us to explain why Tennesserim figures 
in Vijayanagara history. 1 believe it was from that place that tin, a com- 
modity that does not seem to have been produced in India, was imported into 
the Vijayanagara Empire. But the ix>rt which controlled the tin trade was 
Masulipatam which lay on the borders of that Empire. The English factors 
enlighten us on the importance of Tennesserim for India. John Goumey in 
his letter dated the 28th July 1&14, and addressed to the East India Company, 
writes thus : — “Store of tin is brought yearly from Tannassary (Tennesserim) 
to Musulipatam, and sold at betwixt 60 and 80 pagodas per candy, but 
whether our sort, not being accounted so good, may pass well I know not ; 
some therefore to try were not amiss.” 1: 

Borneo. The next chronological reference to an over-seas trade centre 
is to Borneo. The Portuguese captains inform us that Vijayanagara had 
direct dealings with that distant island. Dorn Jorge de Albuquerque writes 
thus in his letter dated January the 1st 1524 to the king of Portugal, from 
Malacca, concerning Borneo : - ■ “ The King of Borneo has written to me to 
say that he is, and wishes to continue, a true friend of the King of Portugual. 
sending his letter by a Biscayan, the sole survivor of an expedition under 
Femao Magalhass, which the Castilians sent against Borneo. What l have 
ascertained about Borneo is as follows : - It provides nothing but camphor, 
for which there is a ready sale in Bengal, Paleacate (Pulicat), Narsinga (i.e., 
Vijayanagara), and other Malabarese territories, Cochin and Calecut, and a 
little in Cambay. This camphor is very different from that which comes from 
China, and does not belong to the King of Borneo, but is the property of 
another king in the island, who is a Caffre, whereas the King of Borneo and 
his subjects are Moors. These Caffres cultivate this camphor, and exchange 
it with the Moors of Borneo for cloth from Malacca, which is imported there 
from Cambay and Bengal.’’ IS 

Unlike the Portuguese, and English travellers, the Dutch are not so 
explicit in their descriptions. Nevertheless the Dutch accounts help us to 
confirm the statements made by other European observers that Vijayanagara 
had commercial relations with the East-Indies in the last quarter of the six- 
teenth century. Thus, for example, in 1596, while sailing in t.’it south-eastern 
seas under their captain Cornelius Houtiman and others, they refer to Bantam, 
and write thus : — “ They trade very much in Camphire at Bantam. They 
call it Casar, or Camphire. There are two sorts of it ; the first came from the 
island of Borneo, and is considered the best ; the second sort comes from 
Chinceo in China, bqt not to be compared with the other. The Trees which 
produce Camphire, are as big as Walnut Trees : the Gum grows in the inside 

17. Foster, ibid. II, p. 86. See also ibid. III, pp. 9, 301. 

18. Danvers, op. cit., I. pp. 358-359. 



119 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 

of the trunk and comes out of it like sweat by drops, no bigger than a 
Barley com. 

•• The Camphire of China comes forth in lumps, and is cheap enough ; 
but one pound weight of that of Borneo, is as dear as a hundred pounds of 
China Camphire. But the Indians who know how to mix them, adulterate 
the oest, as they do all other Merchandise, being as dexterous at that Work, 
as any People in the World ; so that one must be very cunning, and have a 
great deal of experience not to be deceived. " J; ' Since we know from the Portu- 
guese sources that Borneo camphor was in great demand in the Vijayanagara 
Empire, we have to assume by the term “ Indians " given here by the Dutch 
that it refers to the people of Vijayanagara as well as to those of Bengal and 
Cambay. We may note incidentally that the Dutch in the above passage do 
not give a favourable account of the honesty of Indian traders. 

The same Dutch expedition under Cornelius lloutiman and others saw 
in January 15% pepper which grew like “ a bunch of Grapes, though not. 
quite so big,” in plenty in Sumatra. They had seen the same kind of pepper 
in Malabar, Onor (Honnavar j, Barcelor (Basrur). Mangalur (Mangalore), 
Calicut, and several other places in India. One quality of pepper which they 
noticed in Sumatra is specially noteworthy. “ The. pepper which they call the 
Canaiins, or the Boors Pepper, because none but the poor People use it, 
growelh in Goa and Malabar, and is like. French Wheat, but Ash coloured, 
and hollow on the inside with kernels.”-" We can only suppose that this 
(poor) quality of pepper came from the coast of Kanara which in those 
times was under the Vijayanagara Empire. It was evidently because of this 
that it was called the Canarins by the Dutch. 

We may likewise suppose that the pepper trade of Vijayanagara was 
extended to Java and Malacca. The following passages in the same history 
of the first voyage of the Dutch will be of some interest here. The same 
Dutch travellers describe the pepper grown in Java thus : — “ We said before, 
that the Pepper Plant which grows in Java, runs upon great Reeds called by 
the Inhabitants Manbus, the inside of which is full of a Substance called 
Tabaxir : However, the Dutch having cut some of them, found nothing in 
these Reeds. The reason why the Manbus of Java have no Tabaxir is yet 
unknown, perhaps it hath not been well examined. 

“ However, it is certain, that abundance of those Reeds grow along the 
Coast of Malabar, especially in Coromandel, Bisnagar, and Malacca, which 
produceth a substance called by the Indians sacar membur, sugar of Membur, 
which is much valued by the Arabians, Persians, and Moors, who call it 

4 

19. A Collection of Voyages undertaken by the Dutch East India Company for 
the Improvement of Trade and Navigation, Etc., p. 218, (London. 1703). 

20. Ibid, pp. 135, 142. 



120 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Tabaxir, that is to say. white juice, for it resembles curdled milk. (Here 
follows a description of the reeds). 

“ The Indians make us of it against Claps, cancers, and other venereal 
Distempers, as well as burning Feavers, Cholicks, and Bloody Fluxes. They 
make also their little Boats of the body of a Tree, which holds but two People ; 
they leave a knot at each end. and excavate the rest. Men who row the Boat 
are all naked, one at each end with a pair of little oars, and row extremely 
fast even against the Currents. They arc so Superstitious as to believe that 
those Boats are never attacked by the Crocodiles." 

Besides pepper there were three other commodities which were articles 
of trade between Vijayanagara and Java. They were lac, water melons, and 
sandal-wood. Concerning lac, the same Dutch travellers inform us the follow- 
ing : — “ Among other Merchandise, that are sold in Bantam, you find iMque 
or Lack, so called by the Moors and Tieck at Pegu, where there is a great sale 
of it. (Here follows a description of how lac is produced by flying ants.) 
It (i.e„ the matter deposited on the branches of trees by the flying ants) is 
of a red brown colour, but the Indians make a powder of it, and mix with it 
what colours they fancy, or make little sticks of it. which are sold in 
Europe, under the name of Spanish Wax, to seal letters with. They also 
make of it several other very curious and well wrought Manufactures."-' 

About water melons of Java, the same source continues to relate thus : — 
“ The Water Melons that grow at Java, are of an extraordinary good taste. 
Their outside is of a green brown colour, but their inside is white, they are 
as long as our Pumpkins. The Indians regale one another with them in 
company, as we do with Fruit in Europe .”- 5 

That the Dutch travellers had evidently the people of Southern and 
Western India, that is to say, of the Vijayanagara Empire, in their mind 
when they talked in general of “ the Indians ’’ is proved when we cite their 
remarks concerning sandal wood an article grown extensively in the forests of 
Malabar and Karnataka from very early times. The Dutch travellers have 
the following observations to make on this point Vou find in the Woods 
of Java, red Sanders Wood, but the yellow and the white, which are much 
better, come from the Islands of Timor and Solor, situated to the East of 
Java. Sanders trees are like Walnut Trees. They bring forth a fruit resem- 
bling Cherries, which is green at first, but black afterwards, without any man- 
ner of taste. 

“ The Indians use a great deal of Sanders wood : they bruise it and beat 
it with Water till it comes to Pap, and then anoint their Body with it, which 
cools and perfumes it all over. The red Sanders Wood is of no use in the 


21. A Collection of Voyanes, pp. 211-212. 

22. Ibid. p. 217. 23. Ibid. p. 217. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 121 

Indies, so they only transport it to other Countries. It is also Physical, but 
not near so good as the White."- 1 

Which were the outlets through which this trade with Java, Borneo, and 
Sumatra was carried on ? These outlets were evidently situated on the Coro- 
mandel coast — the home of commercial enterprise which dates back to cen- 
turies before the great Empire of Vijayanagara came into existence. I have 
already mentioned quite a number of these Coromandel ports in my work 
referred to above.--’ While the over-seas trade of the Vijayanagara Empire 
on its long western coast suffered an eclipse due to the. political vicissitudes 
that followed the wars between the Vijayanagara monarchs and the Dcccani 
Sultans, and more specially the advent of the European traders, notably the 
Portuguese and the English, that on the eastern coast. — which geographically 
was removed from the storm centres of the belligerent nations— continued to 
thrive, for nearly a century after the decisive battle of Raksasa Tangadi 
(1565). It is to this part of India that the English, who were the bitterest 
rivals of the Portuguese in the early seventeenth century, turned their atten- 
tion ; and it is from the early English factors that we get some interesting 
details relating to the overseas trade of Vijayanagara during a period which 
witnessed the gradual decline of the political might of the monarchs of Vijaya- 
nagara. That. Coromandel had ever been a vital part of the Empire of Vijaya- 
nagara there can be no doubt. Even when Nuniz wrote about the Emperor 
Acyuta Deva Raya (1530-1542), Coromandel was an important province over 
which was placed one of the most important viceroys of Vijayanagara. Thus 
writes Nuniz: '* The King has no controller of the revenues nor other officers, 

nor officers of his house, but only the captains of his kingdom ; of whom I will 
here mention some, and the revenues they hold, and of what territory they 
are lords. Firstly Salvanayque (Si'duva. Nayaka), the present Minister; he 
has a revenue of a million and a hundred thousand gold pardaos. lie is the 
lord of Charamaodel ( Cojamapdala, Coromandel) and of Negspatao (Nega- 
patam), and Tamgor and Bomgarin and Dapatao and Truguel, and 
Caullim, and these are cities ; their territories are very large, and border on 
Ceylon." 16 

Nuniz mentions two cities which deserve some comment — Nagapatam 
and Caullim. When another European traveller Caesar Frederick had visited 
the former in 1567, it was “ a Countrey of small trade.” 17 That is to say. 
till the end of the sixteenth century, Negapatam, while it remained a fairly 

24. A Collection of Voyages, p. 218. The people of Vijayanagara must have 
also imported frankincense from Java, about which the Dutch have .some remarks 
to make. Ibid, p. 217. But the Dutch do not implicitly mention the Indians as 
importing it into India. 

25. Salctore, S. P. Life, I. pp. 78-79. 

26. Sewell, op. cit., p, 384 . 27. Saletore, op. cit., I. p. 79. 



122 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


well known town, had not yet risen to the dignity of a great port. But by 
the beginning of the seventeenth century, Nagapatam had assumed large pro- 
portions as a port to which European ships called. This is proved by a letter 
written by Captain Anthony Hippon and the merchants of the VII. 
Voyage to the East India Company. This letter is imperfect, but assignable 
to August 1611. Captain Anthony Hipi*>n relates in it that from Ceylon they 
sailed to the mainland. "From thence (Ceylon), keeping our course under 
the Island of Zeilon until the 6th then coming in the road before the town of 
Negapatam, where was a great ship, riding at an anchor with divers other 
smalt barques, and following our order without doing any violence unto any, 
but followed our course, north and by east until the 8th ditto. Then being 
not far from St. Thome, then did we see a small teat tearing right with us, 
which was bound for Negapatam,"-”' and which the English captured, because 
it belonged to the Portuguese. 

By 1615 Negapatam had established its reputation as one of the largest 
ports on the Coromandel coast. We infer this from the letter dated the 24th 
of November 1615, and written from Achiii by William Nicolls to John Mill- 
ward and John Yates at Tiku. In it Nicolls writes thus So I could wish 
that you, Mr. Millward, had left three or four bales of that sort with me ; 
then could I have engrossed certain commodities of the Coast (Coromandel) 
which are here now arrived, viz., four ships from Meslepotan, Negapatam, 
and Collimatt. . In the next year (1616) Negapatam again figures as an 
important port in a letter dated the 15th of January, and written by the same 
William Nicolls to the Agent at Bantam, and also from Achin. “ Since 
which time (».<*., the 16th of July 1615) here hath arrived four ships from the 
Coast (Cbromandel), viz., from the 1st of October to the 10th two from 
Negapatam, one from Cullimat, and one. from Meslepotam (Masulipatam), all 
fraught with rice and many sorts of white cloth, steel and paintathas 
(pintadres).”™ 

In the above passage Negapatam ranks after Masulipatam and before a 
port which is called Collimat. Of these we are not concerned here with 
Masulipatam, which was outside the Vijayanagara Empire. For it belonged 
to the Qutb Shahs of Golkonda. The port called Collimat has to be identi- 
fied. It figures in another letter dated November the 24th, ’015, written by 
William Nicolls to John Millward cited above. 31 Again in another letter 
written by the same English factor but dated the 23rd of March 1615 (1616), 


28. Foster, op. cil., I. p. 132 . 29. Foster, op. cit.. Ill, p. 233. 

30, Foster, ibid, IV, p. 6. In the same year 1616, we may note in passing, the 
Portuguese had massed from 1,500 to 2,000 soldiers “ for a certain exploit,” obviously 
against the Dutch, who had built a fort at Pulicat and manned it with 130 or 140 
soldiers. Foster, ibid, p. 39. 

31. Foster had doubtfully identified it with Quilon. Ibid, III, p. 334. 



SOME ASPECTS OK THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 123 

and addressed to the Agent at Bantam, we are informed that “ For the Coast 
(Coromandel), as Meselepotam, Collimat, or Negapatam, here is goods to be 
bought profitable likewise, those merchants of those parts having here bought 
;he same, viz., brimstone, worth here 2£ taylee the baharr, sold at Meslepotam 
per the Hollanders for this King’s account.. 

This port of Collimat or Cullimat was identified by Foster with Conimere . 
in the South Arcot District, eleven miles north of Pondichery. The Tamil 
name of the village is Kunimwja, which, according to the same authority, may 
have been changed into Collimat, just as Palave.lka.du was changed into Pulicat*. 
The foundations of an English factory are said to be still visible at Conimere, 
where the English established themselves in 1682. :::; It was perhaps this same 
port of Collimat or Conimere which Nuniz referred to when he. wrote about 
Cullim, in a passage mentioned already in this papcr. :i ‘ 

There is another port in the Coromandel coast which may be mentioned 
here, and which deserves to rank with those we have just now enumerated. 
This was St. Thome, near Madras. It belonged to the Portuguese but was 
subject to the. Vijayanagara Empire. The first Portuguese settlement in St. 
Thome was in 1522, but the Vijayanagara Government did not allow foreigners 
to build any fort there.** All the same the Portuguese seem to have main- 
tained a stronghold at St. Thome. This accounts for the successful expedi- 
tion which Rama Raya conducted against St. Thome in 1558. ■ i ' 1 The Vijaya- 
nagara viceroy erected a fort near St. Thome in 1615, but the Portuguese 
captain Manoel de Frias captured it along with the cannon which was in it.* 7 
When Caesar Frederick visited St. Thome in 1567, towards the end of the reign 
of Emperor Sadasiva Raya, it was “ although it be not very great, yet in my 
judgment, it is the fairest in all that part of the Indies."* 3 

According to the same, traveller, the port of St. Thome was, however, 
dangerous, and the Indian sailors loaded and unloaded merchandise in a most 
marvellous manner.* 3 The anonymous author of the life of St. Francis 
Xavier tells us that St. Thome traded with Pegu and Malacca in coloured 
cloths. 40 The English in about 1610 traded in the “ stuffs or cloths ” called 
by the Dutch Kleetghcrs obtainable at that place, and took them to the East 


32, Foster, ibid, IV, p. 70. 33. Foster, ibid, V. p. 295, n. (1). 

34. Sewell thought it was probably Kayal. Sewell, op. tit., p. 384, n. (2) . It 
cannot be made out whether Sewell meant by Kayal the port of Kavalpatnam in 
the Tinnovelly district. Q>uld Coullimat be the same as Bartholomco’s Calapada ? 
A Voyage to the East Indies, p. 71. (London, MD. CCC.) 

35. Heras, The Aravidu Dynasties of Vijayanagara, I, pp. 64 67. 

36. Sewell, op. tit., pp. 193-194 ; Heras, ibid, pp. 67-69. 

37. Danvers, op. cit., I, p. 173. 

38. Purchas, Pilgrims, IX, p. 109 ; Heras, op. cit . , p. 67 . 

39. Read Purchas, ibid, p. 109 ; Heras, ibid, pp. 69-70. 

40. Heras, ibid, p. 70. 



124 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Indies." But the share of the English in this trade was small, because the 
Portuguese controlled the largest part of the trade at St. Thome." 

Without going further into the history of the growth and development 
of commerce on the Coromandel coast, we may, so far as the subject of our 
paj)er is concerned, note very cursorily a few facts which show that that part 
of the Vijayanagara Empire continued to have commercial dealings with 
Sumatra, Maluccos, Siam, and even with distant. Japan. It is true tliat by 
the first quarter of the seventeenth century the English had already arrived 
on the Coromandel coast, and that the Dutch had laid their plans for build- 
ing factories on the same coast. The arrival of the English on the Coromandel 
coast may be dated to September the Kith 1611, when Lucas Antheunis and 
Peter Floris arrived at Pctapolay and at Masulipatam. " in which two places 
we had our residence this 10th of September 1611.”' • In about the same year 
the Dutch wrote to the Dutch East India Company that “ Amboyna and 
Banda and again Jamby, and the west coast of Coromandel, to wit Sumatra, 
are the places of pepper. Acthin (Achin) is a place which cleaveth to the 
trade of Coromandel. Surat, Arabia, and many western places, where there is 
sometimes great vent of cloth and other merchandise, and in return there is 
much goods to lie had and other things needful for the aforesaid coasts. They 
give good advance, for there is brimstone, pepper, Bournesh (from Borneo) 
camphor, pewter from Perack. gold for the coast of Coromandcll, and more 
other wares. . . ” 4i 

A Sumatra product greatly in demand on the Coromandel coast in 1610 
was brimstone. This we learn from an advice given by Augustine Bradshaw 
dated September 1610, concerning the demand for certain Indian goods in 
Achin and other parts of the Island of Sumatra. “ I think there may be 
yearly sold at the place aforesaid of these coarse Bastaus 2000 or 3000 corge 
in truck for pepper, gold, benjamin, camphor, brimstone, pitch and saltpetre, 
which commodities are for the most part very vendible in divers parts as 
Suratt, Cambaia, Masulipatan, Araccan, and most parts of Bengala 
and Chormandale”* ' Later on in the same advise the same merchant writes 
thus: -“Prom Sumatra at any of the places abovesaid you may send for 
Suratt. Muslipatam, and other parts of Bengalal and Choromandle. great 
quality of brimstone, which is worth in Pryamana and Tecoo from 3 masse 
to 9, 10, and 12 masse, and the highest prices is sold to great profit' at the 
places abovesaid.” 

Coromandel itself exported a particular kind of “ stuff ” or cloth “ as our 
men (Englishmen) call them, and by the Dutchmen called Kleetghees, being 


il . Foster, op. ri/., I. pp. 69-70. op. cit. 

42. Foster, ibid. VI, pp. 67, 83. 

43. Foster, ibid. 1, p. 136. 44. Foster, ibid, I. p. 79. 

45 Foster, ibid. I. p. 74. 46. Foster, ibid. I, p. 75. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAYANAGARA 123 

the same, and such like stuffs as Sir James Lancaster took which are made at 
Bengala, Mesopotamia, Cheromandle and St. Thome.. ,”' 7 What was meant 
by the “ Kleetghees ” is related in the same advise written by Hugh Frayne 
to Nicholas Downton in the Red Sea, which is undated but is assigned to 1610. 
“Cloths, as our men use to call them, and by the Dutch Kletghees, being 
linen and made of cotton wool or the same stuff that Callicow cloth is made 
of ; made to cast about their bodies as cloaks or mantles, or a girdle and scarf 
about their loins ; named as followeth and for which the Amboyneses do give 
doves in barter. Tooria, Baffata, Keykam, Sallalo, Pattala, Sarassa, 
Tzier, Alalayia, Patta, Mora, Tanknyla (These are white cloths with red 
stripes at the end ).” 48 So that we may better understand the various kinds 
of cloths manufactured in the Vijayanagara Empire, we may note their details 
as given by the same merchant in the same advise. Tzinde (evidently the 
same as Tzier) are silk cloths with red stripes : Patta Kaluynen, with red 

stripes overthwart through : Dragon, black and red ; Sallalo, blue and black : 
/Soslan, are white and black, starched and folded up four square ; Kassa, are 
white unstarched lawns ; Kreyakam, are red starched ; Kanteky, black starched; 
Mossajy is black of the same, starched ; Toorya, not starched, arc painted like 
as the Sarassa. but very coarse ; Bornelaya are white and black quarls like 
checkerd, such a Polingknyalry are ; Paw are silk cloths with frings on the 
end, with the quarls of checkers through. The same source tells us that “ These 
foresaid cloths arc always to be had at Bantam, yet sometimes better than at 
othersame, but they be made at Bengala, Mesopatamia. St. Thome, and 
Chormandle.” 49 

Coromandel seems to have exported another commodity -iron — to the 
same regions in the south-east. This we gather from a letter dated the 20th 
February 1614 and written by Captain David Middleton to the East India 
Company from Bantam. “ There is good iron brought hither from Corra- 
mandell by Mr. Floris and good cheap. . . 

There was considerable trade from 1614 onwards between Coromondel 
and the Maluccos. This was “ in all sorts of goods,” as is related in a letter 
dated the 24th April 1614, and written by George Cokayne to John Jourdain. 51 
But the articles mostly in demand were “ cassamcra ” (?), steel, and cloths. 52 
By the same date (1614) the Dutch had already hampered the English trade 
between Coromandel and Bantam. John Jourdain and others wrote in a 
letter dated the 2nd January 1614 to the East India Company, thus : — 
“ Whether they (the Dutch) doth it (selling the same goods to be paid for the 

47 and 48. Foster, op. cit., I, p. 70. 

49. Foster, ibid, I, p. 72. Many more examples could be given of the demand 
for Coromandel doth in the Islands of the South East. See, for instance, Foster, 
*Mf. VI, pp, 45, 45 (n) 1 , 71, 71 (n), 144, 257 (n), 258, 264. 

50. Foster, ibid, II, p. 326. 51. Foster, ibid, II, p. 31. 

52. Foster, ibid, II, pp. 31-34, 78, 274, 323. 



126 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


next year "at 100 per cent less than the James' goods were rated at") to 
cross us in our trade of Choromandell or not we know not, but sure we are 
that the losses remains on themselves.. 

And so that our remarks concerning the intercourse between Coromandel 
and the lands adjoining Tennesserim may be complete, we may give some 
details relating to the state of affairs in Siam. The Coro m andel cloth was 
much in demand in Siam. John Johnson and Richard Pitts from Yudea 
(Ayuthia, the capital of Siam till it was destroyed by the Burmese) wrote 
to Richard Cocks at Firando in Japan, in their letter dated the 23rd of May 
1617, thus : -“If we be supplied with good sorts of clothing of the Coast 
(Coromandel) or Seratt (Surat) coming in time, whereby sales may be made 
(as we make no question to the contrary), we would not care whether you 
sent a penny of money or not."'-' 

The following letter dated the 20th of December 1617 written by William 
Eaton to Sir Thomas Smythe, further substantiates our statement that tire 
cloth manufactured in Coromandel was in great demand in Siam. “ As con- 
cerning your trade at Syam, it is a place that will vent great store of India 
cloth, and likewise other cloths that comes from the coast of Choromandell. 
and to great profit. . . " The names of the Coromandel cloths sold in Siam are 
given in detail in a later context in the same letter, thus : “ The commodities 
that are vendible at Syam are. . .as also cloths (that comes) from the coast of 
Choromandell, viz., tallepines. painted ginnes, jeckand (anus or painted) 
dupaties. woven tanipie, painted tanipie, white bettils, red bettils, 
se(lampores), red yarn, which is there in great request and much sought after; 
there will vent of it greater quantity.' v,;i 

As to the exports from Siam to the Coromandel coast, the same letter 
relates that if the trade with “ Jangamay " ( i.e., Kiangmai, or Zimmai ) is 
opened, it would be of much advantage to the English. For “ it is a place 
that will vent much clothing, as I am given to understand, and for great profit, 
as six or seven of one, besides the returns that may be made from thence, 
which is gold, rubies, and other precious stones, as also benjiamcn (Benjamin, 
or bezein), sealing wax (which commodities are in great request at the coast 
of Choromandell), besides deer skins, which are there very cheap.” 5 * 

The importance of Siam on the India-Japan route was recognized by the 
English even in the first quarter of the seventeenth century. Ships from the 
Coromandel coast touched at Siam and Petania (of Petania, or Patani) in 
the course of their eight or ten months’ voyage from Japan to India/" 

53. Foster, ibid, II, p. 269. See also ibid, pp. 274, 308, 323. 

54. Foster, op. tit., V, p. 269. 55. Foster, ibid. VI, pp. 256-258. 

56. Foster, ibid, p. 256. 

57. Foster, ibid. III,, pp. 148, 178-179. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE OVERSEAS TRADE OF VIJAVANAUARA 127 

Coromandel cloth was much in demand also in Japan, as wc learn from a 
letter dated the 16th of January 1616 (1617) written by Richard Cocks from 
Firando in Japan to the East India Company . 5 * 

The bearing of this continued trade between Vijayanagara and the East 
Indies on the political history and culture of the former country, I shall dis- 
cuss in a subsequent paper. Suffice it to say here that these commercial 
relations open an altogether new chapter in the annals of the Vijayanagara 
Empire. 


58. Foster, ibid, V, p. 46. See also pp. 48, 72. 



EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA 
HISTORIC SURVEY OF ITS ACHIEVEMENTS IN 
DIFFERENT AGES 

By 

Dr. A. S. ALTEKAR, Benares Hindu University. 

The rise and fall of a civilisation is intimately connected with its educa- 
tional system and achievements. As long as the educational system of a 
nation is sound and comprehensive and its achievements brilliant and remark- 
able, society continues to prosper. The decay starts when education is 
neglected or ceases to train efficiently the youths of the rising generation in the 
different departments of national activity. We propose to take a survey of 
ancient Indian Education in this paper to see how far Indian history confirms 
the truth of the above observation. 

Four Historical Periods : For the purpose of our survey we shall 

divide ancient Indian history into four periods. The first period will be from 
pre-historic times to c. 1000 B.c. It may be conveniently described as the 
Vedic age, as most of the Vedic literature was composed during this period. 
The second period will extend from c. 1000 B.c. to c. 200 b.c. It may tie 
described as the age of the Upani?ads. the Sutras and the epics, as these works 
can be assigned to this period. The Barhadrathas. the sisunagas, Nandas 
and the Mauryas were the leading political powers of this period and so the 
age may be conveniently described also as the age of the Nandas and Mauryas. 
The third period will extend from c. 200 B.c. to c. 500 a.d. It may be des- 
cribed as the age of the Dharmasastra, as most of the leading works on this 
subject were written during this period. It can also be described as the age 
of the Sungas and the Satavahanas, the Vakaiakas and the Guptas, as these 
were its leading political powers. The fourth period will extend from 
c. 500 a.d. to c. 1200 a.d. It may be described as the age of the 
Purapas and digests (Nibandhas), as society was guided mainly by the 
theories and practices recommended in these works. PolitVdly India was 
divided into many small kingdoms during this age. Kings Har§a and Bhoja 
were the most prominent rulers during the period. The age therefore may 
be described as the age of Har$a and Bhoja. 

We shall now proceed to describe the condition of education as a whole 
in each of these four periods. 

The Vedic Period : upto c. 1000 b.c. This age marked the beginning 
of Indian culture, literature and science, and so the Indians had just started 
their progress in the different departments of knowledge during this early 



EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA : ITS ACHIEVEMENTS 129 

period ; its literary and scientific achievements were therefore naturally much 
Jess dazzling and comprehensive than those of the succeeding age. People 
of this period however had a very keen desire to make progress in the realm 
of knowledge. They had realised that it was intellectual efficiency and 
equipment that was most essential for progress in culture and knowledge. It 
was emphasised that gods would befriend only those who are wise and 
learned. Those only were regarded as learned, who could not only recite the 
u-xis but also understand and interpret them. Every householder of the age 
there lore naturally regarded the education of his children as a sacred duty. 
No distinction was made in this connection between boys and girls ; the edu- 
cation of both received the same attention even during its higher stages. 
Ordinarily the guardian discharged his duty to teach his wards so regularly 
and successfully that no necessity was felt for a long time cither for the 
professional teacher or for the public school. Secular literature was yet to be 
developed and so the literary course was predominantly religious. People 
however had an open, free and enquiring mind and were eager to explore new 
realms of knowledge. Great emphasis was laid on the proper development of 
debating powers ; boys and girls who were successful in debates were highly 
honoured. Education however did not produce mere talkers but transformed 
it*- recipients into men of action as well. This would become quite clear from 
the successful manner in which the Aryans of the age spread their culture and 
extended their political influence. The Aryan community was a compact and 
homogeneous one during this period and there was not much difference in the 
educational level of the different classes. Priests however generally used to 
\necialise in literary and religious education. Warriors and agriculturists also 
received some literary education, but it was not naturally so deep or wide as 
that of the priest or the poet. They used to devote the greater part of their 
educational course in mastering the arts of war, or the methods of agriculture 
or the processes of arts and crafts. The followers of the latter were held in 
high esteem ; some of them like Asvins and Ribhus were even deified. The 
educational system of the age was successful in forming character, developing 
personality, promoting progress of the different branches of knowledge and 
achieving social efficiency and happiness. 

The Upanisad-sutra period, c. 1000 b.c. to c. 200 b.c. This period 

can justly be regarded as the most creative period of Hindu culture and 
literature, arts and sciences. The foundations of whatever is the best in 
Hindu culture and glorious in Hindu achievements were laid down during 
this period. Metaphysics made remarkable progress, as is evidenced by the 
Upani$adic, Jain and Bauddha works ; the foundations of almost all the later 
systems of philosophy were also laid down. Philology and grammar were 
well developed and the work in the sphere of legal literature was commenced. 
Speculations in the sphere of political thought were original and fruitful. 
Astronomy and mathematics, medicine and surgeiy, mining and metallurgy 
10 



130 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


began to be cultivated, and sculpture and architecture recorded remarkable pro- 
gress, especially towards the end of the period. Effort was also made to popu- 
larise culture and knowledge by transforming the epic of the Bharata war into 
an encyclopaedia of religion and ethics. 

These manifold achievements in different spheres became possible 
because Indians had still a free, open and enquiring mind and were making 
strenuous efforts to extend the bounds of knowledge and to ensure its trans 
mission to posterity. With a view to enlist the help of the whole society 
for this work, Upanayana ritual was made obligatory for the whole Aryan 
community at about the beginning of tiffs period. This gave a great impetus 
both to the spread of literacy and of higher education. As learning became 
more and more extensive in course of time, education in the family became 
impracticable and society began to encourage distinguished scholars to become 
regular teachers. They used to organise private schools for higher studies, 
relying mainly on the voluntary contributions of students taking their advant- 
age. Brahmacarya discipline was still rigorous, but towards the end of the 
period the marriageable age of girls began to be gradually lowered, which 
adversely affected female education. During the earlier part of this period, 
however, there was no dearth of women philosophers and scholars, some of 
whom used to organise schools and hostels for girls. Co-education was how 
ever not unknown. Majority of girls received their education at home, as 
was the case with boys also during the earlier period. The educational system 
paid as much attention to the cultivation of the Vedic literature as to that of 
grammar and philology, mathematics and astronomy and epic and legal 
literature. Professions became specialised towards the end of this period and 
society began to feel it advantageous that they should become hereditary in 
order to facilitate further efficiency. The ordinary soldier or agriculturist 
used however to receive a fair amount of cultural education. The training 
imparted to the doctor and the sculptor was fairly practical and efficient and 
the average intelligence of the artisan class was fairly high. The skilled 
worker was also respected by society. Education was regarded as a serious 
proposition and society was anxious that its benefits should be extended to as 
large a class as possible. Various steps were being proposed and adopted to 
see that studies of students did not terminate at. the end of their courses. 
Educational system continued to be successful in forming character, building 
up personality, extending the bounds of knowledge and preserving the heritage 
of the past. It undoubtedly promoted social happiness and efficiency it 
enabled India to be at the vanguard of progress in the contemporary world 
and repel and subjugate the Greek enemy. 

The Ace of the Dharmasastra, c. 200 b.c. to c. 500 a.d. : This 
period may be desciibed as the age of critical reflection and specialisation- 
rhe achievements of the preceding creative period were critically examined 
and special systems like the Saiiikhya and the Yoga, the Nyaya and the Vai* 



EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA : ITS ACHIEVEMENTS 131 

sesika. the Vedanta and the Mahayiana Buddhism were evolved, which marked 
considerable progress in accurate thought. The creative vein was still active, 
though in a loss marked degree than before. Its activity was particularly 
noteworthy in the realm of classical literature and sacred law, painting and 
sculpture, mathematics and astronomy. A considerable part of the religious 
literature was now canonised, but Hindus still had an open, free and enquir- 
ing mind. Philosophical systems continued to be called orthodox though they 
had no place even for God. Heterodox systems like the Jainism and the 
Buddhism were studied by the Hindus and theories and dogmas of Hinduism 
were analysed and examined by the Jains and the Buddhists. This led to 
considerable progress in logic and metaphysics. Greeks were no doubt regard- 
ed a- unholy foreigners ( Mlecchas ), but nevertheless their achievements in 
the realm of sculpture, coinage and astronomy were carefully studied, examined 
and assimilated, which led to considerable progress in all these sciences. 

There was however a distinctive setback to the cause of education as a 
whole during this period. Child marriages became the order of the day 
towards the end of tire period, and so female education suffered very consi- 
derably. Only daughters of high class families used to receive education 
during this period. The lowering of the marriageable age of girls naturally 
involved the corresponding lowering of the marriageable age of boys. 
Brahmacarya discipline consequently became slack and nominal and the 
educational system could produce only a limited number of young men pos- 
sessing a developed personality, characterised by self-confidence and self-reli- 
ance. During this period Upanayana in the case of Ksatriyas and Vaisyas 
first became a mere formality ; this development gave a severe blow to the 
general and cultural education of the warrior and the farmer, and the trader 
and the artisan, which reduced their general efficiency'. Their education 
gradually began to become too much specialised and narrow. The same 
defect arose in the course of time in liberal education also. There was too 
much of specialisation in logic and philosophy, astronomy and mathematics ; 
there was no broad based secondary course of education. The educational 
system was still able to promote social efficiency and happiness and secure 
the preservation and spread of national culture : it enabled society to absorb 
and assimilate a number of foreign tribes whom it could not drive out by 
military force. Towards the end of this period, the higher education of the 
cultured classes received a great impetus and encouragement by the rise of 
organised public schools and colleges ; on account of the liberal support which 
these institutions received from the state and society they were able to impart 
free education. Several colleges for higher education became famous centres 
of education, which in the course of time began to attract students from abroad 
as well. The training in practical sciences like sculpture and achitecture, 
medicine and metallurgy was still very efficient, if somewhat narrow. 

The Ace op the Purai^as and Nibandhas, c. 500 a.d.— 1200 a.d. 



132 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


India continued to enjoy the .reputation of an international centre of educa- 
tion during this period also. Down to c. 900 a.d. Tibetan and Chinese 
students continued to flock in her eastern Universities and her doctors used 
to be summoned in Western Asia for curing patients and oYganising hospitals. 
Education had not become mere book learning ; Indian teachers excited ad- 
miration of foreign students by their remarkable powers of explanation and 
exposition. Graduates of this period were remarkable for their logical acumen 
and mastery in Sanskrit, though the latter was no longer the spoken dialect. 
Facilities for free higher education continued to be ample ; if with the decline 
of Buddhism the number of monastic colleges decreased, the loss was more 
than compensated by the rise of numerous temple colleges. Brahmacarya 
discipline no doubt became nominal owing to early marriages, students how- 
ever showed commendable perseverance in pursuing protracted courses of 
studies. Poor students continued to maintain themselves by begging if neces- 
sary ; the number of teachers eager to follow the; high code of the profession 
which enjoined free tuition, still continued to be very large. Society’s earnest 
ness for education was thus remarkable. 

Though thus higher education continued to prosper, the education of the 
masses suffered during this period. Upanayana now completely disappeared 
from Ksatriyas and Vaisyas ; this gave a serious blow to their cultural and 
literary education, reduced the percentage of literacy among them and made 
their education narrow. Useful arts and professions began to be regarded as 
plebeian and were boycotted by the higher sections of Brahmanas ; as the 
services of the best intellect of society were no longer available for the deve- 
lopment of arts and crafts, they ceased to make any progress worth the name. 
Growing orthodoxy of the age disapproved of dissection and condemned the 
pursuit of agriculture on the ground that it involved the killing of insects at 
the time of sowing and reaping. Medical education in the course of time 
therefore became less efficient ; surgery disappeared and agriculture became a 
neglected and plebeian profession. The marriageable age of girls was further 
lowered during this period : girls were ordinarily married at the age of 8 or 9. 
This naturally gave a death blow to female education. A few ladies no doubt 
appear as poetesses during this period ; they were exceptions rather than the 
rule. Education could not reach the masses as the medium of higher instruc- 
tion was Sanskrit, which was no longer the spoken tongue. No serious or 
concerted effort was made to develop literature in vernaculars in order to faci- 
litate the infiltration of knowledge to the masses. In the sphere of higher 
education specialisation was carried to too great an extreme : the logician, 
the mathematician and the Vaidika, for instance, did not possess much know- 
ledge of the problems and achievements of one another. The preservation 
of the ancient literature and culture was the main concern of the educational 
system ; it was unable to produce many scholars who could substantially 
enrich it. The creative vein in the Hindu intellect could still be seen in the 



EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA : ITS ACHIEVEMENTS 133 

realm of poetics, and to a less extent in those of philosophy, literature and 
astronomy. It was howevei quite feeble, compared with its strength and 
achievements in the preceding ages. The situation deteriorated further by 
the growing self-conceitedness of the scholars of the age and their refusal to 
benefit by the knowledge and experience of outsiders. 

They had no longer a free, open and enquiring mind ; they would refuse 
to accept what was not in consonance with the statements in the sacred texts. 
For instance, though the astronomers knew full well that the lunar eclipses 
were caused by the moon coming within the shadow of the earth, they still 
went un professing adherence to the legend of the demon Rahu devouring the 
moon. This attitude stood in the way of further progress in sciences like 
astronomy and medicine, history and geography. During the medieval age, 
great importance was attached by Indian Pandits, as by Jesuitical doctors, 
lo cleverness and skill in mere worldly warfare ; a person was hailed as a great 
scholar if he could perceive distinctions where none existed and silence his 
opponent by a brilliant, display of the resources of a well-trained memory. 

It will be thus seen that the decline that overtook Indian civilisation to- 
wards the end of the 10th century was to a large degree due to the educational 
system ceasing to impart education that would produce scholars who would 
make their own contribution to the march of knowledge, and science. The 
education of the masses and women was neglected and no attention was paid 
to the development of the vernaculars, which alone could have raised the 
general intellectual level of society. A society in which education was con- 
fined to a small section of population, the scholars in which had no longer an 
open and enquiring mind could naturally not hold its own for a long time. 



HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GILG1T MANUSCRIPTS 

By 

Dr. R. C. MAJUMDAR, m.a.. ph.d.. f.r.a.s.b. 

The Gilgit Manuscripts, recently edited by Dr. N. Dutt and Mr. Shiv Nath 
Sarnia, are a valuable addition to the Buddhist literature and throw 
interesting light on the origin and development of the Buddhist Canon. These 
aspects have been fully dealt with in the learned introduction. But some of 
these texts also contain valuable data for the study of political and social 
history. As a specimen I projx)sc to deal in this paper with the first section 
of the Civaravastu, in the Vinaya Texts of the Mulasarvastivadas published 
in Gilgit Manuscripts Vol. III. Part 2, (pp. 1-52). 

§ 1. Summary 

It may be summarised as follows : 

The King of Videha had 500 amMyas with Khanda as their chief 
( agrdmatya ) . He married in a family of equal status (sadtfa kula) and had 
two sons, Gopa and Simha. Khanda gradually acquired great power and 
authority in the state and the other ministers, becoming jealous, conspired 
to destroy him. They approached the king and poisoned his ears by repre- 
senting that “ Khanda is the real king and may, if he so desire, seize the 
throne. ’ The king gradually grew suspicious and looked for an opportunity 
to bring about his downfall. Khan-da. coming to know of this, became afraid 
and thought thus “ Where shall I go ? If I go to SravastI, it is under a king, 
and so there would be the same troubles. So would be the case in Varanasi, 
Rajagrha and Campa which are all subject to the authority of one iierson 
( ekddhma ). Vaisali is under a g am (ganddkina). What is desired by ten 
is disliked by twenty. So by all means I must go to Vaisali/’ So he sent a 
messenger to the Licchavis of Vaisali saying “ I wish to live in Vai<SlI under 
your protection (vfihu-cchaya ) The Licchavis cordially invited him, and 
so he went to Vaisali with his goods, cattle and attendants. 

Vaisali was at that time divided into three quarters, having respectively 
7,000, 14,000 and 21,000 turrets ( kilt agora ) with gold, silver and copper 
pinnacles (niryuha). They were inhabited respectively by the high, middle 
and low classes. The Vaisali gana (republic) set up a convention that a girl 
bom in any of these quarters should be married to a boy bom in the same or 
in a higher quarter, but never to one bom in a lower quarter. The best girl 
( stnraina ) in VaiSH should not be married to any one but would be an object 
of enjoyment by the gana as a whole ( ganasdmanyani paribhojyameva ) . 



HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GI1.GIT MANUSCRIPTS 135 

Khanda was made a chief ( pradhanapuru$a ) and given residence in the high 
quarters. 

When the republican assembly of Vaisali held its session Khanda did not 
attend, although invited to do so. Being asked for the reason Khanda 
leplied “my attendance may lead to troubles (ddinava)." The people of 
Vaisali, however, reassured him and he began to attend. But he did not 
express any opinion iri the assembly, until he was similarly reassured that no 
troubles would follow if he did so. Formerly, the tone of the official des- 
patches sent from Vaisali was rather harsh. Since the time Khanda began to 
Like part in the deliberations of the assembly the? language became mild and 
polite. Those who received these letters were at first surprised at this change, 
but gradually learnt the truth viz. that it was due to the influence of Khanda. 

Khanda built houses for his two sons Gopa and Simha. A daughter was 
born to Simha. Festivities on a grand scale celebrated her birth and she was 
named Cola. The astrologers, on seeing her, predicted that her son would 
nize the throne by killing his father. Siriiha had a second daughter named 
Upacela. 

Gopa, a strong but turbulent fellow, destroyed the gardens of the Liccha- 
vis of Vaisali. The gardeners, unable to prevent him. reported the matter 
to his father who expostulated with his son. warning him that the. citizens of 
Vaisali are also strong and turbulent and might do him harm. Gopa said : 
“ Father, these people have gardens, but we have none." So Khattrla applied 
to the ‘ gana ' for a garden and received a dilapidated one. There was a big 
Sala tree in that garden and there one of the brothers set up an image of 
Buddha and the other constructed a Vihara. 

But the misdeeds of Gopa irritated the Licchavis. So Khanda asked him 
to go to a distant, village ( karvata ) lest the wrath of the gana would fall upon 
hint. Gopa accordingly left Vaisali and having gone to the village led an 
indcjjcndent life (svddhishthitdn karmdntdn karayilum-arebddha) . 

The Commander-in-Chief ( senapati ) having died at Vaisali, Khanda was 
appointed to the post by the Licchavis. He. too. died after faithfully dis- 
charging his duty for some time. Then an assembly of the republic was held 
at Vaisali to decide upon the appointment of a commander- in-chief. There 
^ime said : “ The g ana was protected by Khanda. so his son should be 
appointed.” Others observed : “ Ilis son Gopa is rough and unmannerly. If 
he be appointed Commander-in-Chief he will constantly cause dissensions in 
the gana. His brother Sirhha, however, is tender-hearted and would be able 
to please the gana. If the gana agrees we shall elect him as the Commander- 
in-Chief.'’ As this proposal was agreed to by all they went in a body to 
Simha and offered him the post. Simha said “Gopa is my elder brother. 
Please appoint him to the post.” They replied “Simha, the post is not 
hereditary in your family. Whoever is agreeable to the gana will be appointed 



136 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to it. If you do not agree we shall select another.” Simha, considering it 
to be highly undesirable that the (lost should go out of the family, accepted 
the offer and was anointed Commander-in-Chief with great pomp and 
ceremony. 

The official despatches of Vaisali hitherto commenced with the phrase : 
“ Thus commands the gcoia with Khaoda as their head ( K hati if a- promt* kha 
gum)-" When Sirhha became the Commander-in-Chief his name was sub- 
stituted for that of Khanda in the above phrase. In course of time a letter 
with this phrase was sent to the village where Gopa was residing. Having 
learnt from it that his brother had succeeded his deceased father in the post 
of Commander. Gopa grew angry, went to Vaisali, and asked Sirhha whether 
it was fair on his part to supersede the claims of his elder brother. Sirhha 
having narrated in detail all the circumstances, Gopa grew angry with the 
Licchavis of Vaisali and proceeded to Rajagrha. There he was appointed 
chief minister ( agramatya) by king Bimbisara. 

In course of time the chief queen of Bimbisara died and Gopa wrote to 
his brother proposing the marriage of the latter’s second daughter Upacela 
with the King. Sirhha wrote back accepting the proposal. But he reminded 
his brother that it was the convention of the gana of Vaisali that the daughters 
of the city should be married only to its own citizens. He. therefore, pro 
posed that Gopa should come to the garden and he would send Upacela there 
to be taken away secretly by his brother. 

When Gopa arrived at Vaisali Simha asked Upacela quickly to dress 
herself and put on her ornaments. But the elder daughter Cela, coming to 
know of this, also dressed herself. In the meantime the presence of a foreign 
enemy in Vaisali became known by the sound of the Yakja’s bell 1 and caused 
great uproar. In the hurry and confusion Simha mistook Cela for 
Upacela and took her to Gopa, who at once placed her in the chariot and 
proceeded towards Rajagrha. Some people of Vaisali followed them, but 
were repulsed by Gopa. 

Arrived at Rajagrha Gopa discovered his mistake and went sorrowfully 
to the King. He told the King about the astrologer’s prediction that the son 
of Cela would kill his father. The King was, however, fascinated by the 
beauty of the youthful Cela, and said : “ The son kills the father c-a account 
of the throne. If I get a son from her I shall anoint! him ( pattavandhmh 
kari$yami) as soon as he is born.” So he married Cela with great ceremony, 
named her Vaideh! as she was brought from Videha country (vi$aya), and a 
son was bom to them. 


1. It is related that a gate-keeper of Vaisali, having died, became a Yaksa. 
He directed the citizens of Vaisali to build a house for him (yak^asthana) and U> 
place a bell there, so that he might strike it whenever any enemy of Vaisali entered 
the city. 



HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GILGIT MANUSCRIPTS 137 

About this time Mahanama, a rich citizen of Vaisiafi, had a daughter 
named AmrapaB (her supernatural birth from a plantain grove is described 
in details). When she grew of marriageable age princes, sons of minister. 
he si his, sdrtkavdhas and other rich suitors from Kraunca, isakya and other 
countries came to ask for her hand. Mahanama, afraid of incurring the 
displeasure of these, brought the matter to the notice of the gana. A session 
of the assembly was held to discuss the matter. When the daughter was seen 
by the members they decided that she was a stri-ratna (jewel of a woman), 
and so according to the convention already laid down, she was not to be 
married to anybody but was to be enjoyed by the gaiio. Amrapali thereupon 
asked for five privileges, viz. ( 1 ) She would be given residence in the quarter 
inhabited by the high class ; (2) No one will enter her house so long as 
another was there ; (3) Any one who enters must give a fee of five hundred 
karsapanas : (4) In times of general house-search her house would be inspect- 
ed on the seventh day; 1 4 ) Exit from, and entrance to, her house should 
r.ot be observed or discussed. The gaiia argued thus ; (l) Being the jewel 
of a woman she deserves residence in the best quarter ; (2) It is meet and 
proper that only one should visit her at a time as otherwise there may be 
quarrel between the citizens ; (3) The fee of 500 kdrsdpatias is also reasonable 
for she is in need of dress and ornaments ; (4) As regards the search on the 
seventh day it docs not matter whether it is conducted earlier or later ; (5) 
She is a public woman ; no one will visit her if he is observed at the time of 
entrance or exit. So the gana granted her all the five privileges she had asked 
for. 

Amrapali invited painters from various countries and asked them to 
paint on her walls the figures of kings, traders, merchants etc. seen by them. 
When this was done she asked for their names and was told that ' this is 
King Pradyota.’ * this is Kosala King Prasenajit ’, * this is Vatsa King 
Udayana,’ this is sreiiya Bimbisara, King of Magadha ’ etc. She became 
enamoured of Bimbisara. 

One day King Bimbisara. engaged in conversation on good topics with 
his ministers (satkathaya tisthati), asked them what sort of courtesan each of 
them had seen. Gopa said that the courtesan AmrapaB in Vai$aB was exceed- 
ingly charming and accomplished in all the sixty-four arts and is fit to be 
enjoyed by the king. The king replied : “ If so, I shall go to Vai§aB and 
visit her.” Gopa told him that the Licchavis of Vaisali were hostile and may 
do him harm. But the king said that a man must have the courage of a man 
and went with Gopa in a chariot to Vaisall. Leaving Gopa with the chariot 
in the garden Bimbisara entered the house of Amrapali. Immediately the 
yakga’s bell was sounded, and loud shouts came from the angry 1 citizens of 
Vai&UL Bimbisara, having asked Amrapali, was told that they were search- 
ing the houses to find him out, ‘ Shall I then fly ?’ asked the king. * Dont 
be dejected ; ’ replied the courtesan, 4 my house won't be searched till the 



138 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


seventh day and so you may stay on till then.’ On the seventh day the king 
left Amrapali’s house, giving her a thin piece of cloth and a signet ring and 
saying “ if a girl is bom to you keep her with you ; but if a son is bom, cover 
him with this cloth, tie the ring on his neck and send him to me.” Bimbisara 
was pursued by the people, but. as on the previous occasion of taking out 
Cela. Gopa fought and defeated them. The citi 2 ens of Vaisall resolved, as 
on the previous occasion, that they would retaliate on the sons of Bimbisara. 

Amrapali gave birth to a son and sent him to Rajagrha along with some 
merchants who were allured by the prospect of taking their goods duty-free 
by liaving stamped them with the signet-ring. The child, as directed by the 
mother, went straight to the king seated in court ( arlhadhikauma ) and sat 
on his lap. On account of his fearlessness he was named Abhaya. 

King Bimbisara was not above adultery. Once while going on an elephant 
in the streets of Rajagrha by the house of a sresthin who had gone abroad 
with merchandise the latter's wife became enamoured of him and threw a 
garland from the window towards the king. The king looked up and invited 
her to come. She said " My Lord, 1 feel shy. you had better come in.” So 
the king visited her and she conceived. About this time her husband sent 
news that he would reach home in a few days. The king sent a messenger 
to him asking him to bring some jewels from far off countries. Having thus 
contrived to keep off the Sresthin for a sufficiently long time the king had 
the satisfaction of welcoming the son born of her. He was named Jivaka 
and Kumarabhrtya. 

Abhaya and Jivaka, when grown up, reflected thus : " Ajiitasatru, as 
predicted, will ascend the throne. So we should learn some arts in order to 
earn our livelihood.” One day a chariot-maker (ralhakara ) , clad in white 
and attended by persons in white clothes, entered the palace. Having learnt 
that he would get a fee ( vrtli) Abhaya also wanted to follow this profession 
and placed his desire before the king. The king having demurred, Abhaya told 
him that all the arts (sarva-£ilpani) were worthy of being learnt by a prince. 
Thereupon the king permitted him to become a chariot-maker. Similarly 
Jivaka, seeing a physician asked the royal attendants about him and was told 
that he used to tend upon the sick. If they recovered he was paid a fee, but 
if they died nobody cared for him.- He accordingly asked for, and obtained 
permission of king Bimbisara to learn the medical arts. Having mastered 
medicine he wanted to leam the ' kapalimocant- vidyd ’ from a renowned phy- 
sician named Atreya of Tak^ila. Bimbisara sent him to Tak?asil5 with a 
letter to king Pu$kaiasarin. 

2. This seems to be the meaning of the passage which runs thus : yady ■=■ aturo 
jjivatyabhisaram labhate ! At ha preto na margyo na picckyak. 



HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GILGIT MANUSCRIPTS 


139 


Jivaka returned after having acquired great efficiency in all kinds of 
medical treatment 1 and was twice consecrated as Vaidyardja by the king. 

When Ajatasatru, prejudiced by Devadatta and Kalydnamitra, killed his 
lather, the virtuous king ( dharmika dharmaraja) Bimbisara, he was attacked 
with the disease called gulma. The royal physicians, when asked to attend 
the king, said in one voice : " your brother Jivaka is unrivalled in his know- 
ledge of medicine. When he is present how can we undertake the treatment ? ” 
So Jivaka was sent for. He thought thus : “ A gulma is burst open by either 
excessive delight or excessive anger. He is a sinner, and cannot feel much 
delight in any case. So his anger must be provoked.’* He then told the king 
that he would undertake his treatment if he (the king) would eat the flesh 
of his son prince Udayibhadra. The king at first got very angry and refused, 
hut had ultimately to consent to the proposal. Jivaka concealed Udayibhadra 
and offered a dish of meat to the kmg saying that it was the flesh of the 
prince. When the king was about to take it, Jivaka struck him on the fore- 
nead saying : 44 Thou hast killed the father and are now eating the flesh cf 

thy son, O sinner/’ The king got excessively angry and his gulma was burtf 
open. Then Jivaka brought out Udayibhadra and told the king the artifice 
lie had to adopt for curing him. The king was pleased and consecrated 
Jivaka as Vaidyardja for the third lime amid great ceremony. 

As Jivaka got exceedingly proud, the Buddha humiliated him by showing 
his greater knowledge of medicinal plants. Jivaka thereupon became a 
devoted disciple of the Buddha. 

^2. The Licchavis 

It will be observed, on a comparison with the corresponding section of 
the Pali Vinaya texts, that practically the whole of the story, as given above, 
is new. The scene in the Pali Vinaya is also laid in the court of Bimbisara, 
and the names of Abhava and Jivaka also occur there. But the story concern- 
ing the birth of the former is lacking and a different account is given of the 
parentage of the latter. So far, therefore, as the narrative portion is con- 
cerned there is very little in common between the two versions of the Vinaya 
texts. It will appear from the above summary that the Vinaya texts of the 
Mulasarvastivadins contain important and interesting information regarding 
the history and social life of the Licchavis and Vaisall. In the first place 
we get a vivid contrast between the republican and the monarchical forms of 
government, the former being called gayddhtna, and the latter ekddhhta. The 
context in which Khaixla makes the contrast leaves no doubt about the true 


3. This is treated in great detail and various diseases and their remedies are 
incidentally discussed. The twenty-two pages devoted to it (pp. 27-48) throw very 
interesting light on the medical science' of those days and deserve full treatment, by 
one conversant in the old Ayurvedic system. 



140 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


democratic spirit which animated the citizens of Vaisali. Every important 
matter was discussed' in the assembly and ‘what was desired by ten was 
opposed by twenty.’ That the executive authorities were controlled by the 
assembly even in minute details appears from the change in the tone of official 
despatches brought about by Khanda’s taking part in the deliberations of the 
assembly, and his application to it for the grant of a garden. 

It would appear that Senapati was the head of the state. Shhha was 
elected to this post by the assembly, and we must presume the same procedure 
in the case of Khanda though the election by the assembly is not specifically 
referred to. 

This democratic constitution, however, did not mean social equality. The 
division of the capital-city of Vaisali into three residential quarters based on 
wealth, and the restriction of marriage between equals in each quarter prove 
clearly the existence of class distinctions of a fairly rigid character. But that 
even a foreigner like Khamja and the courtesan Amrapali were assigned resi- 
dences in the highest quarter shows the flexibility of the social rules. 

The convention, actually put into practice by the gma in the case of 
Amrapali, that the most accomplished woman for women) in the city of 
Vaisali should not be married but remain an object of enjoyment by the- 
public, throws an altogether new' light on the social and moral ideas of the 
age. It is interesting to note that in the Pali Vinaya texts, a pointed refer- 
ence is made to the courtesan Amrapali as having added lustre and distinc- 
tion to the city of Vaisali. 3 What is more, in order that Riajagrha might not 
lag behind VaHsali, a similar courtesan is installed there with the consent of 
king Bimbisara. 

The personal character of this king is fully in keeping with this spirit. 
He gravely discusses with his ministers the type of courtesans each had seen 
and insists upon visiting Amrapali. He had also no scruple in having a love- 
affair with the wife of one of his own subjects whom he manages to keep at 
a safe distance by the exercise of his own royal authority. It is also worthy 
of note that the issues of both these illegitimate connections are reared 
in the palace and receive high distinctions in life. 

§3. General Political Setting 

The general political history of N-E. India, envisaged in the text, is also 
not without interest. In addition to Prasenajit, king of Kosala with his 
capital at SiSvasta, and Bimbisara, king of Magadha with his capital at 

4. That discussion formed an important feature in the working of the assembly 
is proved by the request to Khan da to express hist opinion. Even the question of 
marrying his daughter was placed by Mahanama before the assembly. 

5. “Through that person Vesali became more and more flourishing “ (Maha- 
vagga VII. 1, 1.) 



HISTORICAL MATERIALS IN GTLGIT MANUSCRIPTS 


141 


Rajagrha, to both of whom frequent references are made, mention is made of 
the kings Pradyota and Udayana. kingdoms of Videha, Varaijasl and Campa, 
and the tribal states of Sakya and Kraufica. Thus it presents the political 
condition such as we find in other Buddhist canonical texts. It evidently 
refers to the period before Ariga and KSsI were conquered respectively by 
Bimbisara and Prasenajit. The mention of Videha as a kingdom is. im- 
portant. Rhys Davids includes Videha among the tribal republics* and trans- 
lates the epithet Vedehiputta, applied to Ajatasatru, as the son of the queen 
of the Videha clan. 6 7 8 Both these views are opposed to the testimony of the 
present text. For, apart from the mention of Videha as a kingdom, it is 
clearly said that Ajatasatru’s mother was not a queen of Videha but the 
daughter of a citizen of Vaisali, and she was called Vaidchl as she was brought 
from Videha country. 

The ?tory of Ajatasatru’s treatment by Jivaka brings out the fact that 
the king had a son named Udayibhadra. This is in conformity with the 
Ceylonese tradition and opposed to the Puranic statement that Ajatasatru 
was succeeded by Darsaka and the latter by Udayin. It is thus evident that 
the Ceylonese Chronicles were based upon a common Buddhist tradition and 
Jhis considerably weakens the argument of V. A. Smith, with reference to the 
Purapic account of Darsaka. that " traditions preserved in Magadha should 
be more trustworthy than those recorded at a later date by monks in distant 
Ceylon.”* 

The king of Videha is said to have five hundred amatyas with Khapda 
the chief or agramulyo. This frost of agrdtmtya is also mentioned in con- 
nection with the kingdoms of Magadha and Kosala, though there is no men- 
tion of five hundred amatyas in either case. Whether the body of five 
hundred amatyas denotes a sort of deliberative assembly cannot be deter- 
mined. But although its exact nature, cannot be defined it seems td be an 
interesting feature of the government. 


6. Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, p. 175. 

7. S. B. E„ Vol. XI, p. 134. According to Jain tradition Ajatasatru ’s mother 
CeUanB was daughter of Cetaka, Raja of Vaisali (ibid, Vol. XXII, Introduction). 

8. Early History of India, 3rd Ed., p. 47. 



STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF INDIAN PLANTS — 
ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF JONDHLA (HOLCUS 
SORGHU M ) - ( F ROM B.C 2200 TO A.D. 1850) 

By 

Mr. P. K. GODE. M.\. 

In July 1941 l published a short paper’ on the History of the Fig (Ficus 
{ Carica ) recording its history from c. B-C. 1000 to a.d. 1800. My main object 
in preparing this pajier was to record the history of this plant from foreign 
and Indian sources and to point out how it was gradually assimilated by the 
Indian Materia Median like many other plants of foreign origin. This paper 
of mine has received better appreciation-' from Sanskrit scholars, botanists and 
medical men than 1 expected. Dr. Birbal Sahni, f.rs.. Dean of the Faculty 
of Science, Lucknow University, directed my attention to a recent book on the 
History of Plant Sciences '- by Howard S. Reed which has two chapters “ on 
the history of the plant lore of the ancients, where Egypt and Assyria, Greece 
and Rome, China and early America are all adequately treated ” but “ one 
looks in vain for a bare mention of ancient India which was certainly well 
abreast of the times and gave much that the West has assimilated, though not 
always gracefully acknowledged.” Dr. Sahni rightly observes that the Retro 
gressive Period (Chap. IV of Reed’s book) was retrogressive only so far 
as the occidental nations were concerned. 

The study of Indian culture in all its aspects of which the history of 
Indian plants is but one aspect has not yet been properly carried out in spite 
of the wealth of material in Jain. Brahmanical, Buddhist and foreign sources 

1. Vide . pp. 125-136 of New Indian Antiquary , Vol. IV (1941-42). 

2. Dr. P. M. Mehta, m.d., m.s. Chief Medical Officer, Jamnagar State, who is 
deeply interested in Indian Botany and Ayurvedic System of Medicine suggested 
that I should take up a systematic study of other plants of medical and nutritive 
value. His constant correspondence with me during the last 3; years lias been res- 
ponsible for maintaining my interest in the history of Indian Medicine. I a*n thank- 
ful to him for supplying me extracts from works on medicine and botany not easily 
accessible to me in local libraries. 

3. Vide, p. 369 of Cunent Science, 1942, XI, No. 9 where Dr. Sahni’s interest- 
ing review of Reed's book appears. A copy of this review was kindly sent to me 
by Dr. Sahni. who wrote to me on 12th January 1943 I have read with much 
interest your Notes on the History of the Fig {Ficus Carica ). I think you would be 
doing a great dervice to Indian Botany if similarly you were to work out the history' 
of our knowledge of other common Indian plants of medicinal or nutritive value. 
Our own ignorance concerning this subject is 1 2 3 colossal and we can scarcely blame 
the western writers if they ignore the ancient Hindu knowledge of the plant sciences ” 



ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OK JON DHL A ( Holcus Sorghum ) 143 

in contact with India from remote antiquity. It is, therefore, no fault of the 
Western writers if they ignore the ancient Hindu knowledge of our sciences 
as reflected in the literary and other sources now available for study. In 
view of the unsatisfactory character of the history of Indian plant sciences as 
pointed out by Dr. Sahni l have thought it advisable to note down and record 
as many facts about the history of different Indian plants as I can gather 
during the course of my other studies pertaining to the history of Indian 
Culture in all its manifold aspects. As one such effort in the field of this 
history 1 shall deal with the antiquity of IIolcus Sorghum < fawar or Jondhla) 
which is supposed to be the earliest of the wild plants to be domesticated 
according to Swanson and Laude,' who record the following jjoints regard- 
ing its antiquity 

< i ) Holcus Sorghum is indigenous of Equatorial Africa and Asia. 

( ii ) Evidence of it-> existence about 2200 B.c. is furnished by one of the 
Egyptian tombs of this date. 

(Hi) In the Bible (Book of Ezekiel) the word dochan occur'. It is trans- 
lated by the word millet but it is tx>ssiblc that it signifies the 

Sorghum. 

iir) The cultivation of Sorghum in Asia, particularly in India is very old. 

(r ) Sorghum was grown as early as 3rd Century A.D. in China, where it 
was probably introduced. 

Watt in his Dictionary of Economic Products of India 7 ' devotes some 
space to the history of Sorghum. I note below some points from his remarks: — 

(1) Some of the cultivated Sorghums had been developed in India. 

(2) Sir Water Elliot pointed out that the most general Sanskrit name 

for the crop, yavatia , denotes in other connections a Greek, Muham- 
madan or stranger while its Persian name jnur-i-hindi shows that 
it reached Persia, at least from India. 

(3) De Candolle lays a certain amount of stress on “ the absence of a 

Sanskrit name as rendering the Indian origin doubtful.” 

( 4 ) Some writers have given Zurna or Ziira as the Sanskrit for this grain, 

but if that be the case, neither Dhura or Ziira has given origin to 
any of the Indian names. Ziira or Zurna is, moreover, clearty 
derived from the Arabic Dhiira. The Arabic word has on the 


i. Vide Bulletin No. 266 (1934) by A. F. Swanson and Laude — "Varieties 
of Sorghum in Kansas ' (Kansas State College of Agriculture and Allied Science. 
L. S. A.j . This Bulletin was not accessible to me but the pertinent information was 
supplied to me by my brother Mr. R. B. Code, M.sc. Assistant Investigator Govt. 
Dry Fanning Scheme (1933 to 1943) and now Bio-Chemist to Govt, for the Bombay 
Province. 

5. Vide pp. 291-292 of Vol. VI, Part HI, London and Calcutta, 4893. 



144 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


other hand passed into the Egyptian and perhaps also the Hebrew, 
so that it seems almost justifiable to say that the aboriginal people 
of India knew of and perhaps cultivated their indigenous Sorghum 
long anterior to the Aryan invasion. Indeed, it may be assumed 
that the Sanskrit people first learned of this grain in India, but 
gave themselves very' little concern regarding it. But. indeed, the 
absence of any allusion to it in the classic literature of the Sanskrit 
people can hardly be advanced as proof positive that it was un- 
known to them. The religious associations of the grain, the obser- 
vances of cultivation and the multiplicity of forms of the crop, 
all point, to an antiquity quite as great as can be shown for most, 
other articles of the humbler phases of life. The absence of any 
historic indications of an ancient importation and the presence in 
India of an abundant wild species that affords a large conspicuous 
edible grain seem, when taken in conjunction with the arguments 
already advanced, conclusive evidence in support of the opinion 
that many of the forms of this millet are beyond doubt natives of 
India.' 1 

(5) “Smith ( History of Bible Plants, p. 214) has endeavoured to show 
that the stalks of this millet were very probably the reed of St. 
Mathew and that the spikelets on its top were very likely the 
hyssop of St. John mentioned at the crucifixion. The hyssop 
(Esob of the Hebrews) of Moses was a word used to denote any 
common article in the form of a broom or a material suitable for 
that purpose. If this view be accepted, the cultivation of Sorghum 
in Palestine may be regarded as very ancient.”* 1 

The foregoing scholarly collection of facts and views bearing on the history 
of the Sorghum, though illuminating, is not conclusive so far as the antiquity 
of Sorghum in India is concerned. It is the purpose of this paper to record 
some useful data bearing on this antiquity so that the whole problem should 
be clarified by the application of the chronological method of recording 
tactual evidence adopted by me in my present study of the problem. In 
recording my evidence I shall follow the method of proceeding from the present 
to the past so that readers may know how far I have penetrated the mist of 

6. Ibid. p. 295. These remarks read in conjunction with the existence of Sorghum 
in an Egyptian tomb of 2200 b.c. may tend to confirm the belief that the Sorghum 
has very great antiquity say of more than 5000 years and if the theory of its impor- 
tation to India from Africa is accepted we have to suppose that this importation took 
place in remote antiquity prior to the Christian Era. The evidence recorded in this 
paper shows its existence on Indian Soil for the jast 2000 years. It is for the 
students of the prc-historic Culture of India to investigate the exact period of the 
suggested importation. In the meanwhile we may accept Watt's conclusion that 
the Sorghum and it» varieties are natives of India. 



ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF jondhi,a (Holcus Sorghum ) 145 

antiquity gathered round this important grain the Sorghum, the sustainer of 
life in different parts of India even in its worst quality now rationed out to 
millions of my countrymen consequent upon the exigencies of the present 
world-war. 

John Graham published in 1839 his book on Plants growing in Bombay 
and its vicinity in which he refers to Jowaree and Bajree as follows : — 

Page 237 — Holcus (From Helko to draw in allusion to the supposed emol- 
lient properties of a grass, to which this name was given. 

Page 238— Holcus Shicatus — Bajree — extensively cultivated and forms a 
a try important article of food along Jondhala. 

Holcus Sorghum — Jowarke — Jondla, the great millet a well-known 
cerealia. The straw called Kurbee is reckoned very nourishing for cattle and 
is a substitute for forage for horses, when grass is not obtainable. 

Edward Moor, one of the founders of the Royal Asiatic Society London, 
^■.rved with the Maratha army against Tipoo Sultan in a.d. 1790-91. In his 
Narrative of the Operations etc. published in London in 1794 he refers to 
jaw or y as follows 

Page 278- In Chapter XXI Moor gives historical and descriptive parti- 
culars of Canara and the Canarese. In this connection he states 

We learned that in times of plenty, the ordinary price 7 8 of provisions 
was in this proportion : a bullock load of joivary for a rupee or four sheep 
or twenty fowls : sheep we have frequently picked at half a rupee each. A 
bullock load is eighty pucka seer which at a liberal allowance will serve a 
family of six persons a month. ’ On page 505 Moor explains Jawary as 4< A 
s'Kjin called in America and the West Indies Guinea Corn." 

Yule and Burnell record usages of the Jowaur , Jowarree in their monu- 
mental work Hobson-Jobson , v These usages are taken from sources dated 

7. jawar is selling at 4 seers a rupee in Poona at present (August 1943). 
\bout A.i>. 1790, when the Peshwa was' still ruling at Poona its cast in the Deccan 
* s indicated by Moor’s statement “ a bullock-load of joivary lor a rupee.” He further 
explains ** a bullock-load *’ as equal to 80 pucka seers. It is clear, therefore, that, 
the cost of jowary has increased 20 times. Students of Indian Economics should 
ponder over this contrast. 

8. Vide p. 465 of Hobson-] obson (fxmdon, 1903) - " Jowaur, Jowarree S. Hind. 
jfuvar, jua7 |Skt. yavaprakdra or akdra ‘ of the nature of barley'.] Sorghum Vulgar e. 
Pcrs. (Holcus Sorghum L.) one of the best and most frequently grown of the tall 
millets of southern countries. It is grown nearly all over India in the unflooded 
tracts ; it is sown about July and reaped in November, The reedy stems are 8 to 
10 feet high. It is the ciwlam of the Tamil regions. The stalks are kirbee . The 
Ar. dura or dkura is perhaps the same word ultimately as jatvdr ; for the old Semitic 
flame is dokn, from the smoky aspect of the grain. It is an odd instance of the 
looseness which used to pervade dictionaries and glossaries that R. Drummond 
(Ulus, of the Gram. Parts of Guzeratee etc. Bombay, 1808) calls 41 Jooar, a kind 
of Pulse, the focxJ of the common people.** 

11 



146 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


c. 1590, 1750, 1800, 1813, 1819 and 1826. The earliest of these usages is 
from Ain-i-Akbari by Abul Fazl (trans. by Blochman and Jarret) and reads 
as “ Jowari ” as will be seen from the following extract : — 

“ C. 1590 — In Khandesh “ / otvari is chiefly cultivated, in some places, 
there are three crops in a year, and its stock is so delicate and pleasant to Uk 
taste that it is regarded in the light of a fruit” ( Ain cd. Jarett, ii, 223).” 

Other usages ar e — 1760 ( Jounri ), 1800 ( jawarry ). 1813 ( juarrer ). 
1819 (joiwaree), 1826 (Joanee). 

Marsden in his book on Sumatra (London. 1784) refers to a kind of 
patlde as “ paddee Jerroo " as follows : “ In the Lampoon country they make 

a distinction of padde crawang and paddee jerroo, the former of which is a 
month earlier than the latter.” 

I cannot say if word “ jerroo " mentioned by Marsden has any connec- 
tion with the word Jawar or /war. 

Raghukatha Ganesa Navahast.v* (c. a.d. 1640-1712) a friend of 
Saint Ratndas of Maharaslra comprised a work on dietetics called the 
Bhojana-kutuhala (MS No. 591 oj 1899-1915 dated a.c. 1803 in the Govt. 
MSS Library at the B. O. R. Institute, Poona). In the 1st Paricceda of 
this work represented by the above MS l find the varieties of Ydvanala 10 men 
tioned as follows : — 

Folio 5— “ gre re re gw — II ft II 

surest i 

gpqgonqf: II 

3m r <5 i: I It frRPI II 

9. Vide my papers on this author in the Journal of the Bombay University 
Vol. X, pp. 132-140. Annals (B.O.R. Institute) Vol. XXII, 254-263 and Journal 
of S. M. Library , Tan fore, Vol. Ill, pp. 1-12. 

10. A Hindi Court-poet of Sevai Jaising of Amber (a.d. 1699-1743) has com- 
posed a Cookery book (MS No. 1515 of 1891-95 in the Govt. MSS 

Library at B. O. R. Institute. Poona). The name of this poet is 

he composted this work in a.d. 1739. In the following extract he describes the pre- 
parations of and as Current in the royal kitchen : — 

“ aw sraift gift #?? 

sftatt grtt uroft 3t%gqn3 i 
^ sift eiraft =^T«RT Sfojfo i 

aw 

fta fcm &k adsMif 

awr awi sfapr fii ro i O siuni n ” 



147 


ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF JONDHI,A ( Holcus SoTgkum) 


frost g$: I 

*f 5 Sgj^: II II * 11 $ II 
qRsn# us i airft §5r<t ^nafv^f!^ i 
^t: SRrTOt ^Rsfsrqr »ra*i gg^r: 11 n*r 11 ” 


Folio 71 —" 3IPRR5 gs ” 


is mentioned in the following extract :- 
3^ i 


SJK: ll 

ffaSR[: *Wdito[ r^sqtpc l 
if&PFspRt afamswf ii ” 


Tt will be seen from the evidence to be recorded subsequently that Yava- 
nala is a Synonym for Jawar or Jondhla. 


Saoiiu S ( ;n dar ag a n l , a Jain lexicographer who composed his Dhdturatndkara 
in Saiiivat 1680 -A.i). 1624 refers to Ytivandla or Jonndld as follows in 
his lexicon called the Sabdaraludkara ' 1 : — 


(4th Kdntja . verse 257) — 

“ srternm *?5RR5 *j, sum, ftm: *m: n va^ n ” 

In a Marathi document of a.d. 1541 published by the historian Rajawade we 
find Jondhla mentioned as 5^55 ( Jo j ha la ) several times. I reproduce 

one entry from this document as follows 

“ *lg 

minrill. 11*1. 11*1. ” 

Nakamari in his medical glossary called the Rajanighattfu composed in Kash- 
mir c. ax). 1450 refers to Ytivandla and its properties as follows 


Page 360— ( I 

qFRrests* i 

aw n ra ffa^r ww- 11 \c 11 


wjwwMWi. n n ” 


Sugar produced from Yavanala is called Yavartali Sarkard and is mentioned 
by Narahari as follows : — 


Page 91 — « ) 

qFWTcft forfarm fciRt i 
gsR&fcw gw grm u 1U u” 


11. Ed. by Hargovinddas and Bechardaa, Benares (Veera Era 2439). 

12. Vide Sources of Marat ha History (Khagda 17, Document No. 62). 

13. Ed. Anondashram Sanskrit Series, Poona, 1896. 



148 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


King Madanapala of the Ka$ta race, ruling on the banks of the Jumna com- 
posed his medical glossary called the Madananighaitfu u in A.D. 1374. In this 
work he refers to Yavanala and its Synonyms as follows 

Pagt 123 — ‘snwnfctf 

“ TO: It II 
JpPTO: Wpftdt qiTO: q>4>ftvi fa <jL II c\ l| 

Wc have now seen that Sadhu Sundaragapi (a.d. 1624) uses the words qjij^ 
^f3f; for qicRTO and that Madanapala (a.d. 1374) uses the word gjpnjg 
for Hemadri, the famous minister of the Yadavas of Devagiri 

(ad. 1260) composed a commentary called the Ayu < vcdarasayana 1 ' on the 
voluminous medical compendium of Vagbhata II (c. 8th or 9th cent. aj>. ac- 
cording to I-Ioernle) called the Astangahrdaya, in which we find the word 
mentioned 

Sutrasthdna, Chap. 14, verse 21 — 

{< II ^ II 

Hemadri (a.d. 1260) explains in his commentary the word qpt (Jurna) 
used by Vagbhata II as follows : — 

This explanation shows that about 700 years ago the word which 

is given as an equivalent of 5ffcn«sr by Sadhu Sundaragani (a.d. 1624), 
meant ^ a term for Jawdr, which seems to have great antiquity. 

In a.d. 1220 Arunadatta, the Bengali commentator of the Astangahrdaya ex- 
plains the qpt of Vagbhata II (8th or 9th cent ■ a.d.) as follows in his 
commentary Sarvatigasundard : — 

“ 3$: ^ afos: ” 

The variants for in the above line recorded by Vaidya Paradkar 

are and qSHfe*. ” It is clear, therefore, that in 

the 13th century the old word ^ for Jawdr or Jondh}a was known in the 
^gonqq' or the Deccan as and its variants recorded above. 

The testimony of a Bengali commentator of a.d. 1220, which equates qjjj 
with gfPqcH is further confirmed by the Mahanubhava literature of 
c. 1250 a.d. In fact Cakradhara the founder of the Mahanubhava Sect 
was very fond of sffqssr and its preparations. In a work (in Marathi) 
called the composed by Mahindrabhatta, the pupil of Cakradhara, 


14. Ed. (1902, Calcutta) by Ashubodh. 

15. Vide Edition of the Astangahrdaya by Hari Shaslri Paradkar, N. S. Press. 
Bombay, 1938 with my English Introduction on Vagbhata II and his Commentators. 


ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF JONDH^A ( HolCUS Sotgkum ) 149 

there are many references to or Jawar > ® I note below a few pf 

these references from the published edition 17 of ISlaeoritra : — 

Part I, p. 18— “ » 

Part III, p. 76 — “ ;rr sft irraT 

Part IV- p. 48—“ fSpsi ( f^Tc^T ) %?Tf ntflW'MRr qr Ow r ^ffr 3IKlW: 
amiftS srrfft an<npft% ” 

„ — p. 49—“ 3^r sfteft ” 

„ — p. 5i—“ faqfoq *n% ( storkt ) * 15 : at q ra fc %*n^rr 

sit 3 »n?I^ " 

» — p 6 i—“ g®r afa&n% ?r 

ifapft 5RTT5 %55T 3qi^RI 

,. — p. 62—" qiZT qicRJl: anfli: ffRST 

nkipftqtfe qtenqtet: nteidt sRJiig %5Jf : ntaidt aif^rr 

#TtR3Rr JPT nteldt ^T¥I 3mhft5SI: ” 

It is dear from the above extracts that in the Deccan of the 13th century 
the terms afc gs fr or sf ( Holcus Sorghum) and its preparations 
were current. We also note here that the present custom of roasting the 
grain bunches of Sorghum and eating them in the field or at home was also 
current 700 years ago and these roasted grains were known as a 

term for these grains which has survived even to this day. The pastoral life 

16. My friend Prof. D. R. Bendre of the Commerce College, Poona, him brought 
to my notice the following references to *ffoo5r in a Canarese work of the 10th 
Century A.D.: — 

C. 940 A.0.— Canto IX, Verse 84 of W«ikri (or pub- 

lished by Karnalak Sahitya Parishad, Bangalore refers to aftol 
(Jola) : — 

( Dialogue between $<>T and 4 * Setting aside the good deeds of 

the Lord (his chief gzffqw) and being false to afts can one live 
thereafter? ” ( Here 3fto5 — Jawar ) . 

Canto X , 42 (A soldier proceeding to the battlefield observes): — “How 
shall I repay if I don't kill so many horses and elephants ” 
(Here ^55 —Jawar). 

I am thankful to Prof. Bendre for these references. 

17* gfo B Mftq by H. N. Nene, Parts I and II (1986) ; Part III and IV (1937), 
Nagpur. Cakradhara was' contemporary of King Kanharadcva (ad. 1247-60) and 
King Mahadeva (a.d. 1266-71) of Devagiri. Hemadri was the minister of kings 
Mahadeva and Ramachandra of Devagiri. In another Mahanubhava work 
fgRTS (by H. N. Nene, 1936) there are references to on pp. 18 and 38. 



150 


B, C. LAW VOLUME 


in the Deccan has not changed very much so far as the crop of Jondhja and 
its uses arc concerned. The custom of preparing or omelets from 

the flour of JondhJa was also then current though we now prepare them from 
the flour of gram. This custom is worth renewing even in cities as Jawar is 
now selling at 4 seers a rupee while it was sold at 80 seers a rupc-e as observed 
by Edward Moor in a.d. 1790. In the encyclopaedic Sanskrit work called the 
Manasolldsa ls composed by king Somesvara or Bhulokamalla (a.d. 1116-1127) 
there is a section on Hunting ( ) > n which the use of a jawar grain- 
bunch (or as we call to-day) is prescribed for feeding the 

deer as follows : — 

p. 282 — •* sn q s ngrei ^igw i^piP t ” 

Kcsavasviimi in his lexicon N (tndrthdrnara-sankxepa (a.d. 12th century 19 ) 
mentions and sffarar ' n tlie following line : — 

P. 118— “ 5 5?tar55I II Ol II ” 

In a Canarese inscription 2 " of a.d. 1166 we find a reference to com merchants 
and jwdri as follows : — 

P. 110-- “ All these chief merchants not minding any tax granted to 
glorious God Ccnnakesava jwdri of one spoon (Saffuga) from each 
shop” (lines 50-53 of the Inscription). 

Canarese Scholars will be easily able to record earlier references to jawar 
from literature and other sources (before a.d. 1166) and I earnestly request 
them to do so. 

From the Deccan and Karnataka of the 12th century we now turn to 
Gujarat in search of the history of jawar. We find that Hemacandra, the 
great Acarya of the Jainas (a d. 1089-1 173' 1 ) who lived at Patan in Gujarat 
composed a lexicon of Desi words called the Destndmamald in which we find 
the words “ 5 jto<rf% 3 n ” and corresponding to the modern words 

jfjqasi and 3 ^ respectively as will be seen from the following 
extracts : — 

Page 151 — “ 11 ^ 11 


18. Ed. in G. (>. Series, Baroda, Vol. II (1939). 

19. Vide p. 118 of Classical Sanskrit Literature by Krishnamachariar 1937 - 

“ viMwI'fc composed in the 12lh Century.” 

20. Vide p. 110 of Inscriptions in Northern Karnataka and the Kolhapur State 
by Prof. K. G‘. Kundangar, Rajaram College;, Kolhapur, 1939.-- Date of Inscription 
No. 13 in which the reference to jtvari occurs is Suka 1088 - a.d. 1166 ( Tuesday , 
6th July). 

21. Vide my paper on Mammafa and Hemacandra ( Journal of Tanjore S. M. 
Library . Vol. I, No. 1, pp. 9*13). 



ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OK JONDHLA ( HolctlS Sorghum) 151 

i i >h|giiQ $i*#sfo ^ ^ u iwi* 
5ftuui«sSlM ^urBf i 

SRRT ifell 3<$«R II x^ II 

Hemacandra (in the 12th century) states that the word jfarft is also a 
desya word like #0TBarr. I f this statement is correct we have to regard both 
these words as dialect words current in Hemacandra’s time with some anti- 
quity behind them as Hemacandra has based his Desmamaniald on some 
earlier DesT lexicons now lost to us.- 2 

We have already seen that Madanapala mentions the word sjoftg for 
Jondhala. We shall see later that this word is very old. In fact it is used in 
the earliest medical text known as Carakasamhita. Cakrapanidatta 
{ a.d. 1060) a Bengali commentator explains the term et sjonif ” as equivalent 
to jfhir^ a word current in his time in Bengal. I have found two refer- 
ences to “ ” in the. Carakasamhita .- M which may be recorded here :•••■ 

Page 111 -Sulrasthdna, Chap. 21, verse 25 — 

“ sariclw fspi^ y n u rer mv. i 

^®nw: f5s?*n5i n v\ » 

Page 149—sutrasthdna, Chap. 27. verse 17 — 


22. lJcmaaindra composted a Sanskrit lexicon called the 

in which he notes the synonyms of t ---Jawar) as follows : — 

Page 475 - I Edition of arfqtqHf^rrqior, with a separate index volume) 

( x ) ^i, versc 244 "- 

“ #195: I 

sjjikqt zfcm #5igftq^i n ?>xx ii ” 

Hemacandra writes his own commentary on the above lines as follows : — 

"3JTOT ^ q is wrer tlcHltf: i» 1 ii 

^ #155: “ *J155” ( 3®ir ) 

ii && #nc*rer ii ^ ii 

‘3Rf% SKM’ Sjyfc “#RS$$rT:” l| x ll x II ll 

si^Rt., 3$ ^ ^<nfor. i» \ ii 

5RPL 3955 ^31 SlfrwireT II ^ ll 

#!F5R <pww #sgf#w ii 

23. Ed. by Nimayasagar Press, Bombay, 1922— The B. O. R. Institute Govt. 

MS No. 66 oj 1872-73 wrongly called 3TfK^4re%Hf is in fact Cakrapapidatta's 
comm. onSR^fefTT —folio 149— ajyft# #1H ” 



152 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Cakrapanidatta explains : — 

“ ^ner: ” — “ sfcn* ” « a variant in MS. No. 66 

of 1872-73. 

In the vernacular names of Jauiar given by Watts in his Dictionary (p. 290 
of Vol. VI, Part III) we find the following names which come phonetically 
near to gfapr of a.d. 1060 : —(Hindi) —Janera ; (Bengali) — Kasa- 
jotiar ; (N. W. P. and Oudh)— junri ; (PB) -junri ; Watt here records some 
other usages as follows : — 

(1) Burmese — Pyoung : (2) Ziuna ( '- Sanskritized form of the Arabic 
name Dhura), Yavandla, rakta Khurnah ( Sanskrit ) ; (Arabic) — Dhura 
(zfira), team, jaivars ( -smaller millet), dhurat ; (Egypt)-- Kaydi dmra ; 
(Chinese) — Kao liang ( -tall millet) 

Yadavaprakdsa (c. '1050 A.D.) in his lexicon 1 refers to jawdr 

or jonndld as follows : — 


24. Ibid., p. Ill - footnote 3 explaining the term in verse 25 of Chap 

21 of Sutrasthdna records the following explanation of SjOlfc^ as given by fe^f*T 
a later commentator of Caraka : — 

%•- ” ( ). 

We have already seen that Aruna or Arunadatta explains the word ijoi **> 
in The variants of this are 3Tt*n*5$, and 

The variant mentioned by T5jcp?Tflis an addition to these variants 

of Arunadatta’s text. 

25. The Prakrit Dictionary called “ Paia-Sudda-Mahannavo " Calcutta. 1923*28 
(p. 448) records the following usages' of vg3flft (juari) : — 

A.D. 1143 — (i) lVide p. 546 of cd. by Har Govinddas, Bena- 

res, 1918-19.} 

c. AJ). 1090 — (ii) t Vide (Paricceda I, Gatha 7.) published by 

Benares, 1916.1 

We have already noted and recorded as' Desi words by 

Hemacandra. g3ff^ and sftaTft are synonymous. 

About the dates of the two Jain works referred to above I not*- nere the remarks 
of Winternitz, Indian Literature , Vol. II, Calcutta University. 

Page 576 — “ A voluminous Prakrit poem Sapdsanaha- Car iyarn by Lak^mana Gaijin 
deals with the Story of the Seventh Tirthakara. This work, composed in the 
year 1143 a.d. al3o contains 68 Apabhramsa verses.” 

Page 536-- 1 Surasundafx-cariam by Dhanesvara, the pupil of Jine§varasuri and 
Buddhisagarasuri written towards the end of the 11th century is a voluminous 
romantic epic in Prakrit.’' 

26. Ed. by Gustav Oppert.. 1893. 



ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF JONDH^A ( Holcus Sorghum) 153 

“ — ^sm: ii v: n 

^ipt %n5sr u 

Hemacandra's lines in the Abhidhanacinlammii quoted by me already are 
exactly identical with the above lines in the Vaijayanti. Evidently Hema- 
candra (a.d. 1089-1173) has borrowed from Vaijayanti (c. a.d. 1050) or from 
some common source. 

It is clear, however, from the statements of llemacandra and Yadava- 
prakasa that the following terms were used about a.d. 1000 for modem Jawdr 
or Jondh\d : — 

or 2R*fl55, 3TfaT3T, ^fsigfareiT, 

3|™TI?«3TT, %lft, 33TTft 

It is for linguists to see how far Hemacandra’s grammatical explanation of the 
synonyms of jawdr such as “ qiairar 35RI&: ” etc. are historically 

correct. 

Going backwards from a.d. 1000 we lind that in a Tamil work of the 8th 
century a.d. the jawdr is referred to as Irungu ■ The modem word in Tamil 
for jawdr is Colam. Irungu is mentioned in Jivakacintamarii of the 8th cen- 
tury A.D .- 7 

Vagbhata II (8th or 9th century a.d. according to Iloemle) refers 1 ® to 
both sjtfi and qpiNjl * as synonyms for jawdr as follows 

(1) Chap. 14, verse 21- 

“ 11 ’xi u” 

(2) Chap. 7, verse 46 (This verse is taken from a j gi ifffa g 
^[RWf Cha P- VIII). 

" n v* n " 

I have already recorded the explanations of Arunadatta and Hemadri regard * 

27. In response to my inquiry about Tamil references to jawdr my friend Rao 
Bahadur K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar of Madras writes to me under date 16th 
August 1943 : — 

“Mr. V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar, m.a. whom I had consulted writes as 
follows : — 

So far as I know Colum is a modern word. 

It was known in mediaeval literature as Irungu. The Sangham classic do not 
mention it nor the Silappadkikaram nor the Kural . The earliest reference is in 
fwakacintamani, 8th century a.d/’ 

I am thankful to my ever obliging friends Rao Bahadur Aiyangar and Prof. 
Dikshitar for the above information. 

28. Vide Paradkar’s edition of the Atfangahidaya already referred to in this 
paper. 




154 


B. C. I,AW VOLUME 


ing the meaning of the term gjdy used by Vagbhata II and hence they need 
not be repeated here. 


Vagbhata I (c. a. a <>25 according to Hoernle) refers to jaw dr as “sjojfiS ” 
in the following line of arepT&T?, fgSRSTR Chap. 7. verse 12 — ( 




I1 II 


(See Chap. 8— “ igjnfg etc." 


Unfortunately the commentator on the does not explain the 

word ^Qf[g in the above line. . .He merely states ” It is, how- 

ever, clear that the term ^OTtsg was known to Vagbhata in the 7th cen- 
tury A.l>. 


In a Jain Prakrit work called the Tiloyapannutti " ( Trilokaprajhapii ) 
which belongs to the first stratum of the pro-canon of the Digambaras and 
the author of which Jadivasaiia is a revered author of antiquity we find a 
reference to jatvdr as srrfUTR (Sanskrit ) as follows : 

.Page 157— “ ^FROIf^ m jpft PlgHTOW ^ I 

S'4° 5 lt 5 ?li in 3 3 II ” 

The editors identify arjjujres with “ (sfsrrc ) ” M in their Hindi 

translation' 1 of the above stanza, which includes amongst the best 

kinds of grain like wheat etc. The Tiloyapmwalti is assigned to the 5th 
century a. I), by some scholars. At any rate this reference to jrqurfft ( ) 

is very important, recorded as it is in a Prakrit text of great antiquity, incor- 
porating the hereditary knowledge and ancient tradition of the Jainas pertain- 
ing to Jaina cosmography, dogmatics, mythology and chronology. 

I have already recorded two references to Tjofig in the Car aka saw hi trig- 
one of the earliest medical texts. According to Buddhist tradition Caraka 


29. Kd. by Pt. Pamachandra Siiasln Kinjavadeknr. Chilrashala Pres*. Poona, 

1940, with the commentary called by SpJ. 

30. Ed. by Dr. A. N. Upadhye and Prof, H. L. Jain, Pub. by the Jain Sariis- 
kriti Samraksaka Sangha, Sholapur, 1943, with Hindi Translation by Pt. Balcbandra. 

31. 'Phis translation reads : 

“■ 

wrcer 3 ?i*t snwrfa t 5t*k sntwr m t m^n ” 

32. Vide p. 33 of Aryan Medical Science by Thakorc Sahib of Gondal (London, 

1896) — “Some believe him ( ) to have been bom at Benares 320 years b.c.” — 

Pt. Durga&hankar K. Shastri (in his History of Ayurveda in Gujarati, Ahmedabad, 
1942, p. 87) makes' 5th century a.d. as the latest, limit for the chronology of early 
Ayurveda Samkitds. He also states that Carakasamhitd and Susrutasamhitu were 
completed before 5th Cent, a.d, (i.e. before a.d. 400 or so). 



155 


ANTIQUITY OK JAWAR OF JONDHLA ( HolcUS Sorghum ) 

was the court physician of King Kanaka ' 1 who is assigned by some scholars to 
the period a.d. 125-140. Whatever be the exact date of the Carakasamhita, 
the fact of its being one of the earliest medical texts before a.d. 400 or so is 
acknowledged by many scholars and consequently we may regard the term 
“ ogoifs *' as the earliest usage of this term for jawar or jondhla so far known. 
As regards the other synonym for jawar viz. rppqa which occurs in the 
Prakrit work of about the 5th century a.d. as I have to record 

its usage in another earliest medical text, the where it appears 

as “ nnH f aS ” as will be seen from the following extract : - 

Page 48 of Bhelasamhita (ed. by Asutosh Mookerjee, Calcutta Univer- 
sity, (1921) yfrsraftft — 

“ l 

^ II 

^ arrrrtgnrr: ( Ifa )#r ( i: ) i 

an? ( jprarat ^ ii 

qfRsnoS * It mti i 

as )&£)%( ffg wifir siftfowt H ” 

The mention of qiqqi® and its properties along with those of other gains 
like jpw ap ^4 etc. in the Bhelasamhita indicates that afiqq rs is the name 
of a grain known to Bhela. the pupil of anipi (6th cent. b.c.). : i « Atreya 
had six pupils “ each of wlrom is reputed to have committed to writing the 
teaching of the master in the form of a or compendium.” So far three 

of these Sarhhitas have been discovered. They are tji^dl, > n the 

form of the redaction by (2) ' e d- by Aslmtosh Mookerjee) 

and (3) * recently published by Rajaguru Pandit Hemaraj of 

Nepal. If the tradition about the Atreya school of medicine is correct we 
have to regard the as earlier than the srftr^l^ctr preserved in the 

form of and published by the N. S. Press, Bombay. There is a 

divergence of views about the chronology of these Sanihitas, which go by the 
names of Cmaka, Bhela and Kdsyapa. It is, however, agreed to by all 
scholars that they are the earliest medical treatises that have come down to 
us from antiquity. 

33. Vide p. 256 of Vincent Smith’s Early History of India. Oxford, 1914 — 
Kaniska came to the throne "most probably in 7 S a.i>.” Dr. Fleet thinks that 
Kaniska came to the throne “ in 58 B.C." 

Dr. Dinesh Chandra Sircar states that Asvagho^a is said to have been a con- 
temporary of Kaniska. Asvaghasa’s Buddhacarilu was translated into Chinese 
between 444 and 421 A.D. (Vide pp. 379 and 389 of Successors of Satavahanas. 
Calcutta, 1939). If the tradition about Caraka's connection with Kaniska is correct 
the date of Caraka is evidently before a.d. 400. 

34. Vide prefatory Note to Bhelasarirhita by Sir Ashutosh Mookerji. 

35. Published, Nimaya Sagar Press, Bombay. 1938. 



156 


B. t. LAW VOLUME 


Starting from a.d. 1839 we have now moved backward through centuries 
of the history of Jawar ( Holcus Sorghum ) and have reached the first few 
centuries of the Christian era, when this grain appears to have been cultivated 
and used by our ancestors and when also its properties were studied and re- 
corded by the earliest medical writers of those centuries. If this view based 
on the data recorded in detail in this paper is accepted we may be able to 
understand the significance of the following remarks of Lassen 36 about the 
introduction of jawar into Italy in the 1st century of the Christian era : — 

“ Another Indian cereal Milium was not exported from India it is true : 
but on the other hand its cultivation was introduced into Italy ten years before 
Pliny wrote this passage (Periplus Mar. Eryther p. 32). It is probably the 
kind of millet very common in India which botanists call Holcus Sorghum and 
the Indians guari or gawar in the vernacular.” 

As Pliny, the Roman author flourished between A.t». 2,7 and 79 and as 
there was contact of India with Rome in this century the probability of the 
cultivation of Indian jawar in Italy as suggested in the above extract cannot 
be ruled out in a summary way. In fact Prof. Franklin Edgerton :,f of the 
Yale University ( U. S. A . ) has found a reference to the city of Rome in the 
Sabhaparvan of the Mahabharala which he has critically edited for the 
B. O. R. Institute Critical Edition of this Great Epic of India. 

The history of plants, especially when these plants have migrated from 
their original habitat to different regions of the globe, is necessarily interwoven 
with the history of the different people who cultivated them in remote ages of 
the history of the globe. I am quite incapable of getting access to the sources 
of the history of all these people and must confine my studies to such of these 
sources as are available to me easily. Even this study of the history of the 
jawar must remain only as a sketch of this history made by a 
shaking hand on too big a canvas stretching from 2200 B.c. to a.d. 1850. 
The chronology of the sources from which I have drawn my data is somewhat 
definite for sources later than a,d. 1000 but only relative so far as sources 
earlier than a.d. 1000 are concerned. However, in the present stage of our 
chronology we have no other recourse but to represent only the current views 
about them, leaving it to future scholars to solve the problems of early chrono- 
logy on the strength of their own studies of the present sources and in the 
light of new sources, if discovered hereafter. 

About the several problems that arise out of the present collection of 
data bearing on the history of Jawar it is better to defer our judgment. We 
have no direct peep into remote antiquity and consequently the gleams of 

36. Vide Lassen's! History (English Trans, in the Journal of the Bihar and 
Orissa Research Society, Patna, Vol. X, 1924, Page 253. 

37. Vide pp. 262-266 of the Journal of the American Oriental Society Vol. 58. 



157 


ANTIQUITY OF JAWAR OF JONDH^A {HolcUS Sorghum ) 

light that are furnished by a few documentary references are the only guides 
that help us to clarify the age-long history of this edible grain which may 
have been cultivated in India even prior to the Aryan invasion as observed 
by Watts in his Dictionary of Economic Products of India. 

The following chronological table will show at a glance the evidence 
collected in this paper regarding the antiquity of Jondhald or jawar : — 


Chronology 


Evidence 

J = Jondhl a or Jawar ( Holcus Sorghum ) 


B. C. 2200 j Evidence about the existence of J furnished by an Egyp- 
tian tomb (Swanson and Laude). 

J ( = qpRIol ) mentioned in one of the earliest 

medical treatises like the and 

J referred to in the Bible according to Smith ( History of 
Bible Plants , p. 214 ). 

A. d. 100—200 J ( = Mentioned in 

J ( = ? an Indian Cereal Milium ) introduced into Rome 
in the time of Pliny ( A. d. 23-79 ) according to Lassen. 

A. D. 200 — 300 J Cultivated in China, where it was probably introduced 

from outside. 

400—500 J ( = 3OTHRJ = ) mentioned in fifcsfaqsrfa of srf&w? 

a Jain author. 

C. 625 J ( ) mentioned in 3tspi3?lf of Vagbhata I. 

700 — 800 J ( - mentioned in the Tamil work 

1050 J ( = srnrcia, 3jvnif!i f kplTO, etc.) mentioned 

by 

8th or 9th Cent. J ( - 3jpt) mentioned in the of Vagbhata II. 

A. D. 1060 J ( = sjyfiil = ) mentioned by a Bengali 

commentator of 

C. 940 J ( = ) mentioned in Canarese work <TPHTOci. 

1089-1173 J ( = #wri?53n, aspires, qtos, 

etc. ) mentioned by in ktffawnsr and arf*rai*t- 

1090 J ( = sjanft ) mentioned in a Prakrit work 
1100-1200 J ( = 2MHR5, #5TR5f ) in s f WraMf # ? Of 

1116-1127 J [ = an^ns (#*Rl)] mentioned by Some£vara in his 

tTFTOtpSW. 



153 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Chronology 


Evidence 

J -Jondlha or Jawdr ( Holcus Sorghum ) 


1143 J (=33Tlft) mentioned in the Prakrit work gqr*Rl5^TC3T. 

1166 J mentioned in a Canarese inscription. 

1220 J ( — in ^fepJTFPT ) mentioned by Bengali 

author in his Comm, on ( variants of 

are 5lt$554v ). 

C. 1250 J ( = 5rfa®[, ) mentioned in 5?I55Rf{5j and 

^qi$ ( Mahanubhava texts ). 

C. 1260 J ( = ) mentioned by Hemadri in his Comm, 

on the signify. 

1374 J ( = *PRI9, etc. ) mentioned in the 

a medical glossary by U<4<n<4. 

C. 1450 J ( - aficfifi55 ) described in the rnrftsprj of (in 

Kashmir ). 

1541 J ( 3al?j3 ) mentioned in a Marathi document along with 
hf and g(t. 

1590 J grown in Khandesh { Ain-i-Akbari ) . 

1624 J ( ^?fr, ^ ) mentioned by Sadhusundara- 
gani in his 

C. 1650 J ( qi5plT55 ) described by Raghunalha Navahasta friend 

of Ramdas Saint in his Bhojana-Kutuhala. 

1739 J used in the royal Kitchen of Sevai Jaising of Jaipur 
( Rajput ana ). 

1760 “ Jouari ” ( reference quoted in Hobson-} obson ). 

1784 “ Jerroo" a Kind of Paddy in Sumatra mentioned by 

Marsden 

1790 Description of J by Capt. Edward Moor. 

1800 “ Jowarry ” {Hobson-J obson reference). 

1813 “Juarree” ( Hobsonjobson reference). 

1819 “Joiwaree ” ( Hobson-J obson ). 

1826 “ joanee " {Hobson-J obson). 

1839 Description of J by John Graham in his work on 
Bombay Plants. 



CAN WOMEN PERFORM SRAUTA SACRIFICES 
OF THEIR OWN ACCORD ? 

By 

Dr. D. R. BHANDARKAR, m.a., ph.d., f.r.a.s.b. 

Recently I have begun to revise my article on “ Dekkan of the Sata- 
vahana Period ” which f contributed to the Indian Antiquary a quarter of a 
century ago. In that connection the Nanagh&t Inscription of Naganika is 
engaging rny sfxx'ial attention. She is here credited with having alone per 
formed a number of Vedic sacrifices, and as Buhler has, I now think, correctly 
interpreted ; and not her husband Satakarni, in association with her consort, 
Naganika, as l then wrongly thought. Rapson practically agrees with Buhler 
in saying that the inscription is a record of sacrifices performed and donations 
made by Queen Naganika, the wife of king Satakarni, acting apparently as 
regent during the minority of her son Vedisri. Buhler however admits that 
according to the Sastras women are not allowed to offer Srauta sacrifices but 
that disabilities attaching to the sex were moved by the fact that the queen 
must, have been ruling as guardian ol her son, the prince Vedisri. The con- 
clusion is agreed to by Rapson 5 though he does not adduce any reason in 
support of it..* But is it permissible for a woman or even a queen to perform 
Vedic sacrifices according to the Smritis ? Manu, e g. does not allow even the 
initiation of women. “ The nuptial ceremony ” says he ” is stated to be the 
Vedic sacrament for women (and to be equal to the initiation), serving the 
husband (equivalent) to the residence in (the house of the) teacher, and the 
household duties (the same as the daily) worship of the sacred fire.” 1 * 3 Else- 
where he says : M For women there is no sacramental rite with sacred texts— 
thus the law is settled. Women, being destitute of knowledge and not conver- 
sant with Vedic texts.”- Nevertheless, when the Manu-smnti was being com- 
piled, women did sometimes perform sacrifices. Why else should Manu lay 
down that “a Brahman must never eat at a sacrifice that is offered by one who 
is not a Srotriya, or by a village priest (grdtna-ydjin) or by a woman . . ”? 4 
Thus Manu places a woman on the same footing as a non-Srotriya, i.e. “ a man 
who is a Brahman but is not conversant with Vedic literature.” Both, it 
seems, were in the habit of performing sacrifices in the time of Manu. But 
who could have performed sacrifices for them ? Is this possible for anybody 
who is not a specialist in sacrificial knowledge and practice ? He must surely 


1. Cat. Ind. Coits , Andhras, W. Ksat tafias. Intro, pp. XX and XLV. 

2 Manu-smrti , II, 67. 3. Ibid., IX. 18. 

4. Ibid., IV. 305. 



160 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


be a Brahman, and, I am afraid, for that specialisation, a Srotriya also. 
Manu-smriti was composed or was in the making when Hindu society was in 
a transitional state. At one time Manu is made to say that ‘ for women there* 
is no sacramental/ and at another time he admits that women can perform 
sacrifices though no Brahman shall eat at these sacrifices. 

We shall now turn our attention to another section of Sanskrit Literature, 
namely, to the Srauta-sutras, which deal with sacrificial literature, and which 
alone are the authority on the subject whether a woman is entitled to perform 
a Vedic sacrifice in her individual capacity. These are the Purva-mimamsa 
sutras composed by Jaimini alias Badarayana and commented upon by 
Sabara-svamin. Anybody who reads Mimanisa- d arson a t VI, i, 3, 6-16 will be 
convinced that woman is perfectly entitled to the performance of any iSrauta 
sacrifice. The opposition is here led by AitiSayana. It is very difficult to 
say whether he was a Smrtikara at all. But he leads the opposition by saying 
that in the Vedic text Darsa-Purna-masabhyam svarga-kamo yajeta . the word 
svargarkamo is in the masculine gender ; therefore man, not woman, can per- 
form a sacrifice. Badarayana, that is, Jainini, answers this question by saying 
that the term svarga-kama denotes a collective class consisting of persons who 
have the one characteristic of possessing the desire to attain Heaven by means 
of a sacrifice without any distinction being made between the individuals 
constituting that class. Hence even women are understood by that term and 
included in that class. 

Many other arguments have been advanced against the capacity of 
women to perform Vedic sacrifices. One such argument, the most important 
of them, is that wealth is necessary for performing sacrifices and that men 
are possessed of this wealth, whereas women are not. Women are like chattels 
as they are liable to be sold and bought. They are sold by fathers and 
bought by husbands. They have thus no right to the property (if their fathers 
or to that of their husbands. The Vedic texts say that “ a hundred chariots 
shall be given to the guardian of the bride : and (in the Arsha form of mar- 
riage) one ox and one cow This is apparently a price to induce the bride's 
father to part with his daughter and cannot be construed as a religious act. 
Again, it may be urged that a woman may perform sacrifices with wealth 
which she has earned by cooking food for others or by savings from the food 
given her. But as she is another's property, the acquisitions must belong to 
him. Whatever she does is in the service of her husband Whatever may 
thus be acquired by her belongs to her husband. The Smrti has it : “A 
wife, a slave and a son have no property of their own. Whatever they earn 
is the wealth of the man to whom they belong/' 

Such is the line of argument urged by the exponents of the opposite view. 
Badarayaijta begins the reply with the curt remark that so long as the earnest- 
ness to obtain the fruit of the performance of a sacrifice is common to both 



CAN WOMEN PERFORM SRAUTA SACRIFICES OF THEIR OWN ACCORD? 161 

males and females, it presupposes the capacity of a woman to own wealth. 
If^-by slavishly conforming to the Smrti, woman is made a dej>endent upon 
others and considered destitute of all wealth, then obviously the Smrti is in 
conflict with Sruti. This is not right, this is not just. Therefore, if she is 
desirous of the fruit of performing a sacrifice, she ought to set the Smrti at 
naught, possess herself of wealth and perform a sacrifice. Surely it is im- 
possible to see a greater disregard shown to the Smrti when it is pitted against 
the Sruti. But, as a matter o! fact, women are possessed of wealth, says 
Badarayana. Thus at the time of marriage when the bride is presented to 
the bridegroom, the latter enters into the following agreement with the father 
of the bride ; dharme chdrthe cha kanie cha ndtich rilavyd, “ she shall not 
be thwarted in the performance of religious acts ( dharma ), the acquisition of 
wealth ( art ha ) and the fulfilment of legitimate desires ( kuma ).” When 
therefore the Sm;*tis speak of the incapacity of the wife to possess wealth, that 
is very unjust and is antagonistic to the Sruti. Again, what is called the 
purchase of a girl, is not a purchase at all. Tt is a religious act, pure and 
simple. In the case, of a purchase there is always the variation of price. The 
gift of a hundred chariots ( satamatiratham ) does not vary and is a constant 
quantity whether the girl is beautiful or not beautiful, £abara-svami remarks 
that this may be a sale in conformity with the Smrtis but is opposed to the. 
Srutis. The Srauta School therefore disapproves of it, and stands fast to the 
conclusion that the girls are not sold. There are Vedic texts also in sup- 
port of the proposition that women have the capacity of owning and posses- 
sing wealth. -Sahara quotes at least two. But this much is certain, says he, 
that woman is the owner of pf/rinayya, ‘ property received by her at the time 
of marriage.' Sahara further remarks : fiatyaiva gatamanunmiaw kriyate . 
"even that, which is acquired by the husband is admitted (as hers)." 

What is the upshot of the above discussion ? The woman according to 
the Srutis not only can have her own wealth but can also participate in the 
possession of her husband’s wealth. She is neither bought nor sold at any 
time of marriage. And if she has but the desire of attaining the fruit of a 
Srauta sacrifice, she can very well do so alone and on her own behalf or jointly 
with her husband if both so will it. If there is any Smrti which lays down 
an ordinance to the contrary, it has to be ignored, disregarded and completely 
set at naught. If such was once the srate of things, it is no wonder if Naga- 
nika, wife of Satakarni, could perform not one or two but several Srauta 
sacrifices and make any number of donations in money, elephants, kine and 
so forth, as is quite clear to any scholar who studies the Najjeighat Cave Ins- 
criptions.^ After Naganika not a single inscription has been found describing 
the celebration of Vedic sacrifices by any queen or woman. But that there 
was Brahmanic revival can scarcely be doubted. And we find numbcr.s of 
kings and princes performing Srauta sacrifices. It is possible that their queens 
may have joined their husbands in these celebrations. 

12 



162 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


Now, that remark of Sabarasvamin quoted above requires further con- 
sideration in this connection, viz. paty-mva galam—anumatath kriyate, 
"even that which is acquired by the husband is admitted (us hets ) This 
can best be put to the test in the case of political rule or sovereignty. Are 
they co-partners or joint owners of a kingdom or both ? Not far removed 
in time from Queen Naganilca was her descendant Gautamiputra Satakanji 
whose Nasik Cave Inscription No. 5 contains an order to Samaka ( Syamaka ) . 
the Officer at Govardhana. It is really a copy of the grant of a fresh plot of 
land he issued to the Buddhist monks staying in his Cave, in lieu of the old 
one which had become uncultivabltv’ That the original was a tegular deed 
of grant may be seen from the fact that the text bristles with fiscal terms and 
contains at the. end the name of the engraver and the date of the original 
donation and the actual execution. But who issues this order to the office! 
at Govardhana ? Not Gautamiputra Satakanji by himself, but he and his 
wife together. She has been therein called not only jivasuta (one whose son 
is living) but also rnjam/itii , the king's mother, the latter two epithets obviously 
referring to her son Vasishthiputra Pujumavi, who was then a ruler. This 
clearly shows that Gautamiputra and his wife were both at least co- partners 
in the Aatavahana sovereignty. But could arty one of them issue a grant 
separately in his, or. above all. on her own, name without, reference' to the 
other party? It is true that no such instance; is forthcoming 
from the Sata vahana period. But. about the middle of the seventh 
century belong two grants issued by Vijaya-mahadevI, wife of Chandraditya. 
who was the elder brother of the Chalukya overlord Vikramaditya of Badanu. 
We have not one. but two copper plate charters issued by her. 5 6 These grants 
she has made independently and without the ratification of her husband or 
their suzerain Vikramaditya. And what is most noteworthy is that immedi- 
ately after mentioning her name as Vijaya-bhaparika, the favourite crown- 
queen of Prthvl-vallabka Mahihuja Chandraditya, has b»?cn sjxtcified 
the date of the charter as follows ; sva-rdjya-panchama-sathvalsara Asvaryuja- 
pammmmya dviliyiiydrit vishuve , 7 8 The first part of this phrase has been 
rightly rendered by Fleet as “ in the fifth year of her reign.” Evidently the year 
of her reign is to be taken as also the year of her husband’s — the joint reign of 
her husband and herself. Vijaya-bhat:!arika and Chandraditya must thus be 
taken as ruling together so that the regnal year of one can be the same as 
that of the other. From the details of this date Kielhorn has calculated it as 
equivalent to 23rd September a.d. 659.* The fifth regnal year of Vijaya- 
bhattarika raises one question, namely, whether there is any other evidence 

5. E. /.. Vol. VIII. p. 73. 

6. /. A., Vol. VII, p. 164, 11. 13-15 ; Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 46,11. 15-18. 

7. Ibid.. Vol. VII. p. 161. 11. 15-16. 

8. List of Inse. South Jnd. No. 23. 



CAN WOMEN PERFORM SRAUTA SACRIFICES OF THEIR OWN ACCORD? 163 

to show that the king and the queen reigned conjointly. Attention may in 
this connection be drawn to the Bankapura Inscription of Saka 977 when the 
Kadamba chieftain Harikesarideva is represented as administering the Bana- 
vasi twelve-thousand, not alone and by himself, but in conjunction with his 
wife Lachchaladevi. 9 Here is thus another epigraphic instance of husband 
and wife jointly ruling over a kingdom. 

That a queen could even uptil the end of the eighth century issue the 
grant of a village as crowned queen is clear from the Jetfiawai Plates of Sila- 
mahadevi. 10 She has been described as Paramesvarl Paramabhalfdrikd $rt- 
Silamahadevi, 1 ' the great queen of Paramabha[ldraka M aharajadhiraja Parame- 
ivara Dharavarsha alias Dhruvarajadeva, who was a Ra$trakuta sovereign. 
And she was the daughter of the East Chalukya King Vishnuvardhana IV 
of Vengl. Now, what about Silamahadevi ? Were her titles Paramesvari 
ParamabhaUdrikd empty and unmeaning ? In the prose portion of tlie record 
which sets forth the details of the grant, she herself and alone issues orders 
to the officers concerned with the grant just as every donor king does. Thus 
at the end of the record, the Diitaka and the officer who drew up the grant 
are represented as carrying out their respective duties according to the orders, 
not of Dhruvaraja but of Sila-mahadevi. And further there is absolutely 
nothing in the draft of the charter which indicated that any approval or sanc- 
tion was ever accorded to the grant by Dhruvaraja. This indubitably demon- 
strates what Sabara-svamin says,— namely, paty-aiva gaUim^anumaiam 
kriyate, “even that which the husband acquires is admitted (as hers).” 

Things were different in the twelfth century a.d. and especially in North 
India. An entirely different procedure seems to have been followed e.g. in 
the case of the Gahadavala family. Thus Govindachandra of this dynasty 
had two PaUamahddevi mahdrajni, one Nayanakelidevi, and the other Gosala- 
dtvi. Both were Fattamahadevi but apparently not at one and the same 
time, because the first issues her grant in V. 1176 and the V. 1208. Though 
they were thus palta-mahddevi and are described sawsla-raja-kriy-opald 
which Kielhorn renders by “ endowed with all royal prerogatives ”, they are 
represented to have issued the grants, says the king, asmat-sammalya, that is, 
“ with the express approval of myself (Govindachandra) ”. 12 Husband and 
wife were neither co-partners nor joint owners of any kingdom or, for the 
matter of that, of any property in the twelfth century a.d. Smrti domination 
was complete at least from this century onwards, in North India. Woman 
became a chattel in every sense of the term. 


9. E.I., Vol. XIII. pp. 168, 171 (1.28) and 174. 

10. Ibid., Vol. XXII. pp. 98 and ff. 

11. Ibid., Vol. IV. pp. 108 ff. ; Vol. V. pp. 117ff. 

12. See c.g. E l., Vol. IV. p. 109, 1.19. 



SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON GUPTA COINAGE 

By 

Dr. RADHA KUMUD MOOKERJI, M.A.. p.r.s., ph.d. 

Gupta coinage forms an important branch of Indian Numismatics and 
presents many interesting features some of which have not been properly 
noticed. 

As is well known, Gupta coinage owes its origin to some kind of foreign 
influence. Samudragupta has the credit of inaugurating the Gupta gold cur- 
rency. It may be presumed that he acquired abundance of gold from his 
Digvijaya. or conquests in different directions, and this gold he utilized in issu- 
ing gold coins. The course of his conquests brought him into contact with 
the remnants of the retreating Kushan power in the Panjab and in the North 
West, and also with their coinage from which he acquired its technique. 

Thus the first Gupta coins started as imitations of Kushan coins and of 
their foreign features. But Samudragupta and the artists and craftsmen of 
Northern India in those days were not wanting in their own ideas and in- 
ventiveness on the subject of money-making, and were thinking of ways and 
means by which they might produce coins bearing genuinely indigenous Indian 
features. The foreign features with which the Gupta coins were inaugurated 
were gradually replaced by Indian features in their later coins. Thus 
Samudragupta has the unique credit that he both inaugurated and Indianized 
Gupta coinage. 

The degree of Indianization shown in the Gupta coins is thus also the key 
to their chronology. 

Samudragupta has shown his numismatic genius and inventiveness by 
issuing as many as eight different types of coinage. This variety of coin-types 
was followed as an example by his successors and forms a characteristic fea- 
ture of Gupta coinage as a whole. 

There is a deep underlying rea.son inspiring this variety in numismatic 
performance. The Gupta numismatic technician was, in the first place, seek- 
ing ways and means by trying experiments in a variety of designs by which 
the foreign features of the Gupta coins with which they started could be 
progressively eliminated and replaced by appropriate Indian features. 

To take an example, the earliest coins issued by Samudragupta were of 
the Standard Type, but both its Obverse and Reverse are full of Kushan fea- 
tures, because this type is the closest copy of the Kushan design of coinage. 



165 


SOME CONSUMMATIONS ON GUPTA COINAGE 

There is, however, even here an attempt at the mingling of Indian with foreign 
features. But . these Indian features are very few, and that only on the Ob- 
verse, as indicated below : 

(1) The Gupta king wears a close-fitting cap instead of the peaked 
head-dress of die Kushan king. 

(2) The Garuda standard in place of the Kushan trident. 

(3) The jewellery worn by the king is Indian. 

Barring these three Indian features, the coin shows the following Kushan 
features : 

(1) The dress of the king is Kushan, viz., coat and trousers. 

(2) His name is written vertically. 

(3) The standard is bound with a fillet. 

(4) The altar and sprinkling of incense (as found on Kanishka's coins). 

(5) The halo round the king’s head. 

The Reverse is a downright copy of the late Kushan ’ Ardoclisho ' 
Reverse. The Goddess is even given the ‘ Cornucopiae , the Greek horn of 
plenty, in her left arm, and fillet in outstretched right hand. Even the back 
of the throne which lost its meaning is kept up by the Gupta coin-makers. 

The Standard Type of coinage was followed by the Archer and the 
Battle-Axe types which mark an advance in the process of their Indianiza- 
tion. The unmeaning standard copied from the late Kushan coins is replaced 
in these types by more understandable and appropriate objects like the bow, 
the battle-axe, or a crescent-topped standard, while the arrow takes the place 
of the Kushan altar. The bow and arrow recall Vishnu 5arngl, as mentioned 
in an Inscription. 

As lias been already stated, Samudragupta issued as many as eight types 
of coinage, admitting of variety of designs within some of these types. These 
eight types are : 

(1) The Standard (5-6) Tiger 

(2) Archer (7) Asvamedha 

(3) Battle-Axe (8) Chandragupta 

(4) Kacha 

This variety gave a large scope to experiments in the Indianization of the 
Gupta coins and the progressive replacement of their foreign by indigenous 
features. The stages of this process are marked out in the different types of 
coinage as indicated below : 

(1) The king’s head-dress which from the start was a close-fitting cap 
in place of the Kushan peaked or conical head-dress. In most Indian 
coins such as the Tiger Type, the king wears the Indian turban and on 
some varieties is even bare-headed. 



166 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(2) ifhe jewellery worn by the King or Queen, such as ear-ring, necklace, 
armlet, or anklet (worn by Goddess on Tiger-Type). 

(3) The King wears the Indian dhoti or waist-doth on both Tiger- 
and Lyrist-Types. 

(4) Introduction in place of Ardochsho of Indian Goddesses : 

(1) Lakshmi marked by her favourite flower, lotus, (a) which she holds 
in her hand (as on Battle- Axe-Type) in place of the Greek and foreign object, 
the Comucopiae ; (b) which is used as foot-stool (as on Battle-Axe Type); 
(c) on which she is seated (as on some varieties of Battle-Axe Type). 

Lakshmi on some coins is seated on the Indian Modhd or wicker-stool (as 
on Lyrist type), or on throne without the Kushan back (as on some vaxieties 
of the Battle-Axe Type). 

(2) Goddess on Lion who is Durgd -Himhavdhini with her feet resting 
on lotus (as on Chandragupta I coins). 

(3) Goddess Gangd on makara (as on Tiger- Type). 

(4) Goddess Sarasvati on the Lyrist Type, seated on modhd. 

(5) Introduction of the Queen on certain coins (the Chandragupta I 
and Asvamedha coins). 

(6) Garuda, vehicle of Vishnu, surmounting the standard. 

(7) The Indian weapons of war and hunting, such as Bow and Arrow 
(on Archer type). Sword and Battle-Axe (on Battle-Axe Type) which take 
the place of the Kushan Standard, the arrows taking the place of the Kushan 
altar. 

(8) The Dwarf who had a traditional place in the Indian royal house- 
hold (as seen on Battle- Axe-Type). As stated in Kautilya’s Arihosdstra, tire 
King’s menial staff traditionally included personal attendants marked by 
physical deformities or deficiencies, such as the Kubja (hunch-back), Vdmana 
(dwarf), Kirdta ( alpatanu , ‘ of small body ’), Muka (dumb), Badhira (deaf), 
Jada (idiot), and even Andha (blind) [My Chandragupta Mauxya and His 
Times, p. 106]. 

(9) The ASvamedha Type inspired by a specifically Indian conception 
and institution. 

A similar study may be made of the coins of the Later Gupta Emperors 
showing variety of Types giving scope to the gradual introduction of Indian 
features. Chandra Gupta II issued five types of coins, viz. : 

(1) Archer (4) Lion-slayer 

(2) Couch (5) Horseman 

(3) Chhatra 



SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON GUPTA COINAGE 


167 


The Indian element of the Archer Type is seen on its Reverse in the 
Goddess seated on throne without back and holding in left hand lotus instead 
of Comucopiae. Lakshin! thus replaces Ardochsho. 

Other varieties of this type show more lndianisation : e.g. ( 1 ) The Lotus 
Reverse instead of the Throne Reverse. (2) Wheel (Vishnu’s Chakra) above 
Standard on Obverse. (3) Replacement of the conventional Kushan dress 
of the King by Indian dress, waste-cloth with sash. The Ckkatra-Type is 
Chandra Gupta’s own innovation. The umbrella is the Indian symbol of 
sovereignty, while it is borne by the appropriate attendant, the Dwarf, as 
prescribed in the Nilisastras. Certain specimens show Goddess Lakshml rising 
from lotus as Padma-sambhavii. In general, we may say that Chandra Gupta II 
introduced in his coinage the following Indian features, viz., the figures of 
Couch, Chhatra, Lion, Horse, Dwarf, Gardufia and Lakshmr ori. or springing 
from lotus. 

It is needless to pursue the study further in regard to later Gupta coins. 
We may note in passing the more marked of the Indian features introduced by 
Kumaragupta I in his new coin-types known as (1) Swordsman i,2) Fcacock 
(?,) Pratapa or two Queens-type (4) Elephant-rider type. 

Hitherto, we have been considering the point that the variety of Gupta 
Coin-Types was dictated by the needs of experimentation in evolving genu- 
inely Indian Type of coins which would no longer be modelled on the foreign 
Kushan types to which they owed their origin. But there was also a deep 
historical and political reason for the variety, in addition to numismatic 
necessity, liach tv|ie of coins is charged with a political significance, signi- 
fying a stage in the expansion of Gupta Power by conquests, and this is indi- 
cated by an appropriate legend which is also refreshing in its variety. In 
some instances, the coins are. possessed of a territorial or regional significance 
to which appropriate expression is given by symbols. 

To illustrate this point from the coinage of Samudragupta, we may say 
that his earliest Standard type, shows the standard as the flag of his authority 
planted by him in the various territories conquered by him " in hundreds of 
battles”, as stated in the legend. His victory won in countless battles was 
due to his invincible heroism expressed by the appropriate legend Pardkranw. 
The legend of the Archer Type brings out the. chief weapon of his power as a 
charioteer who could not be opposed, as stated in the legend Apratiralha. 
The Battle-Axe Type indicates another weapon of his power, the. formidable 
Patasu by which the God of Death, or Yama kills all, as indicated in the 
legend Kpt&ita -Parasu. The legend Saivarajochchhetta appearing on his 

Kacha coins points to the completion of his programme of Digvijaya. 

His coins also reflect both War and Peace. Peace is celebrated in a 
variety of appropriate coin-types such as the Asvamedha type, the Lyrist 



168 


B. C. I.AW Vdl.UME 


type, or the Tiger-type. The Lyrist-type is the most Indianised type of 
Saniudragupta's coins on which he introduced the Indian Vina, ' Wicker-stool,’ 
and possibly the Goddess Sarasvatl on the Reverse as the ‘ Goddess of Music/ 
instead of the usual Lakshmi. because the lotus of LakshmT is omitted. 

Thus the legends on the coins change with the changing emphasis on 
imints of the king’s achievements both in War and Peace. 

But, as has been stated above, some of the coins have a distinct regional 
or territorial significance. For instance, the Tiger tyj>e introduces to us the 
king as a hunter of big game like the Tiger. His success at tiger-hunting 
justified tile legend Vydghra pariikiamah on the coin. He can certainly des- 
cribe himself as being jxissessed of the prowess of the tiger. But the Reverse 
of the coin brings out its hidden regional significance. It shows a Goddess 
si anding on Makora which helps us to identify her as Goddess Ganga. Slie 
is introduced as the standing witness of Samudragupta’s conquest in the 
valley of the Ganges, with its swampy and forested tiacts which were, and 
are to this day. the abode of the Royal Bengal Tiger and gave scope to big- 
game-hunting by the king. Thus the Goddess Ganga and the Tiger are aptly- 
associated on these coins. 

A similar regional significance attaches to the remarkable Lion-Slayer 
Type of coins issued by Chandra Gupta If with a large variety of designs 
depicting the king hunting down the lion in different positions on the obverse 
and on the reverse an appropriate Goddess seated on lion in all possible posi- 
tions. The Goddess is no doubt Durgd simha vahim. 

Like the Tiger-type of coins, these coins also bear the appropriate legend 
Sim ha- Vibrant a which is analogous to V yughra-pardkrama. On some coins, 
the king calls himself N arendra-Simha, or Siniha-Chandra. 

The large variety of positions given to the lion as it is hunted down by 
the. king shows how the king had a passion for lion-hunting which captured 
his imagination so much and was given publicity as the favourite royal sport 
even on his coins. It is further to lx: noted that while Samudragupta was 
thinking of the tiger as his big game, his son was more obsessed by the lion. 
There seems to be a deep underlying reason for this difference between the 
father and the son in resjiect of big game hunting. The Tiger type of coins, 
as already stated, celebrates Samudragupta’s conquests of the Gangetic valley 
abounding in forests which to this day so plentifully breed the Royal Bengal 
■Tiger. The Lion type of coins issued by Chandra Gupta II has a similar 
regional significance and celebrates his conquest of regions which are the 
habitat of the lion. It celebrates his conquest of the Aaka Satrapy of Sau- 
rashtra, or modem Kathiawad, which is the abode of lions to this day. 

It is thus possible to trace the working of designs of historical and terri- 
torial significance in the fashioning of many a type of Gupta coinage. 



SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON GUPTA COINAGE 


169 


There is also another small point of Gupta History on which light is 
thrown by corns. It concerns the names of the Gupta emperors. It seems 
that of the name Chandra Gupta II, Chatidra is to be taken as the king’s per- 
sonal name and Gupta as his surname, the name of his family, so that his name 
is to be written in its correct form, Chandra Gupta. This is revealed in the 
legend on some of the copper coins issued by Candra Gupta II. the coins 
classed by Allan under Type IX. The obverse of the coins bears the simple 
legend Chandra and not Sri Chandra continued by the suffix Gupta on the 
Reverse, as shown in the Copper Coins of Type VI II. It may also be noted 
that some varieties of the king's Lion-Slayer Type of good coins bear the signi- 
ficant legends. NavGndva-Chandra or Smiha-CAamfra, indicating that the king’s 
personal name was simply Chandra. This fact revealed by the coins will help 
to solve one of the difficulties in identifying king Chandra of the Meherauli 
Iron Pillar Inscription with emperor Chandra Gupta II when the emperor's 
mime is proved to he Chandra, and not Chandra Gupta. 



AGALOKAKA AND THE KINGDOM OF AGNI 


By 

Dr. B. Ch. CH HABRA, m.a., m.o.l.. ph.d. < Lugd . ) , Ootacamund 

The expression Agalokaka , an explanation of which is attempted in this 
paper, occurs in a partly damaged Prakrit inscription incised on a marble 
pillar which was discovered a few years ago at Dharanikofa in the Guntin 
District of the Madras Presidency. 1 2 The pillar is referred to in the inscription 
as dhamochaka-dhaya , Sanskrit dharmachakra-dlivaja . In fact, it is the con- 
secration of this marble dhvaja that forms the subject matter of the record. As 
stated therein, the column was erected at the eastern gateway of the Maha 
vihfira. belonging to the Buddhists of the Purvasailiya *ect at Dhanakada, the 
modern Dharanikdta. 

The person who set up or dedicated the dharmachakra dhvaja was a minis- 
ter ( nmacha, , Sanskrit amdlya ), who is described to be an Agalokaka Atapora . 
Wo arc told that his name ‘ has apparently been omitted in the record.’" His 
epithet Atapora has been considered to correspond to Sanskrit Arddhapaura , 
and he is thus alleged to have been a resident of Riddhapura, identified with 
Rithpur in the Amraoti District of Berar. Another view is that, instead of 
Ataporena, we have perhaps to read A ta hernia. Atabera being a personal 
name. 3 This view appears to be more acceptable for two leasons : in the 
first place, it dispenses with the unwarranted supposition of the donor’s name 
having been omitted in the record ; and secondly the position of the word con- 
cerned in the sentence indicates that it ought to be the name of the person 
rather than an attribute of him. It may. however, be admitted that the name. 
Atabera sounds rather queer, especially when compared with the other two 
names that occur in the inscription, to wit, Khadanaga (Skandanaga) and 
Virakhada (Viraskanda), this latter being the name of the donor’s father. 

As regards the term Agalokaka , it is in all probability to be taken as 
an attribute. It. is supposed to allude to the original home of the donor.* It 
has accordingly been explained as an emigrant from Agaloka.*' No attempt 
has, however, been made to identify this Agaloka. 

It is clear from the above explanation that the word Agalokaka is to be 
analysed as Agaloka -i- ka, the first component being a proper name, and the 
latter a suffix with the meaning * belonging to ' or ‘ hailing from Nothing 

1. Epigraph *a Jndica. Vol. XXIV, pp. 256-60, and plate. 

2. Ibid., p. 257. 3. Ibid., p. 259, footnote 10. 

4. Ibid ., p 257 . 5. Ibid., p. 260. 



AGALOKAKA AND THE KINGDOM OF AGNI 171 

indeed can be said against the plausibility of this analysis of the term. Now, 
considering the nature of the dialect employed in the record under discussion, 
it may not be wrong to equate the form Agalokaka with Sanskrit Agnilokika, 
which would denote ‘ one hailing from Agniioka 7‘ This leads us to the ques- 
tion of the location of a country of that name* To all appearance, it is iden- 
tical with the kingdom of l O-ki-ni (Akni or Agni),’ mentioned by the cele- 
brated Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsiang, which has been identified with f Karshar, 
or Kara-shahr, near the lake Tenghiz (Bagarash)* in the Eastern or Chinese 
Turkistan. 7 From the pilgrim's description of the land we gather that in his 
time the influence of the Indian culture was very much in evidence throughout 
that kingdom and that especially Buddhism was in a flourishing condition 
there. There are, says he. some ten or more Sang hnrdtn as with two 
thousand priests or so, belonging to the Little Vehicle, of the school of the 
Sarvastivadas (Shwo vih-tsai-yu-po ) 7 s 

Wc lurther learn that Fa-hian, another well-known Chinese pilgrim, whose 
visit to India preceded that of Hiuen Tsiang by more than two centuries, had 
also been in the kingdom of Agni about ad. 400.“ Even in bis time Buddhism 
was thriving there, as according to his testimony * there were four thousand 
monks, students of the Hinayana, in the. territory.’ 10 All this indicates that 
the law of the Buddha had reached there long previously, resulting in a free, 
intercourse between the people of India and those of that country. There is 
thus nothing against the supposition that the pious donor of the dharmmhakra 
Ahvaja at Dhartakada had originally hailed from that far off northern region. 

One word more. It is said that it was Hiuen Tsiang who first employed 
the term * O-ki-ni and that it was an attempt on his part at Sanskritising the 
indigenous name of the kingdom. Fa hum referred to it under the name ot 
Wu-i or Wuki. Another name, given by Chinese historians, of the same is 
Yenk'i, which is supposed to be: identical with Yanghi. Yanghi is a Turkish 
word for ‘fire’. 11 If the present surmise is correct, the donor of the marble 
pillar would be the first to give the Turkish name an Indian garb. 

6. It goes without saying that the word aga in the original has been taken here* 
to be a corrupt form of agni. Compare Panjabi ag or agg and Hindustani ag. For 
the rest, the derivative form is analogous to ardmaka , meaning ‘ gardener ’ which has 
been equated with Sanskrit drdn/iku. H. Ltidcrs. .4 List of Brahnii Insvriptiom. 
No. 756. and p. 214 under drdmika 

7. S. Beals, St yu-ki (Buddhist Records of the Western World), Vol. I, p. 17. 
and footnote 52, also p. xix of the Introduction to the same. 

8. Ibid., p 18. 

9. Ibid., Introduction pp. xi-xii. 

10. Sir Aurel Stein. Scrindia. Vol. Ill, p. 1181. Legge, Travels of Fa-kien, 

pp. 14 ff. 

11. T. Watters, On Yuan Ckwangs Travels in India. Vol. I, p. 46. For yet 
another reference to thi9 pilgrim's visit to the kingdom of Agni, see also ibid., Vol. II, 
p. 331. 



172 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Dr. N. P. Chakravarti, Deputy Director General of Archaeology in India, 
who kindly went through the article while still unpublished, has made a very 
happy suggestion concerning the explanation of the term Agalokaka. He 
equates it with the Ahgalaukika of the Brahmandapurima. which according to 

Mr. N. L. Dey, was ‘the country of the Angalaukikas situated below 

tire junction of the Hydaspes and Akesines V- If this view is correct, tine 
donor of the Dhafiakada pillar belonged to the Ahgalaukika tribe and hailed 
from the Panjab. 


12. Nttndo Lai Dey, The Geographical Dictionary oj Ancient and Medieval 
India, p. 8. 


LOKACARYA OF THE SRI-SAMPRADAYA 

By 

ROMA CHAUDHURI. m.a„ u. phil. (Oxon.) 

Pillai Lokacarya was the son of Vadaka Tiru-VTthi Pillai, son of Nam- 
Billai. He flourished in the 13th century a.d. and was the founder of the 
Tcngalai or Southern School. 

Lokacarya is the author of eighteen Rahasyas or Tamil treatises on the 
Vi<si?tiadvaita School, viz. (1) Mumuk?u-padi. ( 2l Prameya-sekhara, (3) 
Nava ratna- mala, (4) Tani-pranava, (7) Yavacchikappada, (8) Dvaya, (9) 
Arthapancaka. (10) Sara-samgraha, ill) Parandapadi, (12) Sri vacana- 
bhugaga, ( 13) Saipsara-sainrajyam, (14 ) Sriyab-pati-padi, (15) Carama. (16) 
Arciradi, (17) N ava - v idha -sarpbandha and (18) Tattva-sekhara. 

Of these Artlui paiicaka, Tattva-traya and Tattva sekhara are the chief, 
all of which have been rendered into Sanskrit. 

The Artha pancaka is a theological treatise, concerned with explaining 
and expounding the main points of the V aisnava theology. 

The Tattva-traya is a philosophical work, composed on the model of 
Yamunacarya's “ Siddhi-traya." It deals with the three tenets of the Visi$tS- 
dvaita School, viz., the cit or the individual soul, the acit or matter, and Isvara 
or the Supreme Soul. Although this work can boast of no originality of 
thought, yet its special merit lies in its succinct, yet very lucid and charming 
way of expression, entirely free from polemical arguments etc. The views of 
other schools have been refuted of course, but very briefly and simply. It is 
specially suitable for those who want to be acquainted with the fundamental 
ideas of the Visi?tadvaita School without entering into any logical wranglings. 

The Tattva-sekhara, too, is a philosophical work of equal simplicity and 
lucidity. It consists of four prakaranas or chapters. The first and the second 
deal with the supremacy of Vispu, the third deals with the nature of the indivi- 
dual soul, and the fourth with the supreme end of man. In the beginning of 
the first chapter, tattva-jnana or knowledge of truth is defined as the knowledge 
viz. that recourse to the Lord’s feel is the only means to salvation. And such 
a tattva-jfiana is attainable from the Vedas, the Smriis and the Puraijas. The 
Lord is, as usual, Narayana. He is the cause of the world. He is the object 
to be worshipped by those who are desirous of emancipation. He is the giver 
of salvation. For all these three reasons, He is the Highest Being ( para ) . The 
first chapter establishes the first reason, viz. the causality of the Lord, and 



174 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


rejects the casuality of other Deities, such as Siva and II inrnyagarbha. Nara- 
ya&a alone is the uncaused first cause, not subject to transmigratory existence 
or karma. 

The second chapter establishes the remaining two reasons, viz., that the 
Lord is the object to be worshipped and the giver of salvation, and not iSiva 
or any one else. 

The third chapter begins with the most important cliaracteristic of the 
individual soul, viz., its absolute dependence on the Lord in every respect. 
This is emphasised again in the fourth chapter as well, it being tire main 
pivot on which Lokacarya bases his theory of salvation. The individual soul 
is, further, different from the body, the sense-organs, the mind, the vital- 
breath and buddhi. self illuminating, of the form of bliss, the substratum of 
knowledge and bliss, eternal, atomic, pure, and an attribute of the Lord. 

The body is not the soul, otherwise the facts of recognition and memory 
cannot be consistently explained. The body changes day by day, the body 
which one possesses during childhood is not exactly identical with the body 
which he has during youth. Hence unless there be a constant principle in the 
midst of all changes, the experiences of the past cannot be recalled or recog- 
nised. This conclusively proves that the soul is something different from the 
body. Further, the body is a whole of many parts or limbs. Now. if each of 
these limbs be endowed with consciousness, i.e. be the soul, then there will be 
many souls within the same body, and there will be no comprehensive sense 
of egoity (mamatva). If again, only one among the limbs be the soul, then 
the experience of pleasure and pain on the entire body becomes inexplicable ; 
further on this view, on the removal of that particular limb, the entire body 
too should become unconscious • which, however, is never found. Hence the 
body is not the soul. 

The external sense-organs, too, cannot be the soul. In that case, one 
particular sense-organ must be able to grasp everything, the eye e.g. to tas‘e, 
smell and touch— which is an evident absurdity. Similarly, a man who has 
become blind must cease to have any other sensation. Thus, no external sense- 
organ can be the soul. 

The internal organ or mind too cannot be the soul. Otherwise, there 
must be knowledge of everything At all times. Attention, inattention, memory 
etc. are explicable only if the antahkarana be taken to be smoothing different 
from the soul itself. 

Similarly, the vital-breath is not: the soul. Knowledge, which is not last- 
ing. is not the Soul, the constant principle. 

Nor is consciousness, pure subject-objectless consciousness, the soul. Here 
Lokacarya gives very brief and easily intelligible summaries of Ramanuja’s 
criticisms of Samkara’s theories, as contained in the £ri-bha$ya, such as. 



LOKACARYA OF THE SRI-SAMPRAO&YA 175 

Jnatrtva, or the attribute of being a knower, belongs to the soul itself and not 
to mere ahaqikara, this latter being but a non-sentient something. Nor can 
it be said that Jnatrtva results from the reflection of consciousness on ahanr- 
kara, for consciousness itself being (according to the opponents) devoid of 
Jfiatrtva. can by no means impart it to another. Nor can it be said that just 
as the face which is manifested by the mirror inheres in the mirror, so cons- 
ciousness which is manifested by nntabkarana inheres in the latter- - for to 6ay 
that the self-luminous consciousness is manifested by the non-sentient consci- 
ousness is just as absurd as to say that the sun is manifested by the burnt coal. 

In the same manner. Lokacarya gives a short and easy summary of Rama- 
nuja's contentions in his sri-bhfi-sya viz. that the “1 ” (ahamartha) persists 
even during deep sleep and salvation. Thus, the soul is different from the 
body and the rest, and is a knower or Jnata. 

Knowledge is, by nature, bliss. Hence to say that the soul is |X>ssessed 
of knowledge is to say that it is jHisscssed of bliss. In ordinary life, of course, 
it is found that some kinds of knowledge do not lead to bliss, such as the 
Knowledge of rejectible objects like poison, bricks etc. But these are due to 
the connection of the soul with adventitious circumstances, such as, body, 
karmus, egoity, but really all knowledge is nothing but bliss. 

There is a plurality of souls, but the mutual differences among these souls 
are not. clue to Upadhis or limiting adjuncts, as held by samkara. but are real 
and ever- lasting. 

In the fourth and the last chapter Lokacarya expounds his theory of salva 
tion and the means to salvation. This is the most important chapter in the 
whole book, inasmuch as it brings out the main point of difference between 
lokacarya and Ramanuja, the Founder of the school. 

According to Ixrkacarya, the highest end of man or salvation is kairpkarya 
or absolute servitude to the Lord. First, there is the full manifestation of the 
real nature of the individual soul itself ; then the real nature of the Lord is 
directly intuited ; this leads to an intense love for the Lord ; and this, finally, 
gives rise to kaiqikarya or absolute servitude to the Lord, which is salvation 
itself. 

Tims this servitude is neither blind and automatic, nor su]>er- imposed and 
obligatory, — but is direct, intelligent, self-imposed and absolutely spontaneous. 
The individual soul docs not blindly submit and dedicate itself to the Lord. 
But it first realises its own real nature, its own utter insignificance and defects, 
as well as the supreme purity and majesty of the Lord ; then thereby, comes 
to feel an intense love (priti) for Him; then alone, 'it spontaneously and 
lovingly dedicates itself to an eternal servitude of the Lord. In this way, 
Kairpkarya is based on direct knowledge (anubhava-janita) and intense love 
(priti-karita). Hence such a servitude, instead of being a source of pain as 
ordinary servitude is, is the cause of highest bliss. As long as the souls are 



176 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

in bondage, they fail to realise this bliss involved in servitude and engage 
themselves in other pursuits in vain searches (or real happiness. But when 
they, at last, come to realist? it, they become free, enjoying eternal bliss in the 
service of the Lord alone. Thus, servitude to the Lord is bliss, freedom, salva- 
tion. 

The Carvaka view. Lokacarya points out, that salvation means the un- 
hampered enjoyment of earthly objects is not correct, since the soul being dif- 
ferent from the body, mere physical pleasures cannot lead to the highest goal 
of men. 

Nor can it be said that Kaivalya or mere realisation of one’s own self is 
salvation, for tine individual soul being essentially dependent on the Lord, it 
cannot abide by itself without serving its Master. 

The annihilation of the self is not salvation, as held by the Buddhists, 
for the self is eternal. 

The destruction of the attributes of the self-substance, such as knowledge 
etc., too cannot be salvation, the self being eternally possessed of knowledge. 
Nor is salvation a mere negative state of absence of pain, but is a positive 
state of eternal happiness. 

The samkarite view that salvation consists in the cessation of avidya too 
is equally untenable. According to this school Brahman, being absolutely 
niivisesa, possesses no bliss. Hence if salvation be nothing but an identity 
with Brahman, then salvation can by no means be said to he a state of 
supreme bliss. 

The view of Bhaskara that salvation means removal of the Upadhis too 
is open to the very same objection. If salvation be said to be the full mani- 
festation of the so-long hidden bliss, then the question is : Whose bliss is 

t!iis ? It cannot be the manifestation of the bliss of the individual soul itself, 
for the individual soul has no existence during salvation according to this view. 
Nor can it be the manifestation of the bliss of the supreme soul, no obscuration 
of the supreme soul’s bliss being ever possible. If it be held that such an obs- 
curation is possible in the region connected with Upadhi, the Lord must cease 
to be omniscient. 

Finally, the doctrine of salvation as held by the advocates of natural 
difference-non-diflerence too is equally unreasonable i YadavaprakaSa). The 
freed soul being different from the soul in bondage, the former cannot be 
subject to the miseries of the latter ; the Lord being non -different from the 
individual soul, the former will be subject to the miseries of the latter and 
will, here, remove them Himself by His own omnipotence ; as such individual 
souls themselves will have not to exert, themselves at all for salvation and 
salvation will become automatic and universal. 

Hence the true view is that salvation is the entirely spontaneous and 
blissful servitude to the I/ird. 



LOKACARYA OF THE SRi -SA M PR ADA Y A 177 

What is the means to the attainment of such a salvation ? According to 
Lokacarya, the means to salvation is prapatti leading to bhakti. Prapatti, 
otherwise called nyasa, saraiiagati etc., means resorting to the Lord and sur 
rendering one’s self completely to His mercy, and men of all castes are entitled 
tc it. It consists in not transgressing the commands of the Lord and devoting 
one's self to what is commanded by him ; in trying to grasp the Lord’s omni- 
potence ; in earnestly longing for Him alone day and night ; and, finally, in 
having a full-fledged knowledge of His strict impartiality. Hie knowledge that 
the Lord is omnipotent, and as such capable of favouring any and every one, 
yet being impartial, does not do so at random, but favours only those who 
have resorted to him alone, naturally leads one to such a prapatti. 

Prapatti leads to the destruction of even Prarabdha-karmns, and those 

who have resorted to it become free at once, though through the wish of the 

Lord, some such freed souls continue their earthly existence for the good of the 
world. Thus Lokacarya admits the doctrine of Jivan-mukti, not supported 
by Ramanuja and other Vaisi.utva teachers. 

Prapatti brings about salvation not separately by itself, but by generating 
bhakti. Bhakti means continuous dhyana or meditation. Such a meditation 
is nothing but a direct vision of the Lord (pratyaksa-samanakaiaL By a 
proper and disinterested performance of one’s duties in life, the daily (r.ityai 
and occasional (naimittika) duties, and by the practice, of tranquillity, self- 
control etc., the. merits and demerits, i e. all kannas, are destroyed, thereby 
obstructions in the form of rajas and lamas are removed, and thereby alone 
the full and successful practice of dhyana becomes pr;ssiblc. Tri this way. 
meditation comprises all etbicai virtues. 

Neither pure knowledge by itself, nor actions by them stives, nor a combi- 
nation of knowledge and action can lead to salvation. 

Lokacarya ends his work by pointing out again that salvation is nothing 
but kairpkarya and the means thereto is nothing but prapatti. this latter know- 
ledge being the only true knowledge or tattva- jnana. 

According to him, of the two ingredients of salvation, prapatti and bhakti. 
the former is by far the more important one. 

And herein lies the chief difference between Ramanuja and Lokacarya. 
According to Ramanuja, too, the individual soul is ever subordinate to the 
Lord, in bondage as in release. But he never emphasises kairpkarya or absolute 
servitude to the Lord to such an extent as I-okacarya does. What Ramanuja 
emphasises is not servitude to the Lord (kairpkarya), but fellowship with 
Him (sayujya); not. the realisation of one’s own insignificance, but the realisa- 
tion of one’s own real greatness and perfection. Thus according to Ramanuja, 
as a part and adjective of Brahman, the Great, the individual soul too is great, 
and when it becomes free, it realises itself as great, good and pure— similar 
even to the Great God Himself, and not as a mere worthless and insigni- 


13 



178 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(leant creature, incapable of claiming any intimate fellowship with the Lord, 
as held by Lolcacarya. 

Similarly, although Ramanuja admits prapatti, he is reluctant to give it 
so great an importance as Lolcacarya docs. According to Ramanuja, active 
and intelligent devotion, and not mere passive eelf-6urrender, is the means to 
salvation. But according to Lokacarya, though knowledge, action and devo- 
tion all play a part, prapatti is by far the most important means.* 


*(1) Tattva-mnjaya, pp, 7tT. vide l’afu'a-raha.?yam. (2) Tattva-Sekhara pp. 1-2. 
1 3> Op. cit. p. 1. (4) Tattva-prakasa, p. 2. (5) Op. cit. pp. 2 If. ( 6) Op. cit. 
pp. 13 fl. (7) Op. cit. p. 21 ff. (8) Tatlva-Sckhara, p. 37. (9) Op. cit. p. 53. 
(10) Tattva-sekhara, pp. 37-40. (II) Op. cit. pp. 41lf. (12) Tattva-sekhara, 

pp. 42 ff. vide Sri-bhisya 1. 1. 1. (13) " Tasmat Jnanasya anandatvam eva 
svabhavam” op. dt. p. 50. ‘ Evaipbhuta-jMnavattvam atmano nanditatvam." (14) 
Tattva-6ekhara, pp. 51-52. (15) Op. cit. p. 56. “Tasman niruo$a-nirati£aya-nanda- 

svarapa-paramatma-kaiipkarya eva moksah ” vide also p. 55 and pp. 60-61. (16) 
Tattva-Sckhara, p. 54. “ Svarupabhirbhava-purvakarp nitya-nirdosa-nis-sima- 

nandakam, aa-vibhutika-samasta-kalyaoa-guoatmaka-paramatma-yathatmyanubhava- 
janita-pnti-karita-kaiipkaryam.’’ vide also p. 60. (17) Tattva-fekhara, pp. 55, 60. 

(18) Op. cit- PP- 54-55. (19) Tattva-Sekhara, pp. 55-56. (20) Taltva4ekhara, 
pp. 64-65. (21) Tattva-sekhara, p. 65. (22) Tattva-sekhara, p. 67. (23) Tattva- 

Sekhara pp. 67-68. (24) Op. dt. p. 70. (25) Op. cit. p. 69. (26) Vide Gadya- 

traya. 



A DISSERTATION ON THE IDENTITY OF THE AUTHOR 
OF THE DHVANYALOKA 

By 

Dr. SATKARI MOOKERJEE, M.A., ph.X). 

Head of the Department of Sanskrit, University of Calcutta. 

The Dhvanydloka of Anandavardhana, who was a contemporary of 
Avantivarman of Kashmir (855-883 a.c.). is an epoch-making work, which 
created a revolution in the history of Alaipkara literature. This date and the 
chronological status of the work are confirmed by other internal and collateral 
evidence. But a doubt has been raised about the identity of the authorship 
of the work, which consists of two parts, Marikas (original verses) and Vjtti 
(the prose elucidation). MM. P. V. Kane following the due given in the 
preface of the Nirnayasagar Press Edition raised in his History of Alarjikara 
Literature the problem of the separate identity of the authors of the works. 
He collected all the relevant data, internal and externa!, which tend to create 
a presumption in favour of the separate identity of the two. While MM. 
Kane tentatively suggests his view, which is based upon certain observations 
of Abhinavagupta, the commentator of the Dhvanyaloka. later writers are 
more dogmatic in their tone. Dr. S. K. De is categorically positive that the 
Karika portion is the work of a predecessor, which was expounded by Ananda- 
vardhana. The data, on which the theory is based, are however the same as 
adduced by MM. Kane, but the difference, in tone among the later writers 
is worthy of remark. It seems that the belief in the separate identity of the 
author of the Karika from that of the Vjtti has become traditional. It is re- 
markable that this recent tradition is founded upon certain remarks of Abhi- 
navagupta, which are by no means free from doubt as regards their implica- 
tion, and is in direct conflict with the tradition among Sanskrit writers, both 
predecessors and successors of Abhinavagupta. who have emphatically asserted 
the identity of the authors of the original and the commentary. I have given 
a close and prolonged thought to the data, from which the theory of separate 
authorship is derived, and also to the other data, which seem to have escaped 
these writers ; and my conviction of the numerical identity of the author of 
the Karika with that of the Vjtti has deepened by every fresh consideration. 
I do not think the question to be a closed one and 1 propose to record the 
results of my reflections which may serve to stress the need of re-consideration 
and re-assessment of the problem with all its relevant issues. 

The doubt about the dual authorship arises from the differentiation of 
the author of the Karika from that of the Vjtti by Abhinavagupta in his 
commentary, Locana, on the Dhvanyaloka. MM. Kane has quoted pro- 



180 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


fusely from Abhinavagupta the passages which distinguish between the author 
of the Karika and the author of the Vrlti in his work, and I will contort my* 
self with the consideration of those passages, which seem to presuppose the 
numerical difference of the authors and will ignore those which seem to make 
a formal distinction. At the very outset I want to make it clear that the 
mere distinction of the author of an original work, be it Sutra or Kdrikii, 
from the author of the Vrlti is not necessarily personal, but a formal distinc- 
tion, which is seen to be observed even when the same person is known to 
have composed both. The works, whether the products of the same or 
different authors, are different not only numerically but in kind. It is 
usually the case that the two species of works are the products of different 
persons. Whether they are products of different or same writers, it makes 
no difference to the nature and status of the works and their mutual relation- 
ship. The Vrlti is only a commentary and as such is intended to explain 
what is succinctly or implicitly stated in the original. The original and the 
gloss are two different species of work and their role and status arc also 
different. The role of the commentary is to explain what is implicitly con 
tained in the original and it is an offence against the rules of exegesis to intro- 
duce matters foreign to the original. The offence is technically called uisutra • 
vyakhymi r. The offence of ulsutravydkhyana is unpardonable on the part of 
a commentator and deprives him of all claim to audience. Pataniali, the 
author of the Mahdblursya categorically assert- that what is stated in excess 
or in supersession of the original must be given short shrift 1 2 * Nagesa quotes 
in support the dictum of Kumarila “whatever is in the Vrlti and also in the 
Vartika must be (shown to be implicitly contained) in the Sutras.'' The diffi- 
culty raised in the Fancapadiku and in the Vivaratta regarding the introduc- 
tory of Sahkaracarya to his commentary on the Brahmasutra, wherein the 
theory of adhyasa is discussed, that it is uisutra and so ultra vires and the 
answer to the objection that it is implied and warranted by the wording of the 
sutra 1.1.1. are thus seen to be based upon the rules of exegesis and not an 
uncalled for scholastic ingenuity. 4 Even the bha$ya, which is entitled to cer- 
tain privileges, e.g. to explain its own statements, cannot introduce matter 
which is not relevant to fhe original. Thus the stilus of the commentary is 
subordinate to that of the original. The difference of the nature and status 
of the two species of composition imposes a corresponding difference upon the 
authors of the two works. And even when the same person happens to be 
the author of both the original and the commentary, the functional and official 
difference must not be allowed to be slurred over or obliterated because of the 

1. vo hv utsiirarn kathayen nS'do grhycta MBTt.. p. 24 fTW H > Vaspakd Cf. 
etanmulakam eva pathyatc " sutresveva hi tat sarvaipyadvrttauyacca vartike. ” 
MBH. PH. 

2. Vide PancapadikivivararLa, S. V., Adhyasabha$ya (B.S.I.I.I. tac 

na autiSrthakalam api pratipadayati, ato na vyakhyanarham. 



A DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OF AUTHOR OF DHVANYALOKA 


181 


personal identity. The author ot the Vrtti, even when he happens to be iden- 
tical with the author of the original, must give himself out as a different 
person and refer to the original author in the third person. Further he must 
not outstrip the jurisdiction of his role as a commentator, viz. to explain only 
what is implicit in the original and not to introduce matter, which is not 
implied or presupposed by the same. Fidelity to the original and obser- 
vance of the limit imposed by it are absolutely de rigwur. 


In corroboration of our position we refer to the Kdvyulankdrasuira and 
Vrtti of Vumana. who expressly stales that he is the author of the original 
and the gloss as well, to the Kavyaprakasa , the Sdhityadarpana , the Bhd$d~ 
paficcheda — cum ~ S id an Cm i a m : i k t avail, the RusagangadUara and ethers in 
all of which the original and the gloss are written by the same j>erson. These 
■works are known to be the compositions of single authors. But the personal 
identify of the authors does m>i make any difference to the formal procedure. 
If we were not. aware of tlu; irler.tity of the person of iJic authors externally 
and a prior:, \/;. could not ckduce this identity from any reference, veiled or 
explicit, embodied in the Vrtti. If the author of the Villi, even when he is the 
author oS the original text, were to let fall any hint that he is the author of 
the original text, he would be condemned of bad craftsmanship. As a matter 
of fact auihor*>. when I Ik y happen to be the same person, have not been suffi- 
ciently on Web’ guard in their observance of this rule, but the commentators 
have taken pains to point out. that the author qua commentator only makes 
explicit what js implicitly intended by the author of the original text. Thus 
even when new mutlej* are introduced in the Vrlii and the original text presup 
poses what is stated in the gloss, the commentator of the gloss takes pains to 
justify this illegitimate cross reference on the ground that the gloss, or for that 
matter, its author only Mates what is implied by the original text or its 
author. This iw the rule of the game and it is not permissible to overstep or 
transgress it even when the original text and the gloss are the handiwork of 
one and the same person. It is therefore a necessity of form that the author 
of the gloss, even when he is the author of the original, should refer to the 
iciticr ;.s a dhT^erit person and should always comply with the subordinate 
role that the func* ion of a commentator imposes upon him. The most out- 
standing and definitive proof of our contention is furnished in the Pram art a 
vnmamsd, a work consisting of sutra and vrtti written by Hemacan-Jra of the 


12th century. Hemacandra in the role of the commentator behaves as an 
entirely different person from the author of the original sutras, whom he refers: 
to as the sutrakdra and Acdrya. Ilad Hemacandia not written at the outset 
of his commentary that he comments on his own 'Curas, a modern scholar 
would have naturally declared the commentator to he a different person. 
Hemacandra sometimes gives alternative explanations as befits a commen- 
tator. It is interesting that Hemacandra observes that the particle ' atha' 
in the first aphorism proves that the author is identical with that of other 



182 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

works ( anena sabddanusdsetiadibhir asya ekakaXljkalvam aha P.M. p. 2). 
All this proves that the distinction of the original author from the commen- 
tator is purely formal and has no bearing on the question of numerical identity. 

It is necessar> r that this etiquette of form should be borne in mind with a 
view to the adjudication of the evidence of separate identity that is furnished 
by a commentator, who is a third person, of the whole work, such as is done 
by Abhinavagupta. We should not let ourselves be carried away by the 
differentiation by a commentator of the authors of the text and the gloss to 
the conclusion that his differentiation necessarily refers to personal identity. 
The differentiation of the authors is necessitated by the qualitative difference 
of the two compositions and there is no departure permissible from this proce- 
dure even when the author of both is an identical person. As we have made 
it clear, the author of the gloss must keep his personal identity in the back 
ground and make believe that he is a faithful expositor of the text, written 
by a person who is functionally distinct from and in status siqrerior to the 
former. The numerical difference or identity of the authors can be gathered 
only from extra-textual evidence, e.g. the statement of the commentators or of 
other writers. All internal evidence, embodied either in the original text or in 
the gloss, purporting or alluding to personal identity will be regarded as an 
offence against the rule of the game The solicitude of a sympathetic com 
mentator for interpretation of all this evidence as consistent with the numeri- 
cal and functional difference of the authors becomes intelligible in the light of 
the findings recorded here .' 1 

It is a matter of historical truth that so far as Indian tradition is con 
cemed there is perfect unanimity among writers on Sanskrit Poetics beginning 
with Mahimabhatta and down to the latest writers that the author of the 
Karika and that of the Vrtti are a self-identical person. Mahimabhatta wrote 
the Vyakliviveka, 3 product of extraordinary learning and ingenuity, with 
the express purpose of refuting the position of Anandavardhana. He has 
criticised Abhinavagupta’s exposition also. MM. Kane asserts that he was 
a contemporary of Abhinavagupta. Mahimabhatta refers to the author of 
the Karika and of the Vrtti as Dhvanikara without distinction and expressly 
states that the author himself explains the text in the Vrtti * So also has 
K§emendra referred to these texts as the composition of Anandavardhana, the 
acknowledged writer of the gloss. Kuntaka, the author of the V akroklifivita, 
a reactionary work written for the confutation of the Dhvanyaloka, has been 
shown by MM. Kane to refer to Anandavardhana as the author of the entire 

3. Vide the Vjttis of Vamana, Mammatabhatta, Vi&vanatha Kaviraja, Visva- 
nStha Nyayapaficanana, the authors respectively of the KdvyalankarasutravTtti, the 
KSvyaprakaia, the Sdhityadarpana and the Bhdfdparicckeda together with the 
NydyasiddhantamuktdvdR .. 

4. Artho vScyavisesa iti svayaip vivrtatvSc ca. W, p. 82 Benares edition. 



A DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OF AUTHOR OF DHVANYALOKA 183 

text, the Kdrika and the Vjlii included. These writers belong to Kashmir, 
the home-land of Anandavardhana, and Kuntaka was the predecessor of 
Abhinavagupta. It is highly improbable that these writers, who are pre- 
eminently noted for their acumen and accuracy and who are the compatriots of 
our author and were separated by a short interval from the latter, should all 
be guilty of recording a wrong tradition. Rajasekhara, who was the predeces- 
sor of Abhinavagupta, also refers to Anandavardhana as the promulgator of 
the Dhvani theory. We shall give reasons to show that the author of the 
Candrikd, the earlier commentary on the Dhvanydloka, which has been 
severely criticised by Abhinavagupta and mentioned by Mahimabhafta, was 
also of the opinion that the two works, the Kdrika and the Vjlti, were the 
product of the same author. Later writers, e.g. llcmacandra. who flourished 
in the 12th century, and every other subsequent and precedent writer on 
Alamkara have all regarded Anandavardhana as the author of the entire work. 
All these facts have been mentioned by MM. Kane 1 , who leaves little room 
for originality to his successors in the matter of external evidence. My pur- 
pose 1 in stating these data is only to show the unbroken continuity of the 
tradition regarding the numerical identity of the authors of the Kdrika and 
thi> Vrlli. 1 only differ from MM. Kane and his successors with regard 
to ihe interpretation of the internal evidence. It is not mentioned by MM. 
Kane that Kuntaka has been alluded to by Abhinavagupta. 

Mr. Sovani seems to go too far when he propounds that Sahjdaya was 
the name of the author of the original text, on which Anandavardhana com- 
ments. To be fair to MM. Kane it must be stated that he has hesitated 
to accept this hypothesis as an indubitable fact. It is not necessary for me 
to labour the point further as the term is used as an attributive frequently 
by Anandavardhana. The statement of the Kdrika 1.1. “ the nature of 
Dhvani will be elucidated for the delectation of the Sahjdaya (a man of taste 
and critical outlook)" 5 6 should be deemed sufficient to demonstrate the extreme 
improbability of the theory propounded by Mr. Sovani. The designation of 
the author of the Kdrika and of the Vrlli- indiscriminately as sahjdaya by 
Fratiluuenduraja takes away all the point from Mr. Servant's argument. The 
frequent use of the term as a descriptive appellation by Anandavardhana him- 
self should be deemed a final clincher.® 

We now propose to examine the remarks of Abhinavagupta, which ex 
pressly distinguish between the author of the Kdrika and the author of the 
Vrtti, on which the theory of separate authorship is founded. We must be 
on our guard against the too natural mistake of confounding formal distinc- 
tion with numerical difference in the light of what has been set forth by ue 
at the outset. 

5. tena brumal) sahrdayamanabpritaye tatsvarupam, Dh. 1.1. 

6. sahfdayahrdayflhladi , . , also na ca svasamayantabpatinalj sahrdayan kaqvs 

dt parikalpya Op. cit., p. 7. 



184 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


In the first chapter the classification of Dhvani into avivak$itavdeya and 
trivaksilanyaparavacya has been given in the Vrtti and not in the Kmika . In 
the first Kmika of the second chapter the first type is sub-divided into two 
kinds. Apart from the observations of Abhinavagupta, it would appear that 
this Kmika presupposes the classification of Dhvani given in the Vrtti in the 
first chapter and the natural deduction from this cross reference would be that 
die author of the Kmika is identical with that of the Vrtti- In other words, 
the author dot* not discriminate between the Vrtti and the Kmika . This 
is certainly the case, as otherwise the abrupt division of mnvaksitavacya in 
the Karika II. 1, of which absolutely no mention has been made before by the 
author of the Kmika , would be an unintelligible procedure. And if we scan 
the prefatory remarks of Anandavardhana at the outset of the second chapter, 
it would be apparent that he too does not distinguish between the Kmika and 
the Vrtti, and regards iho division promised as only a continuation of the topic 
broached in the V-rtli in Chapter l. f "how dhvani has been shown to he ot two 
kinds, avivaksilavacya and vivaksitanyaparavdeya, Of these, it is stated ns 
follows for the elucidation of the division of <miaksitavucya" (Vrlli). " Avi 


vaksitavavya is of two kinds according as its expressed sense (vucytn is in- 
cluded in another ( wider.) sense or absolutely surrendered' 1 (D)i II. 1) . 
Though this is the natural procedure for an identical person to make such 
cross reference, it cannot be regarded as legitimate owing to the technical 
difference between the Kmika and the Vrtti , the implication and consequences 
of which have been fully explained by us before. Accordingly Abhinavagupta, 
as the: commentator, steps forward to justify this abnormal breach of the eti- 
quette of exegesis by an ingenious device. In connection with the clarifica- 
tion given in the Vrtti in the first chapter Abhinavagupta observes that the 
author of the Vrtti propounds this classification in pursuance of the implicit 
reference which will be made to it in the second chapter. In commenting on 
the Vrlli “ dhvani has been shown to be of two kinds etc." Abhinavagupta 
? uppb.es the necessary corrective by me in the capacity of VjUikdra - that 
is the import. This has however not been stated in disregard of tlic original 
text ( ulsiiiw ) but in pursuance of the intention of the Kf/rikukdra. The. 
twofold classification of dhvani (shown in the Vrlli) is endorsed by the Kdri - 
kakara also inasmuch as the sub-division of the first variety (given in the 
Karika II.l) contains an implicit reference to the former clarification and 
thereby aims at showing U< distinction from the second varetv.*' 7 


Unfortunately both MM. Durgoprasad Dvivedi, tlie editor of the 
N. S. P. edition and MM. Kane alike, failed to pay proper attention 


7. rnaya vfltikarrga bliih'an. Narailan inayo'Lsutram uktam, a pi tu 

karikakarabhiprayeuety aha. ... (Dh. p p. IBS. ftenares edition). Tatra pratha- 
jnoddyote vrttikareria prakrisitah (tasya) avivaksUavacyasya va'i prabhedas *at- 

pratipadarvaye’dam iicyate bliavati mfjiato dvibhedatvam Karikakarasya'pi sa m- 

matam evc’ti bhavafy. Op. cit., p. 166 



\ DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OF AUTHOR OF D11VANYALOKA 


185 


to the clause 4 by me in the capacity of Vrttikdra' (may a Vrttikdrena said ). 
The particle 4 sata * would be redundant, unless the functional difference in 
spite of the personal identity were alluded to by Abhinavagupta. Again, the 
absence of refutation in the Kdrika of the position that dhvani is indefi- 
nable and the express refutation of the same in the Vrtti would seem to 
be an introduction of a topic unintended by the Kdrikdkdra. Abhinavagupta 
justifies the Vrttikdra on the ground that he only makes explicit what is im- 
plied by the Kdrikdkdra . A prima facie reading of the text would rather 
give out the impression that the same person being the author of Kdrika and 
the Vrlli, he does not mind to state in the original verse what lie will state in 
’he gloss. Bui this would involve the offence of the confusion of jxrsonal 
identity with functional identity, which, ns we have shown, is an unpardon 
able breach of form. Abhiuavagupta's observation serves to eliminate this 
confusion. Of course the comment of Abhinavagupta is not easily justifiable 
without {he presupposition of personal identity. The real crux of the pro 
blern however is found in the beginning oi Chapter 111. The observation 
of Abhinavagupta hereunder sn-ms to make him plainly assert his faith in the 
numerical ditfeveua* of tlu: author of the Kdrika from that of the Vrlti. But 
fet us dispassionately and critically examine the- Viili and the comment of 
Aopuiavagupta and :-x.v whether i he postuialion « >f nv« re than functional and 
official difference is necessary h tre also. 


The Vrttikdra introduces the third chapiei by the rcma;k that 'dhvani' 
lias been fully expounded with all its divisions on the basis oi suggested mean- 
ing ( vyaiigya) ; now it is bring expounded again in so far as it is based upon 
the suggestive form '■ vyaujaka ) A Abhinavagupta wxplaivvs the text of 
Anandavardhana in a fav-tuched way and makes severe luiir/uid. versions upon 
the previous comment:* ton whose interpretation however is more satisfactory 
and logically more consistent than wli&t is offered by the former. In the third 
chapter the division of dhvani is made on I he basis of verbal iornis which are 


exclusively vehicles of suggestion and can never become from the nature of 
the case objects of suggestion. The Candrikd r which was the previous com- 
mentary and which is criticised here, explains the meaning of the expression 
‘on the basis of suggested meaning ‘ (ayangyaviitkhean) as referring to the 
division of dhvani in icspccl of Vastu (matter of fact), aljiikdra (figure of 
speech) and rasa (aesthetic sentiment). Abhinavagupta is impatient with 
this interpretation. He remarks, €i this threefold division has been set forth by 
the Vrttikdra and not by the Kdrikdkdra . Nor is the Vrttikdra setting for h 
this division here and now. So what relevancy would be there in the state- 
ment 1 this has been done and this is being done ’ in case the authors are 
different ? Nor does this interpretation square with the entire previous text, 


8. evarp vyangyamukhenai Va dhvaneh pradarsitc saprabhede svarupe punar 
vyanjakamukhena tat praka&yate. Op. cit. 



186 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

since such modes as avivakfitavacya also have been demonstrated therein/’ 8 
Abhinavagupta accordingly explains the remarks of Anandavardhana as hav- 
ing reference to the division of dhvani as avivak$itavacya etc. 

We must confess that Abhinavagupta’s criticism of the Candrikd seems 
to be inspired more by petulance than regard to fact or logical consistency. 
In the first place, it is not a fact that the thrccfola classification of dhvani has 
not been shown in the Kdrika itself. In II. 2, dhvani based on the expressed 
sense is shown to be twofold according as the sequence between the expressed 
and the suggested sense is imperceptible or perceptible. In II. 3 rasadhvam 
as representative of the first type is dealt with. In II. 22 almhkaradhvoni 
based on formal suggestiveness {Sabdaiaklyudbhava) is discussed. In II. 23- 
25 the Vastudhvani is elaborated at length. In II. 26-31 almkaradhvam 
based upon material significance ( arthasaktyudbhava ) is treated of rather in 
detail. The consideration of these facts would show that Abhinavagupta is 
neither correct nor precise in his categorical assertion that the threefold divi- 
sion of dhvani has not been shown by the Kdrikdkara. Tn the second place 
Abhinavagupta’s animadversion would still be unjustifiable even if it were 
true that the threefold classification of dhvani were not dealt with in the 
Kdrika, but in the Vrtti only. He forgets in the heat of the controversy that 
the Vjttikara could not introduce a matter which was not intended or endorsed 
by the Karikakara, since this would involve the fallacy of ntsut ravyakhyana. 
Curiously enough Abhinavagupta himself justifies the cross reference in the 
beginning of the second chapter by this device. It is incomprehensible why 
the same principle should not hold good in tire case under consideration, were 
the contention of Abhinavagupta correct. 

Another point remains to be disposed of. Ixt us examine the implica- 
tion of the complaint of Abhinavagupta about irrelevancy in the case of the 
difference of authors. Is the difference meant to be personal also or func- 
tional only ? The. implication seems to be plain as follows : “ Of course the 

attribution of what has been stated and what is going to be stated to the same 
author may hold good in the present case by way of a historical accident when 
the two authors, viz. of the Kdrika and of the Vrlii happen to be the self- 
identical person. But this would break down if the authors were numerically 
two different persons’ But we have made it sufficiently clear that irrespec- 
tive of the question of numerical identity or difference of the authors of the 
Kdrika and the Vrtti, the cross reference can lie justified o.i the hypothesis that 
the Vrtti merely explicates what is intended by Kdrika, as otherwise the charge 
of utsutra statement would make the position repugnant to the canons of exe- 
gesis. Even supposing that the authors were identical, transference of a state- 

9. etat tavat tribhedatvaip na karik5kares?a kjtam, vrtti karepa tu dar&tam, 
na ce’damip vrttikaro bhedaprakata narp karoti tataS ce ’daip krtam 
idatp kriyata iti kartrbhede ka saipgatib. «t seq. Op. rit. 



A DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OF AUTHOR OF DHVANYALOKA 187 

ment made by the Vjttikara to the account of the Karikakara would still be 
absolutely indefensible. We have 6hown above that Abhinavagupta is not un- 
familiar with the rule. On the contrary it has induced him to explain the sup- 
posed reference by the Vrltikiira to what has been stated in the Vjtti as implied 
by Kdnkakma on the hypothesis of identity of purpose of the authors. He 
could have offered this explanation in the present instance with equal propriety. 
We have shown that the whole pica* of Abhinavagupta’s attack is not only un- 
founded but contrary to facts. The question of factual discrepancy apart. 
Abhinavagupta seems to have made himself appear as the supjxsrter of 3 
false cause. It requires to be stated, in view of the opinion expressed by MM. 
Kane, that even if we take Abhinavagupta’s remarks for all that the former 
means to establish, it is obvious that the author of the Candrika cannot be 
supposed to have held the two authors to be numerically different even on 
the showing of Abhinavagupta. Even if the remarks of the latter were true 
tliat. the triple division of dhvani was the. handiwork of the vrttikara and not 
of the karikdknra, th< confusion implied in the cross reference, made out by 
rhe author of the Candrika, would be possible only if the latter were persuaded 
of the numerical idemtity of the two authors. Abhinavagupta seems to be cons- 
cious of the weakness of his criticism and this leads him to advance another 
argument immediately after. 

There arc one or two other instances which seem to imply the numerical 
difference of the Vjttikara from the kdrikukdra and we propose to discuss them 
now. On page 135 (Dh. N. S. P. edn.) the question of the substratum of 
gmas is raised and Anandavardhana observes that the substratum has been 
set forth in the Kdriko (11. 7), which he quotes in support. Abhinavagupta 
complete the sentence in his commentary “ as ' set forth ’ by our original 
author” (asmanmulagranthakrte 'tv art hah). The differentiation need not be 
more than formal, as we have shown that allusion to the identity of the author 
of the vjtti with that of the karika would be a breach of form. On p. 138 
while discussing the question of lapse from the norm of propriety Ananda- 
vardhana observes that the matter “ has been dealt with subsequently." dar& 
tam eva ’gre). Abhinavagupta remarks that the expression “has been dealt 
with ” has for its subject the Karikdkrtra and hence the past tense is used. 10 
MM. Kane explains the significance of the remarks of Abhinavagupta as 
follows. “ If the -Tift-ET and gfrt were the work of the same author, he would 
have used the future tense in place of the past in the word when 

referring to what was to be discussed later on ; but as the $rfrirT S were the 
work of a predecessor and were actually before the when he wrote 

this passage, he employs the words ( ) •” 11 1 regret 1 

10. darSitam eve ' ti karikakareqe 1 ti bhutapratyayab- Vafcjyate hi * anaudtyad 
fte na'nyad rasabhangasya karanam ’ ityadi. 

11. Hal, p. LIX. 



188 


R. C, L.WV VOLUMK 


cannot agree with MM. Kane in this interpretation of the implication of the 
remarks of Abhinavagupta. The kdrikas, being the original text on which 
the Vftli is a commentary, are certainly to be supposed to be logically, though 
not necessarily chronologically, prior to the latter. And even if the author of 
the Vjtti were identical with that of the Kdrikd, the use of future tense with 
the implication of personal identity as made out by MM. Kane would be 
unjustifiable, since the vrltikara is required to behave as a different jjerson as 
a matter of form. The distinction need not be personal, as personal identity 
cannot be alluded to under any circumstances without infringement of etiquette, 
which is tabooed. 

The argument based on the use of tense is absolutely inconclusive. MM. 
Kane’s criterion of personal identity, vn;., the use of future tense, is unaccep- 
table. In fact Anandavardhana uses future tense in several places in reference 
to what is stated later on in the Kdrikd . It cannot be contended that the 
reference is to the gloss and not to the Kdrikd , since Abhinavagupta himself 
quoies or alludes to the Karika as the object of reference. V/ e refer she leader 
to page 15, page 23, page 26 and page We do not attach undue im- 

portance to these uses of future tense., since the allusion to persona! identity 
with the author of the original will be a breach of form on the part of the 
author of the Villi. The identification implied by future tense or first person 
is to be explained by reference to the identity of interest. The Vrttikdra, 
even when lie is a different person, is to identify himself intellectually with 
the author of the original text as a loyal commentator. So the u sc of future 
tense or of the first person is inconclusive as evidence of personal identity. 
We need not discuss the oiher cases of differentiation made by Abhinavagupta 
between the author of the gloss and the author of the verses since dil,'- implies 
nothing mo/e than what the necessity of form demands. 


Lot us now consider whether there arc: positive indications in the com 
mentary of Abhinavagupta oi the unity of authorship regarding the entire 
work. Abhinavagupta plainly asserts that the theory of dhvavd. though it 
was not unknown to previous thinkers and though it continued to be orally 
discussed without brent-:, was not treated of in works of special interest. Hut 
ihe f r"t cyv.t tn_-a l Ue ieferred to iv;-r e may bo owsir.li: rod to consist of 
the Kdrikd portion alone and thus need not afford any due to the unity of 
authorship. But the following consideration is decisive. Anandavardhana 
maintains that 1 even writers of exceptional intellectual acumen on the science 
of poetics have failed U> discover the existence of dhv;m. But still it will be 


12. taio’nyac ciJrarn eve’tye agrc darsayisyanvih- Oh. p. 31 Abhinavagupta here 
quotes the Karika III 42 as the place referred to. The use of the first person 
deserves more than a passing notice. Again, the pledge of the Vritikdro 1 vacyavaca- 
kacarutvahetavo hi tasyfi'ftgabhula na tu tadekarupa evc’ti pratipadayi^yanriijalvat is 
endorsed in the Kdrikd II 4. 

13. Op . cif.. p. 31. 



A DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OK AUTHOR OK WIVANYALOKA 189 

easy for men of aesthetic taste ( sahfdaya ) to detect the presence of dhvani 
in the famous poetical works such as the Ramdyana in the light of the defi- 
nition propounded here/ He concludes with a veiled personal reference:, 
"May Ananda 1 ' (aesthetic delight and the author Anandavardhana) find a 
secure place in the minds of the men of taste. With a view to this end (the 
nature of dhvani ) is being promulgated." Abhinavagupta observes that 
Ananda is the name of the author ( granthakit ). The promulgation of 
dhvani aims at securing a permanent footing for Anandavardhana in the hearts 
of lovers of poetry by means of the sa$Lra ( etaechaslrcd vrrena ) . Abhinava- 
gupta refers to Anandavardhana as Vrtlikdra and also as granlhakdra. It 
might be supposed that the latter appellation is only an equivalent of the 
former and as such has no reference to the entire work, consisting of karika 
and Vrtti But the description of Anandavardhana as the author of this 
idstra is significant. In another place Abhinavagupta refers to him as the 
author of our sastra, who established that the absolute Brahman is the only 
Ultimate Reality in another work, viz., TaUvaloka. The author of the 
dhvani s asira is also the author of the Ta(tvd!oka. v ' We know Ananda- 
vardhana is the author of the latter work and it follows that it is Ananda- 
vardhana who is said by Abhinavagupta to be the author of the Dhvani 
sdstra . 

The question now naturally arises whether Anandavardhana could be des 
cribcd as the Sastrakara, if he were only the writer of the vrtti alone and the 
Kdrikds . which abundantly set forth the doctrine with its details, were the 
wrrk of a different person. Barring the scholastic devices of Abhinavagupta 
who tries to make out the vrtti to be only a paraphrase and elaboration of 
the Kdrikd, even if we take a dispassionate view of the relative position of the 
Kdrikd and the Vrlti, it must be owned that the original contribution of the 
Vrtti is almost nil. In the circumstances, is it not unthinkable that the author 
of the Vjlli should pass off as the promulgator of the dhvani school, which 
the title of sastrakdra conferred ujx>n him by Abhinavagupta implies ? lft 

Again, in the colophon of the work, there are two verses. While com- 
menting upon 4 iti' the first word of the first verse, Abhinavagupta observes 
that it means 1 in the light of the exposition given in the Kdrikd and the 
Vrtti / This indicates that Abhinavagupta takes the Karika and the Vrtti to 
be the work of one person.* If there be a lingering doubt, the last verse should 

14. There is double entendre on the word. 

15. Vide p. 67 and p. 533 Ben. edn. 16. Vide p. 41, p. 67 (Bom. edn.;. 

* It should be noted that the man gal dear ana and the colophon are not integral 

parts of the text of a work. It is only these places wherein the author of a gloss 
can reveal his identity with that of the original, Sdtra or Kdrikd. without offending 
the canons of exegesis. Anandavardhana cannot be accused of the breach of form 
when he asserts on the colophon his authorship of the entire work, after the conclu- 
sion of the book, because he has already accomplished the task of the Vrttikdra and 
is no longer in the subordinate role. 



190 


8. C. LAW VOLUME 


dispel it completely. The last verse states “ Anandavardhana, whose name is 
widely known, has explicitly brought out for the edification of men of taste the 
real essence of true poetry, which lay dormant 17 for all the ages in the minds 
cf even men of mature intellect." The statement that the nature of dhvani 
which is the real essence of true poetry was not discriminatingly grasped by 
previous writers and that it was for the first time developed and systematised 
by Anandavardhana would become unmeaning and untrue, were the doctrine 
developed in such a systematic form by a predecessor, viz. the author of the 
Karika, who is made out to be a different person by the theory of dual author- 
ship. It is further remarkable that the author of the Karika observes (III. 
56) that the true nature of poetry was indiset iminalingly apprehended by 
previous writers and their failure to disentangle the same was responsible for 
the promulgation of the theory of ritis. This identical claim for originality 
by both the author of the Karika and Anandavardhana is intelligible only if 
the two are regarded as the same person, otherwise the claim of the latter 
would be a vain boast. Abhinavagupta observes while commenting on the 
last verse just quoted that the author heie divulges his name in order that 
students of poetics may feel drawn towards a study of it. People generally 
are attracted by the fame of a great author. In the first chapter also Abhi- 
navagupta has stated that Ananda is the name of the author, who gives out 
his name in order to enlist the support of the readers by creating a sense of 
regard for his great named 8 Of course Abhinavagupta speaks of Anandavar- 
dhana as Granthakara, and this has been supposed to stand for the author of 
the Vjtti. But it is seldom found that the author of a gloss is designated as 
Granthakara. In all the places where Abhinavagupta speaks of the Granlha- 
kara, he does not draw a distinction between the author of the Karika and the 
author of the gloss and the presumption is very great to induce the belief that 
the word should be taken as standing for the author of the entire book. In 
one place we have seen that Abhinavagupta refers to the Karikakara as asman- 
mulagranthakaia. But it seems that too much capital has been made of this 
distinction. The distinction is made in order to preclude a confusion of the 
personal identity with functional identity. The Vrtlikara quotes the karika 
as the place wherein the substratum of the gutm has been set forth. Abhi- 
navagupta in conformity with the rules of exegesis supplies the proviso ‘that 
is by our original author.’ It should be understood that the proviso is added 
cm behalf of the Vrtlikma and not in opposition to him The author n f the 
Vrtti should naturally quote the Karika as the work of the original author, 
on which he comments. 

The consideration of the following statements of Abhinavagupta himself 
should remove all misgiving about the identity of the author of the Karika 
with that of the Vrtti. We have proved at the outset that Indian tradition 

17. Cf. the identity of language of the verse with that of III1. 46. 

18, Pp. 41 to 42 and pages 553 (Bom. cdn.) et seq (Ben. edn.). 



A DISSERTATION ON IDENTITY OF AUTHOR OF DH VAN Y ALOKA 191 

is absolutely unanimous on the fact that Anandavardliana is the author of the 
whole work. It is Abhinavagupta's differentiation between the t\m works and 
their authors that has led scholars like the editor of the Dhvanydloka and 
MM. Kane and others to the conclusion that the two authors are not only 
functionally but also numerically different. My thesis has been that the dis- 
tinction is a matter of form* lapse from which was very seriously regarded as 
an unpardonable offence. The following considerations in addition to what 
I have given above will serve to clinch the matter under consideration. 

On p. 79 Abhinavagupta comments ‘ (He) states the meaning of the 

Kdrikd by means of the Vrtti' On p. 85 Abhinavagupta observes 4 Now (he) 
explains the expression ‘ ekarupa ' (stated in the Kdrikd) by means of VjllW 
On p. 102 the commentator says "With this intention (he) explicates in the 
V)llir On p. 104 in the commentary it is observed, " Accordingly (he) will 
explain in the VrUi in the twofold way/* and on p. 105 again 14 (he) now 
explains the minor sub-divisions of Praiuihokti by means of Vrtti These 
remarks have escaped MM. Kane and his predecessors and successors alike, 
but they deserve more tlian passing notice. The analysis of their import 
reveals momentous facts. Certainly Abhinavagupta could not make these 
remarks i i he were absolutely convinced of the truth that Anandavarahana 
qua the author of the Vrtti was numerically different from the author of the 
Kdrikd. Who is the subject of the verbs in the sentences referred to above ? 
We have put the subject "he M within brackets. But whom can 4 he’ refer 
to ? It cannot be supposed that 4 he ’ here stands for the Vrttikdra, as in that 
case the proposition will turn out to be hopelessly tautologous. It is sheer 
nonsense to say that 44 the Vrttikdra explains the meaning in or by means of 
the Vrtti** The Vrttikdra can state anything in the VrUi alone, which is his 
work — a fact too obvious to be stressed. So the phrases, 1 in the Vrtli * or 
‘ by means of Vrtti ’ would have no sense, if the subject were meant to be the 
Vrttikdra , a different person from the author of the Kdrikd . These observa- 
tions of Abhinavagupta, unless they are to be reduced to downright nonsense, 
are capable of one explanation only. Abhinavagupta takes the author of the 
Kdrikd to be the same person with the Vrliikdnr and so observes that, the 
author of the Kdrikd himself explains the meaning of the words of the Kdrikd 
in the Vrtli There is no question of confusion of personal identity and func- 
tional diversity as the commentator is a third person. The Vrttikdra cannot 
be permitted to allude to his personal identity with the author of the original 
text as that would involve breach of form. But the commentator can make 
any observation on the difference or identity of the authors of the original 
and the gloss, as he is an outsider. 

The differentiation by Abhinavagupta of the Kdrikdkdra from the Vrtti- 
kdra in his commentary is necessitated by caution to rescue the Vrttikdra from 
the charge of the breach of the rules of exegesis. We have made the point 
abundantly clear at the outset. The differentiation is formal and functional 



192 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and has no bearing upon personal relationship of the authors. It is a matter 
of pity that later writers became oblivious of the traditional rules of inter- 
pretation and of the consequential difference of status of the Vrttikara from 
the author of the original text. The ignorance or oblivion, whichever may 
be the case, is responsible for the curious arguments advanced by Riunacarapa 
TarkavagKa, Mahcsvara, Vaidyatiatha Tatsat and Mahesucandra Nayiiya- 
ratna. Karnacarana argues in his commentary on tlie Sdhityadarpana that the 
author of the Vjlti is the same person who composed the Kdrikds on the 
ground that the Vrttikara makes the promise. “ shall expound the nature 
of rasa," which is implemented in a Karika. If Ramacarapa were correct, 
Visvanatha would be guilty of the infringement of a fundamental rule of exe- 
gesis. ‘ We ’ has no separatist implication here. The Vrttikara here speaks 
on behalf of the original author as beftts an exponent and representative.’" 
Vaidyanatha and Mahesacandva likewise defend the unity of authorship of 
the Kdvyaprakdsa on the ground of a supposed cross reference in a Karika to 
the Vrlli- ” Mahcsvara again defends his theory of dual authorship of the 
Kdvyaprakma on the ground that the Vrtlikdra refers to the Kdrikakura in 
the third person. He argues that ii the authors had been an identical jierson, 
the Vrttikdru would have used the first person in referring to the Kdrikakura?' 
These errors of judgment would not have been possible if these commentators 
had cared to consult the Bhmdparicch eda-M ukt dvali or Vamana’s Kdvyd- 
laiikdrasutravrtli and study the procedure adopted therein. 

We shall conclude our dissertation by referring to the criticism of the 
Dhvani theory by Jayantabhatta, the author of the N ydyamadjari. Jayanta 
was the contemporary of Snhkaravarman. the immediate successor of Avanti- 
varman, in whose court Anandavardhana was a minister. Jayanta says, “ By 
the same logic of the unsuspected power of word the doctrine of dhvani is 
refuted, which has been propounded by a fellow, who considered himself a 
real scholar. Well, when negation is understood from affirmation or afiiima- 
tion from negation in such sentences as ‘ Freely walk, O pious man,’ or * Don’t 
enter my room, O traveller,’ it is entirely due to the common efficiency of 
words alone. Or perhaps we should not engage in such controversy with poets. 
Even scholars are bewildered as to the import of sentences and so let us drop 
this discourse. It is exceedingly a delicate problem and is beyond the province 
of logicians.” It is obvious that Jayanta here refers to the Vjtti of the 
Dhvcnyaloka and thinks that the theory was promulgated by one man. viz., 
Anandavardhana. 

19. Sahityadarixma 1. 1. S. V. commentary. 

20. Mala tu purvavat. K. P. Karika 94. 

21. na tu vrtiikrd eva kSrikSkjt paramfsatityadi§u sarvatra namayogocitapra- 
thamapuru$anirdc§asvaras3t, anyatha 'sanadyogocitottamapuru§a eva nirdilyeta. KPT., 
p. 5 (Calcutta Sanskrit Series). 

22. NM. p.. 45 (Chcrwkharaba edition, Part 1). 



A DISSERTATION ON , IDENTITY OF .AUTHOR OF OHVANYALOKA 193 

It follows from both external and internal evidence that has been adduced 
before that there is no break in the tradition that Anandavardhana is the 
author of the entire work and the founder of the Dhvani school. Abhinava- 
gupta’s differentiation of the author of the Vrtti from the author of the Karikh 
has teen proved to be a fiction of the law of exegesis even on the basis of his 
own remarks. Accordingly I feel constrained to assert that, the conclusion ol 
MM. Kane, which he states in the following words, is based upon an insuffi- 
cient appraisal of data. “ I feel inclined to hold (though with hesitation) that 
the Locana is right and that Pratfharenduraja. Mahimabhatta Ksemendra and 
others had not the correct tradition before them.” MM. Kane has created 
a tradition of his own. With due deference to his authority I have to differ 
from him and I place the results of my prolonged study and reflection before 
the bar of scholarship for fresh consideration. 

To sum up the results of our enquiry : We have explained for the first 
time the rules of exegesis which require that the Vrttikara . irrespective of his 
numerical difierence or identity with the author of the original, must behave 
as a different person and author and observe the subordinate role which the 
status of a commentator involves as a matter of irrefragable form. Secondly, 
the diffc.rcntiat.ion of the Vrttikara from the Karikakara in the commentary of 
Abhinavagupta on the Ohvanyaloka is nothing more than formal and official 
distinction which is necessitated by the. duty of protecting Anandavardhana 
qua the Vrttikara from the charge of utsfttra ex|X)sition. Thirdly, the designa- 
tion of Anandavardhana as the Shstrakara. the propounder of the school of 
dhvani would be unjustifiable if the Karikhs were the handiwork of a prede- 
cessor. Fourthly, the omivssion of the name of the Karikakara by Ananda- 
vardhana or Abhinavagupta is proof of the fact that the difference of the 
Karikakara from the Vrttikara is only a fiction of formality. Fifthly, the 
statements of Abhinavagupta himself have teen adduced which are intelligible 
only on the postulation of the identity of the author of the Vrtti with that of 
the Kehika . Sixthly, the confusion of functional difference with personal dif- 
ference has been shown to be due to the oblivion of the fundamental rules of 
exegesis, which has obtained currency since the end of the 18th century, if not 
earlier. Seventhly, the colophon of the Ohvanyaloka and the comments of 
Abhinavagupta thereon have been shown to contain indication of the identity 
of Anandavardhana with the author of the Karikh. Finally, the testimony of 
Jayantabhaffa has been recorded, which together with the testimony of nume- 
rous authors of established fame, give out the Ohvanyaloka to be the product 
of a single person, viz., Anandavardhana. 


23. HAL., p. LXII1. 

MB. — The references are to the Dhvanyatoka (N. S. P. edition) unless specified 
otherwise. 


14 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


By 

R. N. DANDEKAR, M.A., m.o. 

Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona. 

Certain features of the Yama-mythology as represented in Rgveda (RV) 
art quite simple and uncomplicated. This very simplicity has however misled 
many a scholar in the matter of the true interpretation of this mythology. 
The picture of Yama -his personality and functions- as reconstructed from 
the RV-references is characterised by considerable inconsistency, discrepancy 
and vagueness. An approach to this whole problem from the standpoint of 
‘ evolutionary ’ mythology will alone make it possible to restate the whole 
Yama-mythology as a reasonably homogeneous and consistent whole. 

Let us first of all briefly recapitulate the several details of this mythology 
as given in RV. Only four complete hymns in RV refer to Yama. Ilis name 
occurs about fifty times in other RV-passages, which are almost exclusively 
to be found in the first and the tenth bootapof the RV. Yama thus belongs, 
with Parjanya, to the fifth class or group of Vcdic gods, on the basis of the 
frequency of the mention of names. This minor position held by Yama in 
the Vedic mythology indicates that the true nature of the personality of that 
god was already being lost sight of, the vestiges of his original importance 
being revealed, as will be shown hereafter, only through stray references. To 
begin with, a very significant fact about Yama is that he is never explicitly 
called a ‘ god ’ in the RV. lie is no doubt mentioned in the company of 
other gods— with Agni and Matarisvan (1. 164. 46), with Varuna fX. 14. 7). 
with Brhaspati fX. 14. 3) and with Agni (X. 64. 3 ; 92. 11). In X. 51. 1, 
we are told that a god found the hiding Agni : in X. 51. 3, we are told that 
it was Yama, who found Agni, thus indicating indirectly that Yama was a 
god. At the same time it is equally significant that Yama is never called a 
‘ man.’ As a matter of fact, he is clearly distinguished from the pitfs (X. 15. 
8), whose king and lord he. is, though only once he is himself called pita (X. 
135. 1) — obviously in a different sense. The mention of Yama and deva 
Varuna, side by side (X. 14. 7), does not at all indicate that the poet wanted 
to distinguish between man Yama and god Varuna. Other passages of that 
nature (III. 20. 5 ; IV. 51. 11) will show that such reference does not possess 
any special significance. Yama however is clearly a martya (AV. XVTII. 
3. 13). This unique aspect of Yama’s character certainly provides an im- 
portant clue for our investigation. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


195 


The majority of Vedic references to Yama describe him as the lord of 
the blessed dead ( X. 14. 3-7 ; 16. 9) . He is the first mortal, the first to go 
the way of death and to point out the path for departed souls to follow. He 
is the gatherer of men, their guide and pathfinder (X. 14. 1) and gives men 
a resting place (X. 14. 9; AV. XVIII. 2. 37). Of the three heavens, two 
belong to Savitr and one to Yama (I. 35. 6 ; X. 123. 6). Yama’s father is 
said to have been Vivasvat and his mother Saraqyu (X. 17, Iff.). In 
another context (X. 10), however, the parents of Yama and his twin-sister, 
Yaraf, are mentioned to have been the Gandharva and the Water-Nymph. 
Yama dwells in the remote recess of the sky. 1 2 3 Reference is made to karmya * 
for Yama (AV. XVIII. 4. 55) and to Yamasya sadanam * (X. 135. 7 ; AV. II. 
12. 7) . Under a beautiful tree, Yama revels in the company of gods ; there 
the 'father’ entertains kindly thoughts about the forefathers (X. 135. 1). 
Yama was thus primarily regarded as a legendary king, who, by his holiness, 
was enabled to establish a realm of immortal life and bliss, for the righteous 
of olden time, to which good men of all generations have the right of entry. 
In most RV-passages, he was chiefly worshipped as the king of the blessed 
dead. He assembled the flocks of the departed in a marvellous kingdom, 
where there is neither cold nor suffering. He is the king of the people and 
their father. He has found a way for many and along that path he leads men 
into their last abode. Later, however, we see Yama’s character in course of 
change to his jmst-Vedic role as the horrific judge of the dead. He is brought 
in dost; connection with Death. Death is said to be the path of Yama (I. 38. 
5). He is the brother of Mrtyu and is mentioned by the side of Antaka and 
Mrtyu (VS. 39. 13). Mrtyu is Yama’s messenger (AV. XVIII. 2. 27). In 
certain cases Yama is even identified with Mrtyu (I. 16o. 4 : MS. II. 5. o , AV. 
VI. 28 31 ; 93. 1). References to Yama's padlnsa (X. 97. 6), to his mes- 
sengers, uluka and kupotn (X. 165. 4) and to his dogs (X. 14. 10-121 furthet 
| Help to consolidate his character as the fearful god of death. 

Ix’t us now turn to a unique hymn, in which Yama figures very promi- 
nently. In a dialogue between Yama and his twin-sister. Yarn! 4 (X. 10), 
Yama is shown to be protesting strongly against the advances of Yam5 for a 
sexual intercourse, which was intended for the procreation of the human 
race. The impression derived frorrf that hymn as a whole, however, is that, 
in spite of the suggestion of the apparently immoral motif of incest, Yama and 

1. The abode of Yama is also mentioned (X. 63. 10) to be over high mountains 
across a river. Hopkins (PAOS 1891) takes this literally and believes that Yama's 

was the ancient home of the Aryans, the recollection of which they still re- 
tained. 

2. According to EliNf, it is a mound of the dead. 

3. Pischel’s sug g estio n that this indicates Yama’s chapef cannot be accepted. 

4. lit YV, Yanfi is both wife and sister of Yama. 



196 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Yami were then actually regarded as the first parents of the human race. 5 
Yama’s protest only reflects the moral scruples of the author of that hymn. 

Apart from these main references, attention may be drawn to other 
passages, which, though stray and obscure, are of considerable importance. 
Yama is said to have been the first to stretch the web of sacrifice (VII. 33. 
9-10). A reference is already made to Yama’s having discovered the hidden 
Agni (X. 51. 1-4). This fact also represents Yama's function as the firet 
sacrificer. But Yama was not merely the first ‘ sacrificer he was also the 
first ‘sacrificed.’ For the sake of progeny, Yama, we are told (X. 13. 4), 
chose death ; in spite of his deathless birth (I. 83. 5) he surrendered his own 
dear body in the sacrifice (X. 13. 4). The metres, which symbolise the sacri- 
fice, are said to be deposited in Yama (X. 14. 16 ; AV. XVIII. 2. 6 ; 2. 32). 
In such cases, Yama seems to be exalted almost to the position of an All-god. 

Can these heterogeneous and, in many cases, vague details of the Yama- 
mythology in the Veda be presented in a systematic and consistent manner, 
indicating thereby the various successive stages in the evolution of that 
mythology ? 

Before we proceed further, it would be helpful to examine the views of 
earlier scholars in regard to Yama’s personality and functions The study of 
Vedic mythology was, in its early stages, dominated by what may be called 
the ‘ naturalistic ’ tendency. As a matter of fact this was the case with regard 
to the study of all ancient mythologies. It was normal to trace the origin of 
gods to natural phenomena. Ancient mythology in general, and the Vedic 
mythology in particular, thus came to be crow'ded with sun-gods and moon- 
gods. Yama was, for instance, made to represent both the sun-god and the 
moon-god. Ehni ( Urspriingliche Gottheit des ved. Yama and Der vedische 
My thus des Yama) believes that Yama is the deified representation of the 
setting sun. I-Ie is the son of Vivasvat (‘whose light spreads afar'), who, 
according to Ehni. is the rising sun. Yama follows the path of the sun to 
go to a| remote recess. The path of the sun was a symbol of the path of 
human life, and, as a matter of fact, the same words were often used in the 
Veda for the death of man and for the sunset. Of the sun it is said that it 
is the sure retreat. The sun is a bird and has birds as his messengers, like 
Yama. Like the sun-god, Yama has two steeds, golden-eyed and iron-hoofed. 
Vivasvat and Yama, who are related as father and son, stand, according to 
Ehni, for the visible and the invisible sun respectively. This explains the 
suggested contrast between the two (X. 14. 2 ; VS. 24. 1 ; SPB XIII. 2. 2. 7) . 
Yama’s character as a sun-god, in one form or another, is accepted by several 
other scholars. Max Muller ( LSL ), for instance, regards Yama to be the 
setting sun and thus the god of the dead. According to Weber (Vedische 

5. L. von Schroeder believes that the dialogue between Yama and Yarn! 
represents a fertility drama. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


197 


Beitroge), Yama represents the parting day and Yarn! the night. Kuhn 
( Herabkunnft des Feuers und des Gotterlranks) and Bergaigne (La Religion 
Vidique) think that Yama was a form of Agni, particularly the lightning Agni. 
and YamI, the voice of thunder. This difference of opinion itself indicates 
that the solar character of Yama is not at all clear. Bloomfield ( Religion 
of Veda ) tries to support the solar character of Yama on the basis of the 
description of his two dogs. According to that scholar (/AOS 15), the two 
dogs of Yama represent day and night or the sun and the moon. As against 
this, Weber believes that the dogs represent a specific constellation and 
Bergaigne secs in them forms of Yama and YamI. A closer scrutiny of the 
descriptions of the dogs shows that they are rather the outcome of a typical 
motif in primitive cult about death and of the common fantasy regarding the 
abode of the dead. Their description is too minute to mistake them for any 
natural phenomena * 

Hillebrandt’s starting point (Ved. Myth.) is the fact that Yama is the 
son of Vivasvat, whom that scholar regards to be the sun-god. lie further 
pays particular attention to the contrast between Yama and Vivasvat, which 
is often emphasised in the Vedic mythology and ritual. These facts, accord- 
ing to I Iillebrandt, conclusively prove that Yama cannot be the sun-god. 
Eh M's explanation in regard to the contrast between the two is quite artificial 
and unconvincing. That Yama was a 1 god ’, and not an ordinary ‘ human 
being,’ is clear from several passages in the Veda. Still Yama is said to lie 
the first * mortal ’ who dies. These two characteristics of Yama’s personality, 
namely that he is an offspring of the sun and that he ‘ dies,’ will be properly 
understood, according to Hillebrandt, only on the assumption that Yama 
represents the moon-god. 6 7 The moon owes his splendour to the sun and is 
therefore the sun’s child. The moon is also seen to wane by digits until he 
becomes completely extinct and again begins to grow. This is poetically 
described as the periodical death and birth of the moon. Hillebrandt points 
to several Vedic passages where the moon is said to be the child of the sun 
(IX. 93. 1 ; AB. VIII. 28., 14), and where he is referred to as dying and 
being reborn (I. 164. 4 ; X. 55. 5 ; 85. 19 : SSS. 16.5). In support of his 
theory Hillebrandt further produces considerable anthropological evidence 
from, the writings of Brinton, Grabner, Crooke, Frazer, Ehrenreich. 
Hartland and others. The primitive, people all over the world often connect 
the phases of the moon with death, birth, regeneration etc., and consequently 
regard the moon as the lord of the dead fathers. Yama’s part with reference 

6. Max Muller takes Yama’s dogs to represent Time in its double aspect as 
morning and evening. According to N. Aiyanc.ar (Indo-Aryan Mythology), Yama’s 
doga are Afivinau or Agnisomau. Arbman (Rudra) considers them to be refined 
versions of theriomorpliic death-demons. 

7. N. Aiyancar also suggests ( Indo-Aryan Mythology) that Yama is the moon 
sprung from the sun. According to him Yam! is Rohiiji. 



198 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to sacrifice is explained by Hillebrandt also on the basis of his being the 
moon-god. For, the moon is the messenger of sacrifice, brings order in 
seasons and distributes offerings among the gods (1. 105. 4). Taking for 
granted that Soma and Brhaspati also represent the moon-god, Hillebrandt 
further quotes Vedic passages (like IX. 2. 10) wherein they are cloeely associat- 
ed with sacrifice, and concludes that these ritualistic features were transferred to 
Yama because all the three gods represent but one divinity. Yima, the 
Avestan counterpart of Yama, is, according to Hillebrandt, closer to the 
moon-god. His final conclusion is that the lunar character of Yama was not 
clearly realised by Vedic {wets, who emphasised only one aspect of his per- 
sonality, namely, his connection with the dead. Yama was the moon-god of 
the Indo-Iranian or even earlier period. Only in certain typical passages in 
the Veda do we still find the traces of Yama’s ancient majesty as the moon- 
god. 

These theories which make Yama represent one natural phenomenon or 
another seem to cancel one another. Hillebrandt has made it quite clear 
that Yama cannot be the sun-god. The apparent solar features of the Yama 
mythology referred to by Ehni and others are the outcome of poetic convention 
in the Veda, which was dominated by solar myths. They do not indicate the 
intrinsic character of Yama. The ‘ solarisation ' of mythological elements, 
which are originally of an altogether different nature, is a normal feature of 
Vedic poetry. At the same time it can also be shown that Yama did not 
originally represent even the moon-god. The character and function of Vivas - 
vat, in the Veda and the Avesta, are very vague, and the statements regarding 
his relationship with Yama arc characterised by contradiction and inconsis- 
tency (AV. XVII I. 2. 32 ; 3. 61-62). No theory based on Vivasvat's solar 
character and his connection with Yama can therefore be in any way con- 
vincing. Moreover Yama is represented in the Veda as possessing so very 
markedly human features that it is difficult to believe that it is merely a case 
of normal anthropomorphism. To explain Yama’s death on the basis of the 
natural phenomenon of the moon’s phases is again not in the least satisfactory. 
Firstly Yama is never described as being reborn after his death like the moon. 
He is never said to be undergoing periodical death and regeneration.* Secondly 
Yama’s death, unlike that of the moon, is of the nature of selfimmolation and 
serves a definite purpose. Yama is again not only the first to die. but he is 
also the first parent of the human race, which fact does not !k well even an thro.* 
pologically, in the moon-theory. Yama’s rfile as the first sacrificer is of 
special significance. He is not, like the moon, merely a messenger of sacrifice 
or anything of that sort. He is both the sacrificer and the sacrificed and as 
such is more intrinsically connected with sacrifice. To bring forth references 
to Soma and Brhaspati in support of the connection of the moon with sacrifice 

8. The same may be said in regard to the setting of the sun and Yama's death. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


199 


amounts to depending on unproved assumptions. Any attempt to prove 
Yama’s solar or lunar character on the strength of the evidence of the Avestan 
Yima-mythology is again* bound to fail, for, Yima is all along described to 
have distinctly possessed the personality of a human sovereign. The myth of 
Yama and Yam! as the first parents of the human race becomes entirely mean- 
ingless if that pair were assumed to be representing specific natural phenomena. 
The tone of the whole dialogue between the twin brother and sister is un- 
mistakably human and its theme is, without doubt, the procreation of man* 
kind. IIillebhandt’s suggestion that Yama, the son of Vivasvat, should b* 
distinguished from Yama, the brother of Yami, cannot possibly be accepted 
-indeed it is discarded by all other scholars - and only indicates the weakness 
of his hypothesis. Finally the ‘ naturalistic ’ theories about Yama entirely 
disregard the true significance of the name, Yama. The derivation and the 
explanation of the name given by Ehni and IIh.lkbrandt are linguistically 
defective. It may also be pointed out that, in a Vedic passage (X. 64. 3), 
Yama is distinguished from the sun and the moon in very clear terms.' 1 

One fact thus becomes absolutely self-evident as the result of our fore- 
going investigations, namely, that Yama did not, at any stage, represent any 
natural phenomenon. While, therefore, discarding the naturalistic interpreta- 
tions of the Yama-mythologv, Hour ( ZD MG 4) also denied Yama’s divine 
character. Hopkins follows the lead given by Roth and traces in detail the 
whole development of Yama's personality and functions (Rel. of Ind. and 
PAOS 1891). According to that scholar. Yama is the first human being 
and as such becomes, with Yami, the progenitor of the human race. He is 
incidentally the first sacrificer as also the first earthly king and ruler. As 
Yama was the first human being to be born, the Vedic poets nfiively regarded 
him also as the first human being to die. The next: natural step was to regard 
the first mortal to die. as the founder of a new colony of the dead where all 
who died subsequently had to go. Yama, the first to be bom and the first 
to die, thus becomes the guide, the pathfinder and the lord of the departed 
souls. In course of time he almost conies to represent the ideal side of 
ancestor-worship. He becomes the poetic or symbolic image of all fathers. 
It is this phase of the Yama-mythology, which is primarily represented in the 
Veda. Yama’s comparison with Avestan Yima abundantly supports this view. 
A more or Jess similar view is put forth by Ot.denberg (Rel. des Veda) and 
Scherman ( Festschrift fur K. Hof man and Materialien zur Geschichte der 
Visionsliteratur) . According to Oldenberg, the original character of Yama 
is that of the first ruler rather than that of the first sacrificer. Yama, like 
Yima, was a king in a golden period. Oldenberg further points out that men 
in that golden period, who lived with Yama on earth, also went to the other 
world, where he ruled as the king of the dead, and became his special com- 

9. Jn JB (I. 28) also Yama is distinguished from the moon. 



200 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


panions. Angirasas and others (X. 14) may thus be said to have belonged to 
Yama’s first order of noblemen. Scherman believes that Yama was originally 
a human figure, who was later elevated to the status of, if not identified with, 
the sun-god. That scholar disputes the generally accepted opinion that Yama 
was an earthly sovereign, who, in later times, became the dread king of horrible 
hells. 

Compared with the ' naturalistic ’ theories, these ‘ humanistic * theories 
regarding Yama seem to come closer to the true interpretation of the Yama- 
mythology. 1 " But they too can be accepted, not in all their details, but only 
partially. Their insistence on the human character of Yama is based on the 
fact that Yama is never mentioned as god in Veda. But they do not seem 
to have properly estimated the other fact as well, namely, that Yama is also 
never mentioned as a man. Me is a ‘ mortal *. and. as Carnoy has pointed 
out (JAOS 36), according to primitive belief, ‘man’ is supposed 
to be ‘ god ’ who has become mortal. Moreover, as is shown 
elsewhere, there are several references to Yama, in Vedic literature, which 
unmistakably indicate his divinity. Further it may be pointed out that this 
character of Yama as a ‘ mortal ’ is not the result of naive speculation. Yaina 
dies first, not because he is born first, but because he immolates himself as 
a necessary condition for the procreation of mankind. Undue emphasis is 
placed, in these theories, on an incidental aspect, namely, Yama's kingdom 
in paradise. The part played by Yama with reference to the creation of the 
universe and the procreation of the human race, as well as his special con- 
nection with sacrifice are not adequately explained on the assumption that 
Yama was just a human figure, who died first and as such attained to heaven 
before every one else and thus became the lord of the {taradisial abode of 
the blessed souls. Yama, as a matter of fact, possesses, in the Vedic mytho- 
logy, the peculiar character of a ' god-man.’ 

Yama’s personality as a whole cannot thus be satisfactorily explained on 
the basis of the sun-theory or the moon-theory or the first-man-thcory. The 
Yama-mythology is far too complicated for any such simple formula. Vedic 
poetry and Vedic mythology are, to a very considerable extent, dominated 
by artificial, jwietic and priestly conventions. The original nature of the myths 
is therefore often shrouded in a large amount of extraneous and conventional 
details, which, many times, give those myths quite a different apjiearance. It 
is only in certain typical references to a Vedic god, which are usually stray 
and scattered, and which are therefore regarded as inconsistent and obscure, 
that we have to seek for the traces of the true character of that god. There 


10. According to Meyer (Indogermanische. Mythen), Yama the twin is the 
alter eg o of the living man. L. D. Barnett revived ( BSOS IV) the Vedic and 
Avestan data relating to Yama and Gandharva and considers the possibility of con- 
necting them with the Glaucussaga. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


201 


are, in the Veda, some passages, which have luckily escaped priestly revision 
and have retailed their original nature. Such passages have, in most cases, 
provided the proper starting point for the reinterpretation of Vedic mytho- 
logy. This is particularly the case with regard to the so-called minor gods 
of the Vedic pantheon. Another point which should be noted in this connec- 
tion is that, besides comparative philology, new research in comparative 
mythology has necessarily to keep pace with and take into account the remark- 
able progress that has been made in anthropology and folklore. 

We shall start our present investigation with the study of a reference to 
Yama, which is usually considered to be obscure and vague. In X. 13. 4, 
we read : * 

durebhyalj kain avrtiila mrlyum prajdyai kam amrtain 

nitvrnitn 

brhaspalim yajuam akrnrata rsitn priydm yanias tanvam 

pr inherit 

“For gods' sake, verily (he) chose death; (he) chose not indeed, in the 
interest of progeny, a life immortal. They (gods) made Bihaspati, the Ksi 
(himself), sacrificial offering. Yama surrendered his (own) dear body." It 
is not necessary to reproduce here the ample evidence in support of Yama’s 
original divine character. Yama was one among the gods ; accordingly he 
shared in the normal immortality of gods. As a matter of fact, in another 
stray passage (1. 33. a), there is a clear mention of Yama’s original immorta- 
lity. On this background let us critically examine the reference in X. 13. 4. 

In spite of his natural immortality, Yama is said to have discarded it and 
surrendered his own dear body in sacrifice. Through this act of self-immo- 
lation, Yama served the cause of gods and progeny alike. As it seems quite 
clear, the gods organised this sacrifice for the sake of the creation of the 
universe and the procreation of the human race. On that occasion Yama, 
we are told, offered himself as the sacrificial offering. Out of this self-offer- 
ing originated the prajit. The second half of the Kk indicates that Yama was. 
for that sacrifice, which we may now call the primeval sacrifice, himself the 
Bfhaspati, the principal priest and sacrificer. The motif of a cosmic human 
sacrifice as the cause of the origin of the world and the human race is quite, 
common in ancient cosmogonic mythologies. It was believed by several primi- 
tive communities that a primeval being of ‘ divine ’ or cosmic character, but 
possessing a human form, was immolated in a sacrifice and out of his limbs 
originated the several asjHjets of creation. Reference may be made in tin's 
connection, among others, to the Babylonian myth of the creation of heaven 
and earth from the two halves of Goddess Tiamat, and to a similar Buddhist 
myth about the giant Banio. It is highly instructive to consider in this con- 
text the ancient Germanic myths of Tuisto and Ytnir. In Edda (II), we are 
told that ‘ in the primeval times when Ymir lived, when there was neither 



202 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


sand nor sea, neither earth nor heaven above, from Ymir’s flesh was the earth 
created, out of his blood the ocean ; mountains from his bones and trees from 
his hair ; from his skull the heaven originated.' This motif, it may be pointed 
out, is common to several ancient mythologies, indogermanic and non-indo- 
germanic. 1 ' So far as RV is concerned we find two main versions of this 
cosmogonic mythological motif of the primeval sacrifice— one in the reference 
to Yama in X. 13. 4 and the other in the famous Purusasukta. 1 - The latter 
may be said to be merely a more detailed and more elaborate priestly form 
of the former. According to the version in X. 13. 4, it is one of the gods 
himself who surrenders his own body for immolation thus serving the cause 
of gods and progeny alike. That god, Yama, is thus different from other 
gods. This unique character of Yama is indicated in RV by referring to him 
not as a god, because he surrenders his immortality, nor as man, because his 
act of self-immolation, for the sake of creation, is far too ‘ cosmic ’ or ‘ divine ’ 
for an ordinary human being, but by calling him simply a martya. The 
iwo conceptions of ‘cosmic’ or ‘divine’ on the one hand and ‘human’ 
on the other are thus tactfully represented there. In the Pum$asukta, the 
offering in the primeval sacrifice of gods was the agratch jatah puTttsah (X. 
90. 7), whose fantastic description, such as, sahasrasirsa “sakasrak$ah etc. 
(X. 90. 1), however indicates his character to have, been quite different from 
that of ordinary purusas. This purusa is again amrtatvasya isana and com- 
prehends everything. Thus here too an attempt is made to preserve the above- 
mentioned conceptions of cosmic, divine nature and human form, which are 
common in all myths about the primeval sacrifice. The basic motif in the 
case of Yama and Purusa is thus the same, namely, the immolation of a grid- 
man for the sake of creation. 1 ■ 

There is another significant conception, which is often associated with 
the motif of the immolation of the primeval being. Just as the primeval 
being is regarded to possess the nature of ‘ god-man ’, so too it is regarded to 
possess the nature of a male- female or of a hermaphrodite. Tuisto and Ymir 
of the ancient Nordic people, Agdistis of the Phoneceans, Phanes or Mise of 
the Orphiks, Zrvan of the Zervanites, among others, are all forms of an andro- 

11. Bocsskt believes i Hauf>t/n/ibh»u d?r Gnosis) thai such cosmogonic motif 
may have arisen out of .-.omo primitive fertility cult. 

12. A reference may be made in this connection to anc.Uer passage in RV 
f X . 81. 511) where the creator Visvakarman is asked to offer himself in the 
primeval sacrifice. 

13. It is difficult to accept W. Norman Brown’s suggestion ( fAOS 51) that 
Purusa in the Purusasukta is a blend of elements drawn from Agni, Surya and 
Visaiu fused, in a rather shadowy way, in a new unity with special reference to the 
sttn. Nor is it necessary to assume, as Karmarkar does (JBBRAS 18), that the 
idea of the Pura§a-8acrifice is an attempt on the part of the Aryans to compromise 
with the Proto-Dravidians <4 Mohtnjo-Daro. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


203 


gynous primeval being. The character of the Purusa as a sexually unseparated 
being is made evident by the opening verses of the Purusasiukta and by die 
fact that the Puru§a creates out of himself a female form, viriij. In the case 
of Yama, on the other hand, his androgynous character is not directly men- 
tioned. But it can certainly be assumed on the strength of the evidence of 
die analogies of other primitive mythologies and of the evidence derived from 
the linguistic consideration of the name Yama. As Professor Guntert has 
clearly pointed out (Der arische Wellkonig mid Heiland), the word Yama 
can be linguistically connected with two series of words— on the one hand, 
with Av. yema, Lett, jumis, Mir. emuirt, all meaning twins, and on the other, 
with La t. geminus, gemellus and Gk. didumos, which mean both 4 twin ’ and 
4 hermaphrodite ’. A closer examination of words of this type*, indicates that 
the two conceptions of 4 twin ' “and 4 bisexual being 4 arc usually represented 
by similar words. 1 * Professor GOntert’s thorough investigation of the name 
Ymir and the Icelandic mythology associated with that name is very enlighten- 
ing in this respect. Ymir of the Edda and Yama of the Veda are mythologi- 
cally as also linguistically (morphologically and phonetically) related to 
each other. They are the two Indogermanic representations of the basic motif 
of a hermaphrodite primeval being offering itself for immolation in sacrifice 
for the sake of the creation of the universe and human race. 15 The Purusa 
of the Purusasukta is only a priestly modification of the original mythical 
conception of Yama. It may be pointed out that the same cosmogonic motif of 
an androgynous Urwesen is also represented in the lirhad. Up. I. 4. where 

wc read r Alma vd idamagra asit purusavidhal; sa ha etavan asa yuthd 

slripumathsau samparisvaktau. Of a similar purport are further the passages 
in the Kd(k. (XIII. 7), where Prajapati is said to have assumed a bisexual 
form because he did not have any other person for pairing, and in the Ait. 
Br. (III. 33), according to which. Prajapati appears in the form of an antelope 
united with his sister. 1 ’* 

This is the first stage in the evolution of the Yama-mythology to be 
noticed in RV. The primitive conception of a hermaphrodite primeval being 
as the creator of the universe and the progenitor of the human race, which 
characterises this stage, is suggested by the name, Yama, which basically means 
a bisexual being, and by the fact that the counterparts of Yama in other 
primitive cosmogonic mythologies possess a similar character. It must how- 
ever be said that, as it has happened in several other cases in the Veda, the 

14. CONTENT thinks that probably Tveggi mentioned in Voluspa 63 also means 
both a twin and a hermaphrodite. 

15. GOntert refers in this connection to Doias of the Phrygian mythology and 
reiterates his favourite theory that, on the strength of the evidence of comparative 
mythology, it can be proved that, in prehistoric times, there must have existed a dose 
contact among the Germanic, the Thrako-Scythian and the Aryan tribes of the east. 

16. The myth of Manu and Ida also is significant in this context. 



204 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

originally very expressive name of Yama lost its basic significance and it soon 
degenerated into a colourless appellation. The other current of thought, 
which characterises this stage, namely, the immolation of the god-man for the 
sake of creation is happily preserved in a clear reference to Yama's self-immo- 
lation in X. 13. 4. The connection of Yama with sacrifice is thus of a very 
special nature. He is the first sacrificcr, the first to stretch the web of sacri- 
fice (VII. 33J 9-10), which was further extended by the Vasi$thas. He was 
also the first to serve as the sacrificial offering. All this would alone rationally 
explain why in certain stray passages, which are otherwise obscure, Yama is 
so highly elevated with reference to yajna (AV. XVIII. 2. 32). The metres 
symbolising the. magical power of sacrifice are said to be deposited in Yama 
(X. 14. 16). Moreover Yama is also seen to have been exalted almost to the 
position of an All-god because he was the universe itself. Yama's close rela- 
tion with Agni ( X.. 51. 1-3 ; 64. 3 ; 92. 11) may also be explained on the 
basis of this motif of Yama's primeval sacrifice. 

This primitive motif of the immolation of an androgynous primeval being 
for the sake, of the creation of the universe is, in some cases, found in a slightly 
modified form. The original myth came to be regarded as too raw and un- 
refined particularly with reference to the procreation of the human race. The 
hermaphrodite Urwesen therefore was represented to have separated itself into 
a male and a female, who came to be duly recognised as the first parents of 
mankind. As these two were the offspring of the same being they were sup- 
posed to be related to each other as brother and sister. They were also regard- 
ed as twins. This is exactly what seems to have happened in the evolution 
of the Yama- mythology. Yama. the hermaphrodite urwesen. gave place to a 
pair of twins who were regarded as the parents of mankind.' 7 As the result 
of the peculiar linguistic phenomenon, which we have already noticed, the same 
word, Yama, possessed the two senses of a bisexual being and a twin. Even 
in this second stage therefore the name Yama was preserved to denote the 
male twin, though the character and function of this Yama were materially 
different from those of the Yama of the first stage in the development of the 
Yama-mythology. Yama and his twin-sister Yami, whose name is formed 
in obvious imitation of that of Yama, became the progenitors of the human 
race. ,s Yama’s original function as the creator of the universe was thus con- 
siderably restricted. This aspect of the Yama-mythology, in the course of its 
evolution, is preserved in a whole hymn in RV (X. 10). it is however re- 
presented there in quite a different light. The conception of an incestuous 
intercourse between the twin brother and sister, Yama and Yarn!, giving rise 


17. According to the Icelandic myth, Ymir slept and from under his arm sprang 
up a maiden and a child. 

18. Yima and Yimak are the Iranian primeval pair. So are Manusak and 
Ma&yanik. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


205 


to the human race became positively offensive to the conventional moral sense 
of Vedic poets and priests. The real motif of that episode was therefore 
altogether changed and was presented in quite a different perspective. Yama 
is shown there as protesting strongly against the amorous advances of his 
twin-sister, YamT. He draws Yami’s attention to the law of rta (X. 10. 2, 6, 
8), which does not warrant an incest between brother and sister. An attempt 
is made by the Vedic poet to suggest that Yama and YamT were not the first 
parents of the human race, for, they themselves are represented to have parents, 
namely, the Gandharva and the Water-Nymph (X. 10. 4). The poet further 
suggests that Yama and Yami were not the first human beings, by making 
Yama direct YamS to a person other than himself (X. 10. 8, 10, 12, 14), as 
if such a person actually existed. But in spite of all his efforts the Vedic poet 
could not entirely obliterate from that hymn certain details, which dearly 
betray the true nature of that myth. YamT is represented in that hymn as 
being keen — quite naturally, too -on the procreation and the furtherance of 
the race. The procreative instinct of the female is quite unmistakable there. 
Moreover a very clear mention is made in that hymn (X. 10. 3) of the fact 
that Yama was the only male in existence at that time. Does this not indi- 
cate that Yama was the first human being to exist ? The colourless and very 
impersonal character of the so-called parents of Yama and Yami at once betrays 
that their inclusion, by the poet, in the hymn was obviously an afterthought. 
The Vedic poet has tried to make the ancient myth of Yama) and Yam? a 
vehicle for a sermon on rta, moral law,- -but, undoubtedly, without success. 
For, as it is, the hymn appears to end abruptly. The poet does not make it 
clear whether the incest actually took place or not, obviously because the 
answer to that question would have nullified the poet’s purpose. There seems 
to be therefore no reason to doubt that the hymn contains, in spite of its ten- 
dentious perversion by the ]x>et, which only reflects the morality of his age. 
unmistakable traces of a distinct form of the Yama-mythology, according to 
which Yama and Yami, the twin brother and sister, were considered to be, 
responsible for the procreation of the human race through an incestuous 
union. 

The motif of the androgynous U rwesen separating itself is clearly pre- 
served in the Purusasukta. The Urwesen (Puru§a) created out of itself a 
female form, viraj , lw who, in her turn, produced the Pura$a, who may be 
regarded as the symbol of further procreation. The primeval Puru§a is thus 
at (Mice made responsible for the creation of the macrocosm as well as micro- 
cosm — of course, in different ways. It will be seen that the selfimmolation of 
the bisexual Yama, representing the first stage in the evolution of the Yama- 
mythology, as also the myth of the twins, Yama and Yam!, procreating the 
human race, which represents the second stage, are both preserved, in a modi- 


19. Adam is said to have produced Eve out of his own rib. 



20(5 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


fled form, in the Purusasukta. Though Yama's original character as a herma- 
phrodite god-man and as the first twin-parent is relegated to stray and obscure 
references, 20 it has been, so to say, resurrected in the form of the Puru$a of 
the Purusasukta. The original Yama-myth and the Purusa-myth are thus 
organically connected with each other. 

It cannot however be denied that there was among conventional Vedic 
priests and poets a strong prejudice against this myth of an incestuous union 
between the twins. As the result of this prejudice of the Vedic hierarchy, 
YamI disappeared from the Yama-mythology as silently as she was intro- 
duced in it. No further reference to YamI is available in RV. ' Consequently 
out of the pair of twins Yama alone remained as the first-born progenitor of 
mankind. Associated with this progenitorship of the human race we find, in 
Veda, also faint traces of Yama’s sovereignty on earth.-- Himself a ‘mortal.’ 
Yama is regarded as the leader of the human race, its king ruling in an earthly 
paradise. This aspect is specially emphasised in the case of Yama’s Iranian 
counterpart, Yima (Jamshed), who. according to Vd. II. 4 .19, was the kingly- 
ruler in whose reign the. golden age of the world prevailed." 1 It was from 
Ahura Mazdah himself that Yima received the command to further and 
increase the world. The plenitude of life and increase on earth form the 
dominating features of Yima’s rule. No social reference is made to this 
aspect of the Yama-mythology in the Veda. There are, all the same, some 
indications which unmistakably point to it. The possession by Yama of the 
pa/! bis a (X. 97. 16), which corresponds with the p/da of Vanina and which 
may be regarded as the symbol of sovereignty, seems to be one of the remnants 
of Yama’s kingship. Yama’s particular association with Varutia (X. 14. 7), 
who. in course of time, came to be regarded as the typical sovereign in the 
Vedic mythology, can lx* adequately explained only on the basis of the for- 
mer’s own sovereignty. The conception of sovereignty over mankind is a 
natural extension of the conception of progenitorship of mankind. This 
assumption is confirmed by analogous phenomena in other primitive mytho- 
logies. Curiously enough, as A. V. Williams Jackson points out (JAOS 17). 
a passage in the Mahabharata (III. 142. 35 ff) revives this characteristic 
feature of Yama’s personality, which is only faintly suggested in the Veda. 
The description of the sabha of Yama in the Mahabharata (II. 8. 2-4) further 
reminds us of the vara of Avestan Yima. 


20. It is significant that such references are to he found mostly in mapdalas 
1 and 10, and not in the hierarchical family-books. 

21. The whole conception of Yami is as a matter of fact of a schematic nature. 

22. As seen elsewhere, according to Ot.df.nberg, it is this di^iwtimtie of 
Yama’s personality that is original in the Veda. 

23. Attention may be drawn also to H. Couatz's article, " Konig Yima und 
Saturn” ( Pavry Comm. Vol. . 1933). 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 


207 


Another myth about the progenitor of the human race was, about this 
time, being developed in the Vedic thought- the myth of Manu, the first man. 
Manu is mentioned in the Veda as the father of the human race (I. 80. 16) 
and as the first sacrifice!- (VIII. 43. 13; X. 63. 7). The legend of Manu’s 
deliverance from the flood by the fish (sPB I. 8. 1. 1?-' clearly indicates his 
function as the progenitor and leader of mankind. He is the son of Vivasvat, 
and Manu Vaivasvata was commonly regarded as the symbol of the ‘ first man,’ 
the ‘ first sacrificer ’ and the 4 first ruler.’ Manu was thus more or less a 
4 double ’ of Yama. There was therefore, naturally enough, considerable 
Mutual interaction between the Manu-myth and the Yama -myth. To begin 
with, the Manu-myth completely overshadowed the stage in the development 
of tlie Yama-mythology, which has just been referred to. Yama’s character 
as the progenitor and the first sovereign of the human race was almost rele- 
gated to oblivion and can now only be inferred from stray references to it 
in the Veda. The strong prejudice of the Vedic hierarchy against the Yama- 
Yaml myth had already prepared the ground for this. The legends of Manu 
were such as could easily agree with the conventional attitude of the Vedic 
priests. The motif of incest in the Yama-mythology seems to have been parti- 
cularly responsible for the withdrawal of Yama from the Vedic cosmogonic 
mythology and the priestly emphasis on Yama’s double, Manu, as the first 
man. Yama’s role of the first sacrificer, which was associated with the myth 
of the primeval sacrifice of the hermaphrodite god-man, soon became repulsive 
to the Vedic priests and poets and passed on to Manu. Secondly the paral- 
lelism between the Yama -myth and the Purusa-myth helped to bring the Yama- 
myth and the Manu-myth close together. This was due to a peculiar 
linguistic fact. The word Manu is employed to denote sjiecifically the pro- 
genitor of the human race as well as man in general. That word and the 
word Purusa, which also signifies man, were thus more or less synonymous. 
Yama and Purusa, on the other hand, were almost identical in personality and 
character. The natural next step from these two equations— the linguistic 
equation, Purusa - Manu, and the mythological equation, Purusa ~ Yama 
was to closely associate Yama and Manu. We have already ixnnted out 
the similarity between the myths of Yama and Purusa. There is thus con- 
siderable intermixture of mythical motifs and names in the whole Yama- 
Purusa-Manu-mythology. It may be assumed that the original nature and 
functions of Yama, which were tendentiously put into the background as the 
result of Vedic conventionalism, did persist, albeit in a modified form, through 
Purusa and Manu. 

Before Yama was completely sujjerseded by Manu in the progenitorship 

24. Manu assumes a role similar to that of Adam as well as Noah. In the 
Yima-mythology there is a confused combination of the Manu-lcgend and the Yama- 
Iegend. Yima’s vara is security against flood as' also simply surrounds the good. 


208 B. CX LAW VOLUME 

of the human race, the two myths existed side by side and the necessity was 
felt to adjust them somehow or other. The efforts in this direction, which 
are quite obvious in the Vedic mythology, themselves form an evidence in 
support of Yama's role as the progenitor of mankind. In the Vedic mytho- 
logy Yama and Manu came to be regarded as brothers -both sons of Vivasvat. 
That is how Vivasvat was introduced — artificially and suix-rticially — in the 
Yama-mythology as the father of Yama. Vivasvat. we are told in RV (X. 
17. 1 ff), married Saranyu, the daughter of Tva?ta. They were the parents 
of Yama. The gods later concealed the immortal bride, Saranyu, from the 
mortals, and, making another of like appearance, Savarna, they gave her to 
Vivasvat. Vivasvat and Savarna gave birth to Manu.- :> An attempt is thus 
made to point out that Yama and Manu were not identical ; Yama was of 
divine birth, while Manu was not. It need hardly be added that all this is 
obviously an afterthought. 

In spite of all this, the Yama-mythology was not completely effaced from 
Vedic literature. Quite an unexjiected feature of Yama’s original character 
came to be prominently emphasised and was interpreted in an altogether differ- 
ent light. Yama, as we have seen, offered himself for immolation in the prime- 
val sacrifice, for the sake of gods and progeny. Out of the three conceptions 
included in this cosmogonic myth, namely, that of the hcrmaphiodite primeval 
god-man, that of the creation of the universe and the human race and that 
of the self-immolation, it was the last that now came to he stressed. Yama 
immolated himself at the beginning of existence, that is to say, in other words, 
Yama was the first being to die. The adjustment between the Manu-myth 
and the Yama-myth was thus considerably simplified. Manu was the ‘ first 
bom',. Yama was the ‘first to die.’ The further evolution of the Yama- 
mythology is clearly traceable from Vedic references. Yama dies first and 
attains to heaven before every one else. leaving the kingdom of earthly 
paradise, he assumes the sovereignty of the heavenly paradise. He is the 
forerunner of all the departed souls and becomes their guide and pathfinder. 
There he rules over the blessed ones, as the benevolent father of ‘ fathers 
and is worshipped, with the pitrs, as the first witness of an immortality, to 
be enjoyed by the fathers, similar to the immortality enjoyed by the gods 
themselves. One point should be clearly borne in mind in this connection, 
and it is that, though Yama is closely associated with the spirits of the dead, 
he never assumes the horrific role of the demon of death.-' 1 It is this stage 
in the evolution of the Yama-mythology, that is primarily represented in RV. 
A significant feature of the primitive cult about the dead and their ruler. 


25. This legend is narrated in detail in the Nirukta (XII. 10 ff) and in the 
Bfkaddevaia. 

26. Rudra is, properly speaking, the demon of death in the Veda. 



YAMA IN THE VEDA 209 

namely, the conception of the two dogs guarding the region of the dead, is 
now transplanted upon the Y ama-my thology . - 7 

It was at this stage that the Rudra-mythology seems to have significantly 
reacted on the Yama- mythology. Consequently Yama's association with 
' death * as such began to figure rather prominently. Death is said to be 
Yama’s path (I. 38. 5). Yama is mentioned side by side with Mrtyu and 
Antaka, and is even identified with Mrtyu « I. 165. 4 ; MS. II. 5. 6 ; AV. VI. 
28. 31 : 93. 1.). The benevolent ruler of the blessed souls, the helpful 
father of ‘ fathers \ who had originally nothing to do with ‘ death ’ as such, 
and whose proper function, even as represented in a later stage commenced 
after 1 death,* now came to be identified with death. The dogs of death, the 
inauspicious messengers, uluka and kapota , the padblsa, which was now re- 
garded as the instrument of punishment, -all these traits helped to make 
Yama an object of terror. The conception of Yama’s role as the fearful and 
‘ restraining * god of death must have been facilitated also by the popular 
derivation of the word Yama from the root yam (“ to restrain), which, 
though normally possible, is not acceptable, in this case, on account of the 
difficulties of Vcdic accentuation which it would create. But it is this aspect 
of Yama’s personality, which has been preserved prominently in the later 
Hindu mythology. 


27, The dogs are, as indicated elsewhere, obviously the outcome of a common 
primitive folk-belief. The dog Sabtila is' often identified with Kerberos . 

15 



DID PUSYAMITRA SUNG A PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS > 

By 

Mr. N. N. GIIOSK, M..\. 

lecturer in Ancient Indian History, Allahabad University. 

I raise this question in order to find an answer to it. The question 
arises because of the opinions of some eminent scholars. Dr. II. C. Ray- 
chaudhuri, for example, who holds or seems to hold the view that Pusyamnra 
Suhga was not a persecutor of Buddhism. Dr. Raychaudhuri in controvert 
mg the opinion of the late Haraprasad Sastri about the alienation of the 
Briihrnarias by Atoka's edicts against the Brahmanical faith and the militant 
Brahmanic revolution under Pusyamitra Sunga says : “ But the Buddhist 

remains at Bharhul erected * during the supremacy of the Sungas ' do not bear 
out the theory which represent Pusyamitra and his descendants as the leaders 
of militant Brahmanism.” 1 In another place, he says : “ late Buddhist writers 
are alleged to represent Pusyamitra as a cruel persecutor of the religion of 
sakyamuni. But the Buddhist monuments at Bharhut erected 4 during the 
sovereignty of the Sungas ’ do not bear out the theory that the Sungas were 
leaders of a militant Brahmanism. Though staunch adherents of orthodox 
Hinduism, the Sungas do not appear to have been so intolerant as some 
writers represent them to be.”- Following Dr. Raychaudhuri. Dr. R. S. 
Tripathi under a subhead 4 Pu^yamitra’s Persecutions ’ in his newly published 
book * History of Ancient India ' : refers to the evidence of the Divyavaduna 
and Taranatha regarding Pusyamitra \s persecution of the Buddhists, and 
evidently rejects them, for he remarks : 44 Pusyamitra was no doubt a zealous 
champion of Brahmanism, but the Buddhist stupas and railings at Bharhut 
4 during the sovereignty of the Sungas ’ would hardly corroborate the literary 
evidence regarding his ebullitions of sectarian rancour.”* Having had doubt 
himself as to the cogency of his own views he qualified the above statement 
by the concluding lines in the same paragraph thus : ‘ of course, this conclu- 
sion will have to be modified, if the above expression is not taken to refer 
to the time of Pusyamitra.’"' It is unfortunate that Dr ' r ripathi should have 
left himself in doubt and not pursued further to clear this important point 
in his work, the latest product of a text-book for higher studies in Ancient 
Indian History. 

With many of Dr. Raychaudhuri’s objections against the late Mahamaho- 

2. Ibid, p. 268. 

5. Ibid. 


1. P. H. A. I, 3rd. Ed., p. 248. 

3. H. A. I.. p. 187. 4. Ibid. 



DIO PU$YAM1TRA SUNGA PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS 211 

padhyaya Pandit Harprasada Sastri’s interpretation of some of the evidences 
in his article/' I whole-heartedly agree. For instance the late Pandit’s 
attempt to prove Asoka’s persecution of the Brahamaipas by interpreting a 
passage in the minor rock edict has been rightly objected to by Dr. Raychau- 
dhuri; taking the word ‘ amisa ’ to mean ‘ amri$a ’ in Sanskrit, as Senart had 
done, the Paipdit Sastri concluded that by another edict Asoku boasted that 
those regarded as gods on earth have been reduced by him into false gods. 
If it means anything it means that the Brahmanas who wen: regarded as 
Bhudevas or gods on earth had been sown by him.” The word amisa in the 
edict means amisra, unmixed, and, therefore, the rendering of the passage : 

serero sjfftqrfr 3?Smr p foftnp i 
"The gods who during that time (i.e. before) liad been unmingled with 
men in India have now been (by me) associated (with men) " 6 7 8 There is 
thus no question, as Dr. Raychaudhuri lias pointed out, of ‘ showing up any- 
body.’ As a matter of fact Asoka never deliberately persecuted any section 
of his subjects. On the other hand a number of his edicts enjoined an equal 
respect, liberality and solicitude being shown to Brahmanas and sramanas.'’ 
So far I agree with Dr Raychaudhuri and disagree with the late Plaudit’ 
Sastri. But what 1 beg to differ from the learned Doctor is on his attempt 
at minimising the great event of the Brahmatiic revolution, and tlie part 
that Pusyamitra played as its leader, both before and after his accession to 
the throne on the ground that the Buddhist monuments at Bharhut were 
erected ‘ in the time of Sunga Kings.’ His views regarding this point are as 
clear as daylight as can be seen from the quotations I have given at the 
beginning of this paper. Of course, I hold with the eminent scholar the 
opinion that the causes of the downfall of the Maurya empire are many, 
and that the militant Brahmariic reaction is not the only one, as the late 
Parjdit Sastri has sought to convey. But that the discontent of the Brah- 
manas provided a fertile ground for the ambition of the last Maurya King 
Rrihadratha's sempati to bear fruit admits of no doubt. What is then the 
cause of this discontent of the Bilahmaijas ? Although Asoka did not cons- 
ciously persecute the Brahmanas, some of his edicts which he issued with 
the object of reforming the habits of his subjects alienated the Brahmanas. 
for they affected their interests and according to their light the religion to 
which they belonged. In spite of the fact that A4oka paid equal veneration 
to Sramanas and Brahmanas, his reforming zeal could not but hurt the 
interests and feelings of those people whose customs he sought to reform by 
edicts, and like all reformers, well-intentioned and actuated by true love for 
their people, ASoka had his share of hatred and resentment from the Brah- 

6. Causes of the dismemberment of the Mauryan Empire in J. A. S. B.. 1910. 

7. Cf. Maski Rock Inscription. 

8. Cf. R. E ni? IV, V, VIII, IX, X, XII. 



212 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


roaoas. By the RE. I. Asoka stopped animal sacrifices and Samaja, tlie 
old religious and social customs of the Brahmanas. By RE. V. he appoint- 
ed a special class of officers called Dhamma Mahamatras to look after the 
Dhamtna of his people, which was an encroachment on the special jurisdic- 
tion of the Brahmanas, and even set them to look after the dharma of 
the Brahmanas themselves. 1 ' In PE. IV Asoka enjoins on the equality in 
judicial proceedings and punishments. This has been rightly pointed out by 
Pandit Sastri to be an encroachment on a time honoured privileges of the 
Brahmapas. Dr. Raychaudhuri does not accept the interpretation put upon 
it, and says that ‘the order regarding the Vyavahara Samata and Daftda 
Samata is to be understood in connection with the general policy of decentra- 
lisation (italics mine) which the emperor introduced.”' Why should this 
interpretation be put to the words of Asoka instead of the most natural inter- 
pretation which they yield namely that the emperor wanted his Rajukas to 
administer justice to his people with equality and impartiality. Let us quote, 
the relevant portion of the edict with the context as Dr. Raychaudhuri wanted : 

apfarr mt sifajwr wnfa qqcP^, qita ssgiiR q qi araqfaijr 

i ?%rr&5|r % rr$r fa^«wr«rrfi q fiR qr i 

“ In order that they may perform their duties fearlessly, calmly, unper- 
turbed, and in peace of mind, I have put the Rajukas in sole control of reward 
and punishment. But it is my desire that there should be equality in judicial 
proceedings and equality in punishment. 11 The natural interpretation of the 
passage according to the syntax, as well as in view of the background of 
Asoka’s administrative policy, especially in the matter of justice, should be 
that Aioka having given his Rajukhas sufficient power in the matter of judi- 
cial administration, encouraged them to act fearlessly-— especially because they 
would have to encounter the opposition of the privileged classes while adminis- 
trating law equally to all. Anoka's administrative policy was never character- 
ised by decentralisation. On the other hand the process of centralisation begun 
in the time of his grand-father, under his able chancellor Kaufilya, the 
Richelieu of India, was completed in his time. The viceroys of the distant 
provinces and the governors of the home provinces were appointed by him 
from the centre with definite instmetions which were renewed from time to 
time by new edicts. Even the subordinate officials like the Pradestris, 
Rajukas, and Ayuktas, even though working under the viceroys and governors, 
received instructions from the emperor directly. He insisted on his officials, 
both central and provincial, that if they desired to please him, they must 
follow his instructions to the letter, so that they might discharge their duties 
to him and he to his subjects 15 and to see that there is no miscarriage of jus- 
tice in the country. In the Kalbiga Rock Edict I Asoka clearly enunciates his 


9. Cf. P. E. VII. 
11. P. E. IV. 


10. P. H. A. 1.. 3rd. Ed , p. 244. 
12. Kaltnga Edict II. 



DID PU§YAM!TRA SUNGA PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS 213 

judicial policy. Kalinga was a province placed under a viceroy with head- 
quarters at Tosalt. Even then A4oka addressed the judicial officers of Tosali 
( atafef RfWRT ) directly with the definite addition to the 

instructions to the Mahamatras, Asoka proposed to depute eveiy five years 
a Mahamatra of higher grade to inspect the administration of justice by 
these ordinary judicial officers. He further ordered that his viceroys at 
Ujjain and Taxila would do the same. 1 - There is thus no questioned ‘de- 
centralisation’ regarding the application of law and punishment ( vyavr . - 
hara-Samata and danda-samatd) . On the other hand, as the above evidences 
ixrint, it was one of complete centralisation. 

It is an undisputed fact that the Brahmanas enjoyed many privileges in 
law in the times previous to Asoka's reign. The Brahmapic and Dharma- 
sutra literatures provide evidence for this fact. It is also a fact that Asoka 
who was inspired with the Buddhist ideals of democracy and equality could 
not tolerate those privileges and customs which militated against the ideals 
of the Buddhist law of life. Dr. Raychaudhuri seems to doubt that Brah- 
manas enjoyed certain immunities in criminal punishments and has quoted 
certain illustrations from the Brahmapic literature, one from Kaulilyas 
Artliasastra and one from the Mahabharata in favour of his opinion. But 
those illustrations prove the exceptions to the general rule. The evidences in 
favour of the privileged position of the Brahmanas in society and law found 
in the Brahmaaiic and Dharmasutra literatures are overwhelming. Even dur- 
ing Vedic period Brahmanas had come to be highly eulogised as if they were 
gods. (Tai Br. III. 7. 3.) The Brahmana is Agni-Vaisvanara. The Vi?nu 
Dh. S. (19 . 20 . 22) says that the gods are invisible deities, but Brahmanas 
are visible deities ; the worlds are supported by Brahmanas ; the gods stay in 
heaven by the favour of the Brahmanas. The Tai Br. says that the Brahmana 
is indeed the supervisor over the people. The Ait. Br. (37. 5) says that 
where the Ksatriyas are under the control of the Brahmanas, that Kingdom 
becomes prosperous, that Kingdom is full of heroes : 

( % 5nfW ^ 1 ^ )• 

According to Gautama (XI. I) the King is the mler of all, except Brahmanas : 

(Astral aisroer**) 

Both the early Dharma-Sutrakaras. Gautama and Baudhayana, were against 
any kind of corporal punishment being given to the Brahmanas. Baudh. Dh. 
S. (I. 10. 18-19) prescribes only branding and banishment to a Brahmana 
even for murder of a Brahmana ( ?nuvi£<!4( ) Gant. (12. 93) says that 
no corporal punishment should be given to Brahmaiias ( sj igfa 
Instances of many other privileges in law in the matter of punish- 
ments, taxes etc. may be cited from the Brahmapic and Dharmasutra litera- 


13.. P. E. IV. 



214 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

tures. With these overwhelming evidences how can one say that there was 
equality in law and that the Brahma>uas did not enjoy certain privileges which 
went against the principle of vyavah&ra-samatit and daiftla-samata existing 
in the time of Asoka ? That being the case, the edict chi vyavahara-samata 
and danda-samata by Asoka certainly offended the Brahmanas who had been 
enjoying the privileges in law. Therefore, it is difficult to accept Dr. Ray- 
chaudhuri's view that 4 the samata which he (Asoka) enforced did not neces- 
sarily infringe on the alleged immunity of the Brahmanas from capital punish- 
ment, and that it * should be understood in connection with the general policy 
of decentralisation.’ 

I shall now deal with the first event of the Brahmasriic revolt which is 
intimately connected with the fact of Pusjyamitra's oppression of the Buddhists. 
I have already said that Asoka was not an oppressor of other faiths. He was 
a tolerant Bhuddhist ruler, showing equal respect to all faiths and enjoining 
on his subjects to do the same. 14 

But that he was a sincere reformist, wishing well of his subjects whom he 
regarded, and openly said so, as his own children, is clear from many of his 
edicts. It is in his zeal to guide his subjects in the right path that he un- 
consciously and without any intention mortally offended tin. Brahmanas. 1 
have already referred to some of his edicts in this connection. I^et me eluci- 
date them in more detail. RE. I proclaimed Asoka’s principle of akimsd and 
stopped not only killing of animals for the royal kitchen, but also prohibited 
animals being ‘offered as sacrifice,’ and discouraged samajas of the kind 
observed before, in both of which the Brahmanas played an important part. 
'Die appointment of the Dharmmamahamatras (RE. V) deprived the Brah- 
manas of their long-enjoyed right of guiding the religion of the people. The 
smriti literature, as 1 have shown above, placed the Brahmanas in the posi- 
tion of the Gurus. RE. IX shows Asoka as a reformer par excellence. In 
»t Asoka condemned many semi -religious ceremonies which were and still are. 
observed in the homes of the people of the Brahmarjic faith. The essence of 
the edict is that religion does not depend on rituals, but on practical conduct 
in life, on cultivation of proper relations in the home, on character. But he 
regreted that society in his time was given to too much petty ( ) and 
worthless ceremonies. The substance of religion is hidden under mere 

forms. The women-folk are specially guilty in this respect. People 

perform various other ceremonies on all possible occasions m life to avert 
mishaps (a pp^g), at the time of sons’ and daughters ’ marriage, (anargfrantg) 
of births ( ) and journey (3913%). Rites should undoubtedly be 

performed, but rites and ceremonies of this kind bear little fruit. ( arTRSf ) 
It is the moral life that counts. Then he recounts the conditions of real good 
moral life as distinguished from mere meaningless ceremonies in the name of 


14. Ct. RE XII. 


DID PU$YAMITRA SUNGA PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS 215 

religion. These reforms, dictated by an honest and sincere desire for the well- 
being of his subjects and not imbued with a fanatical spirit of hurting any- 
txxlys feelings did in effect, and were bound to, offend the Brahmaijas and the 
people of the Brahmanic faith who honestly found in these reforms a blow 
to their cherished faith and religious rites. Further, the substitution of 
call to wars ( ) f° r the policy of propagation of the Dharma ( qqqtqt ) 

in RE. IV, in other words, the abandonment of militarism for pacifism as 
the policy of state, a policy that was pursued consistently by Asoka’s successors 
encouraged not only the border-provinces to assert their independence, but 
encouraged foreigners, with their outlandish practices, particularly the Bactrian 
Greeks, to invade India. The political independence of India and with it her 
time-honoured culture were threatened with danger. This was the signal for 
the revolution for which the material was prepared by the internal and exter- 
nal [xtlicy of the Maurya rulers from Asoka downwards. The discontent- 
mint of the Brahmanas who were the leaders of the society found a fitting 
weapon in the Senapati Pusyamitra Sunga, himself a Brahmatia. This revolu- 
tion. the coup d'etat which ended the Mauryan tule was a Brahmanic reaction, 
par excellence, whose object was to restore the Brahmana supremacy and 
Brahmanic faith in society which was being threatened from within and 
without. Its immediate effect was the assumption of the power of the state 
bv Pusyamitra suhga, the Brahmana, and the principal instrument of the 
reaction. Pusyamitra had to justify his position as head of the Brahmanic 
reaction by jiersecuting the Buddhists and destroying Buddhist monasteries 
on the one hand and restoring the sacrificial ceremonies of the Brahmanic 
faith on the other, for which his principal helpers were Patanjali and also 
perhaps Manu, the author of the Mauusinriti. who was also his contem- 
porary according to some scholars : and for the one we have, the testimony 
of the Divvavadana and Taranatha ; for the other Patanjali’s Merhdbkasya, 
Kalidasa's Malavikagnmitram, and the Ajodbya inscription'-'' provide the 
necessary evidence. A passage in the Divyavadhana states : qj ^ WttfK) 

qi$qft who ever who will present me with the head 

of a sramana will get a reward of hundred dinars from me.” Taranatha, the 
Tibetan historian, also testifies to the killing of sramapas and burning of 
Buddhist monasteries by Pusyamitra. What reason is there to reject these 
testimonies? Should they be so lightly dismissed as mere uncorroborative 
writings of late, authors like the compiler of the Divyavadana and Tara- 
natha 17 , as Dr. Raychaudhuri holds or as ‘ ebullitions of sectarian rancour,’ 
as Dr. Tripathi points out' 8 ? 

The persecution of the Buddhists by Pusyamitra, as 1 had discussed 
above, was a logical sequence of the Brahmanic reaction and the political 


15 . Ep. lnd.. XX, pp. 54-58. 

17. P. H. A. /., 3rd. Ed., p. 246. 


16. Ed. Cowell and Neil, p. 133. 
18. P. H. A. I., p. 187. 



216 


Ji C. LAW VOLUME 


coup d'etat. The traditions of the persecution were current when the Divya- 
vadana was composed and even in tlie time of Tananatha when he wrote his 
history. Many events of ancient India have been thus preserved by tradi- 
tional writings. Dr. Raychaudhuri who dismisses this particular reference 
in the Divyavadana gladly accepts the testimony of the same book in con- 
nection with another event Regarding the revolt at Taxila during Asoka’s- 
reign due to ministerial oppression Dr. Raychaudhuri says : “ The divya- 

v.utana is no doubt a late work, but the reality of ministerial oppression which 
it refers is affirmed by Asoka himself in the Kalihga edicts.’’ 1 ! ' l do not, 
however, hold that whatever is written in the divyavadana is to be taken as 
n fact without any sound judgment. But should all traditions be dismissed 
as mere myth if no epigraphic evidence lx* found to check them ? Inscription 
is no doubt the most satisfactory check of traditional accounts. But should 
a traditional account be dismissed even though there is a reasonal historical 
background to accept them as true? And what is the most positive ground 
which the previous writers have stood on to reject the tradition of Pusyamitra’s 
persecution of the Buddhists ? Both ihe writers, referred to above, reject 
it on the ground that * the Buddhist monuments were erected 1 during the 
supremacy of the Sufigas’ (italics arc mine). The inscription on the left 
pillar of tire eastern gate-way at Barhut bears an inscription which contains 
the above inscription. The inscription is as follows : 

“Suganam raje rahe Gagiputasa visadevasa poteria Cagiputasa 
Agarajusa putena Vaciptena Dhanabhutina karitam torajiam 
silakanimamto ca upamana (no)." 

" During the reign of the Sungas, the gate way has been caused to be 
made together with the stone-carving by Vatsiputra Dhanabhuti, son of Goti- 
putra Ajaraju and grandson of king Gargiputra Visvadeva." 

Now (gipj does not necessarily include the reign of Pu$yamitra Sunga. 
It means ‘during the reign of the Sungas.' It does not preclude the idea 
that Pusyamitra sunga is not included in the term, and the gate-way was 
constructed during the reign of his successors who were more tolerant to 
Buddhism than the founder of the dynasty and leader of the Brahmanic 
reaction. The Buddhist church was certainly an ally of the Mauryas ; the 
Brahmanic reaction which destroyed Maurya rule necessarily launched a 
crusade against the Buddhist church as a precedent condition of the revival 
of Bnahmaijism. That Pusyamitra greatly patronised this revival we have 
ample evidence both literary and epigraphic. We find in the contemporary 
account of Patanjali’s MahabhSsya.-" in the reference in Kalidasa’s Mala- 


19. P. II. A. p. 299. 

20. The passage in the Mahabha$ya which proves the contemporaneity oi 
Patanjali with Pusyamitra is : ilia Pusyumitrarii yajamah. 



DID PUSYAMITRA SUNGA PERSECUTE THE BUDDHISTS 217 

vikagmimitram that the horse-sacrifice, which was in abeyance in the 
Mauryan period, was revived by him. The Ajodyha inscription definitely 
refers to the two horse sacrifices performed by Pusyamitra : f gppr - 

The Kosaladhipa was perhaps Pusyamitra’s 
viceroy and his sixth son or brother, for the inscription describes him as 
SPlfipfCT * e - sixth of Pusyamitra . 

This feverish activity towards the revival of Brahmanism ill fits with a 
tolerant policy towards Buddhism which he has been credited by the writer?. 
He could ill afford to do so, even if he liked, and keep his reactionary allies 
attached to his rule. But passion must have quieted down, and political 
conditions settled during the time of Pusyarnhra's successors who felt less 
obliged to yield to the reactionary elements in the state and consequently 
pursued a less militant and more tolerant policy towards the Buddhists to 
allow them to decorate the Buddhist stupas in Barhut. That the gate-ways 
wire erected long after the time of Pusyamitra is also the opinion of eminent 
archaeologists. The late Mr. N . G . Mazumdar, for example, writes : “ the 
Sung as referred to in this inscription formed a dynasty which was founded 
by the general (senapati) Pu$yaltiitra, succeeding the Mauryas about 180 H.c. 
The gate ways, however, appear to have been set up about a century later, 
towards the close of the sunga period.""- (italics are mine). In another place 
he says : “ The gateways appear to have been added to the stupa at least half 
a century after the* construction of the original Railing, which may be dated 
about 125 b.c.” In the face of these evidences how can we say that the 
expression suganam raje includes the reign of Pusyamitra sunga also, and 
use it as an argument to reject clear literary evidences that Pusyamitra Sunga 
persecuted the Buddhists ? 


21. Ep. Ind. XX. pp. 54-58. 

22. A guide to the Sculptures in the Indian Museum, p. 14. 

23. Ibid. 



DVARAKA 


By 

Dr. A. D. PUSALKER, m.a., ll.b., ph.d. 

Dvaraka, also known as Dvarika, Dvaravati or Kusasthali, is one of the 
seven sacred places reputed to confer final emancipation. 1 It is also one of 
the four dhamans in India, situated to the West, presided over by srikrsna, 
the Lord of Dvaraka (Dvarakadhfsa), the other three being respectively 
Kedaranatha, Jagannatha and Rsimesvara situated to the North, B,ast and 
South. The Mahumdyuri also refers to Visnu i Srikr^na ) as the principal deity 
of Dvaraka.'- The name Dvaraka does not occur in early Vedic literature, 
but is found in the Mahabharata and the Parana*. The / a takas and Buddhist 
works also refer to Dvaravati or Dvaraka in connection with Kpsna and the 
Andhaka-Vi^nis.- Dr. Rhys Davids mentions Dvaraka as the capital of 
Kamboja in the early Buddhist period ; it was, however, not a city of 
Kamboja, but a trade-route connected the Kamboja country with Dwaraka. f 
Barake of Arrian has been taken to refer to Dvaraka. * According to the Siva 
Purana. Dvaraka contains the temple of one of the twelve jyolirlinga s of Siva 
Known as Nagesa. 0 There is also a monastery of Sri Sahkaracarya at Dvaraka. 
Modem Dwarka is situated in Okhamandal in Kathiawad to the extreme 
western promontory. There is, however, a difference of opinion among 
scholars as to the location of ancient Dvaraka, and Muladvaraka, Girinagara 
(modern Junagadh), and sites near Madhupur and Kodinar on the coast line 
between Porbunder and Miyani, are variously identified with the old Dvaraka. 7 
Location of Dvaraka will be considered towards the end of this paper. 

The Mahabharata and the Pur anas state that: Dvaraka has been elected 

1. am i 

gft srcraHt % qfoi i» 

2. Journ. V. p. Hist. Sor.. XV, pp. 27, 31-2. 

3. Cf. B. C. I-AW, India as described in Early Texts oj Buddhism and Jain- 
ism. pp. 85, 102, 239. 

4. Cf. RAY Chaudhury, Pol. Hist. Am:, lnd.. 4th Ed p. 127 ; Law, op. eft., 

p. 85. 

5. Ajltekar, Ancient T owns and Cities in Gujarat and Kathiawad, p. 25. 

6. Siva Parana, IV. 1.23 ; cf. Dey, Gcogr. Diet 2nd Ed., p. 59. 

7. Full references arc given later on. 



DVjiRAKA 


219 


on the site of Kusasthali, which was the capital of Anarta, 8 ancient name for 
Gujarat. According to the Purams, the descendants of Saryati, son of Manu. 
are credited with the loundation of what is now known as Gujarat. It receiv- 
ed its ancient name from Anarta, son of saryati. Rocamana, Reva and 
Raivata Kakudmin followed, and the dynasty reigned at Kusasthali, whose 
foundation is variously ascribed to Anarta or Revata. 1 ' The Saryatas, how- 
ever, did not last long, and Kusasthali, their capital, was captured and des- 
troyed by Punyajana Rak=asas.'° The remnants of the Saryatas fled to dif- 
ferent countries, and afterwards became a tribe among the Haihayas. 11 
After the destruction of the Haihaya power by king Sagara of Ayodhya. the 
Saryatas probably became merged with the hill tribes. Revata, the founder 
of Kusasthali, has been confused with a later descendant in some Puranic 
accounts, which state that Balarama, the Yadava, elder brother of Sriknjria, 
was carried to Revati, the daughter of Revata. 1 - fn all probability, this latter 
was a distant descendant of the founder of Kusasthali. 

After its destruction by Punyajana Rak$asas, Kusasthali appears to have 
been deserted till the time of Srikfspa, the Yadava hero, the friend and 
counsellor of the Pandavas, who made it his capital. The Yadavas and 
Bhojas, Andhakas, Vrsnis, originally belonged to Mathura ; but on account 
of the incessant invasions of the powerful king Jarasandha of Magadha and 
the tlireatened siege by Ivalayavana, the Yavana chief, the Yadavas with their 
families migrated in a body southwards to Gujarat, and established themselves 
at Dvhraka. Krsna is said to have founded Dvaraka at the site of ancient 
Kusasthali. The life of Kr^na is well known.' 3 The Yadavas were all ruin- 

8. Agni. 273. 12-15 : Hmhniioida. II. 61.19-23 ; 86.24-27 : A ibh. II. 

1 1.50, 67 : Brahma. 14.56 ; Hart, 1967 : 

fasw *«IT hRPPd: fonfolR. 1 

9. Cf. references in note 8 above. This Kusasthali is different from the Kusa- 
sthali on the Vindhyas founded by Kusa, son of Rama. Pamuter. Anc. Inti, Hist. 
Trad., p. 279. 

10. Brahmanda, II. 63.1 : V'ayu. 88.1 r Brahma, 7.37-8: Han. I. 11.4: 

WT RT II 

11. Brahmatjuta, II. 69.52-3; Brahma, 13.203-4; Matsya, 43.48-9; Vayu, 
94.51-2 ; |W«ri, I. 3351-2. Cf. also, Parkiteh, Aw. hid. Hist. Trad,, pp. 98, 265. 

^rr qsr fai: tgqpit i 

12. Cf. the continuation of passages in note 8 above. 

13‘. I have dealt at some length with the historicity of Kfspa and his life in 


220 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


ed in a fratricidal strife near Prabhasak$etra after the Bharata war. After 
Krsna’s death, remnants of the Yadavas abandoned Dvaraka with their 
women and children under the leadership of Arjuna, the Paaidava, and re- 
treated northwards ; but they were attacked by the AbhTras and hill tribes. 
Arjuna was able to save but a few of these people whom he brought to Indra- 
prastha and anointed Vajra. the grandson of Ki’sna, as their king. Dvaraka 
is said to have been submerged under the sea after Krsna’s ‘ascent to the 
heavens, immediately after the Yadavas left." 

A different story of the foundation of Dvaraka is given in the Dvaraka - 
mdhultnya. . iS Anarta. son of cSaryati, being expelled by his father, on his 
praising Krsoa as being the Lord and master of all, went to the sea-shore, and 
practised penance, Srikrsna was pleased and founded a new region for Anarta 
by placing on the ocean a piece of land brought from the heavens. This region 
was later known as Dvaraka There is. however, much historical inconsistency 
in this account, as it makes Kysna. who was ages subsequent to Anarta, a 
predecessor and contemporary of the latter. 1 " 

We do not get any particulars about Dvaraka after the time of Kr$na 
after the sea encroached on it. Being recently founded by Krspa and having 
been submerged soon after Kostin's time, Dvaraka naturally was not regard- 
ed as a holy place at the time of the Pandavas and the Bharata war. That 
it was not a sacred place of pilgrimage at the time of the Bharata war, would 
also seem to follow from the fact that the Piuidavas are not said to have 
visited the site in their pilgrimage. The Papdavas are stated to have gone 
from Surparaka to Prabhasa, (which is on the southern coast of Kathiawad 
far from Dvaraka), where Krsna and the Yadavas had come to meet them. 17 
The site, of Dvaraka rose into prominence as a sacred place during the inter- 
val between the Bliarata war and the composition of the Mahdbharata (c. 2nd 
cent. B.c.), as it occupies a premier place among the Inthas mentioned by 
Narada.'* 1 Somehow we. do not get any reference to the site either in literary 
works or in copper-plates or inscriptions till after the end of the first millen- 
nium of the Christian era. The description in the sisupdlavadha is simply 
poetic fancy. The Vllitsardghava of Somesvaradeva refers to Dvaraka as a 
sacred site of SrikTsna.''’ Caitanya and Mirabai in medieval times went on 
pilgrimage to Dvaraka which had become famous as a iirtka by their time. 

There are references to the tribal form of government of the Yadavas at 

a chapter contributed to the Glory that was Gurjartulesa (Ed. K. M. MUNSHI. 
Bombay, 1943, Section III. Chapter II). 

14. Mbh, XVI, 7.32-72 ; XVII. 1.8, 9. 

15. Gargasamhitantargala Dvarakamahdtmya. Chap. 1. 

16. Cf. Pargiter, . / bic. hid. Hist; Trad., p. 98. 

17. Mbh.. Cr. Ed., Ill, 118.15-23 ; 1 19. 

18. Mbh., Cr. Ed.. III. 80.82-84. 

19. Cf. Durgashankcr Shastri, Aitihdsik Sariisodhan (in Gujarati), p. 602. 



DVARAKA 


221 


Dvaraka, and we shall describe it in brief. The Andhaka-Vrcpis (and the 
different tribes of the Yadavas) had, an Assembly Hall in Dvaraka, known as 
Sudharma where they gathered on important occasions and deliberated on the 
course of action to be followed. 110 The Sabhapala was probably the Secretary 
of the Council who convened its meeting on suitable occasions. There were 
a number of tribal chiefs or ciders ( gana-mukhya ) . and Kr$na, Akrura, Ahu- 
ka, Satyaki, etc. are spoken of as leaders. 21 Akriira was the Commander-in- 
Chief of the Yadava forces.-'- There were, often parties, and contests for power 
and authority. In the assembly every one was at liberty to express his opinion ; 
but the tact and wisdom of the President generally carried the day. The policy 
of the Government was decided by the tribal chiefs < gamiinukhya) in Coun- 
cil. 2 " It appears that in these Gapas there was a regular system of adminis- 
tration according to the SSstras, and there were departments of Secret Ser- 
vice, Finance. Foreign Policy, etc. The administrative discipline was strictly- 
observed, and disobedience to Government officials ( yuktus ) was severely dealt 
with. 24 Dr. Sin ha lightly concludes that the whole description presents on 
the whole a picture of tribal oligarchy. 2 " 

The Dvarakamahatmya in the Prabhasakhanda of the Skanda Purtaja 
deals exhaustively in great detail with the tlrtha-vidhi, the yatrd-vidhi and the 
ksetra-mdhatmya . 2,i Beginning with Gomatimahatmya and the story of Kyspa 
and Durvasas, there follow the descriptions and glorifications of, and numerous 
episodes connected with, the Cakratlrtha, Rukmiplhrada, NrgatJrtha, Vispu- 
padatlrtha, various t'irthas and saras-tirthas, etc. ; there are also descriptions 
of various vratas. The Dvnrakamdhalmya in the Garga-samhita 2r speaks of 
the principal tlrthas, Cakratlrtha, Satikhoddhara, Gomatl, Raivataka, Pinda- 
raka, etc. Modem Dwarka, as already stated, lies to the extreme west of tflfe 
Kathiawad peninsula, which can he approached either by train or by stea- 
mer. It is towards the right side of Gomati-tlrtha. The celebrated temple of 
Dvarakadhlsa here is reputed to have been built by Vajranabha, grandson of 
Kpspa. Snkfspa is worshipped here as Rapachodaraya on account of his flight 
from Mathura through the terror of king Jarasandha. 28 There is also a temple 
of Kusesvara Mahadeva ; to its south is the Sarada Mafha of Sri Sankara - 
oarya. Most of the sacred tirthas mentioned in the Puratias and Mahatmyas 
are found here including the Cakratlrtha. Ratnesvara Mahadeva, Siddhana 
tha Mahadeva. Jfianakupda, Pintjaraka, etc. At a distance of. 20 miles from 
Dvaraka. and two miles from the sea-shore in the gulf is a small island, known 

20 Mbk., Cr. Ed., I, 212.10 ff. 

21. Cf. Mbh. Cr. Ed., p. 960, lines 170-1. 22. Mbh., Cr. Ed., I. 213.31 

23. Mbh., XII, 107.23, 25. 24. Mbk.. XII. 107. 

26. Sovereignty in Ancient Indian Polity, p. 255. 

26. Skanda Purana, VII. 4. 

27. Published by Venkateshwar Press, Bombay, Sam vat 1994. 

2& Cf. Dev, Geogr. Diet., 2nd Ed. p. 232. 



222 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


as Sankhoddharabefa, the main shrines there being the Ranachodaji temple and 
the iSahkhoddharatirtha.-"’ 

Finally, we come to the consideration of the location of Dvaraka, tlie 
capital of the Yadavas, about which, as already stated, there is much differ- 
ence of opinion among scholars. The legend about the original site of Dva- 
raka being engulfed in an oceanic inundation seems to be true as has been 
} jointed by Dr. Altekar, as literary evidence supjwrts it ; as such oceanic 
changes are of common occurrence in Kathiawad, and as doubt exists as to 
the location of the original site which is jrossible only when the original city 
has disappeared."" At present, there is a port to the westernmost part of 
Kathiawad known as Owarka. which is a place of pilgrimage and is regard- 
ed as the site of the ancient capital. Muladvaraka is an island in the sea 
about 22 miles east of Prabliasapat.tana. •' Modern Junagadh at the foot of 
the Gimar hills (which some identify with Mt. Raivataka ) has also been 
located as the site of ancient Dvaraka. 1 - Besides these, Dvaraka has been 
variously placed on the coast between Porbander and Miyana, or near Madhu- 
pur or three miles south-west from Kodinar.- 

The Mahabharaia and the Purdnas ate unanimous in stating that the 
Yadavas established their capital on the site, of the ruins of Kusasthall, the 
ancient capital of Anarta. 15 ' Kusasthall and Dvaraka or Dvaravati appear 
as synonyms. All these authorities further agree in stating that Dvaraka was 
near Mt. Raivataka. Basing their conclusion on the. identification of Rai- 
vataka with Mt. Gimar, some scholars have decided in favour of Girinagara 
(modern Junagadh) as being the site of ancient Dvaraka.’’- Junagadh is, 
no doubt, an ancient town, as contended by these scholars ; but it was never 
known as Dvaraka. lit is. again, more than 60 miles from the sea-shore, 
whereas there is an ancient persistent tradition maintaining that Dvaraka was 
near the coast line., which cannot be easily overlooked or lightly discarded. 
This tradition of the proximity of Dvaraka to the sea is not confined only, to 
later Pururias as is stated by the supporters of the claims of Junagadh. The 
Mahabharaia references in the Mausalaparvan clearly mention Dvaraka to 
be on the coast line ; besides the references in the Harivamsa to the founda- 
tion of Dvaraka near the sea. other Pur anas also state that the ocean was in 

2ft Cf. Durgashanker Siiastri, op. rit., pp. 599-613. 

30. Ancient Towns and Citks in Gujarat and Kathiawad. p. 25. 

31. Hathibhai Shastri, Proc. Oriental Coni.. VIT, pp. 1171-3 : Nagari 
Pracanni Patrikd, XII, pp. 97-100. 

32. Biiattasali, lnd. Hist. Quart., X, pp. 541-50; Durgashanker Shastri, 
op. cit., pp. 377-386. 

33. Cf. BUHGESS, Antiquities oj Kathiawad and Kachh, London, 1876, p. 13. 

34. See note 2 above. 

35. See note 32. 



DVARAKA 


223 


close proximity of the city.' 16 The references in the Adi- and Sabha-parvans 
of the Mahdbharala indicate that Dvaraka was in tlie vicinity of Mt. Rai- 
vataka ; 37 but nothing is stated about its distance from tire sea-shore. At- 
tention, again, may be drawn, in this connection, to a statement in the Ghata 
Jataka, which clearly shows that Dvaraka “ stood on the sea and had a hill 
by its side”, - "* proving thereby* the antiquity of the tradition of Dvaraka 
having both the sea and a hill in its vicinity. Hence, Junagadh being more 
than 60 miles from the sea shore cannot be regarded as the site of ancient 
Dvaraka, which was near the sea. It is. no doubt, near Mt. Gimar ; but 
the identity of the latter with Mt. Raivataka mentioned in the Mahiibharata 
and the Pur an as has not been established beyond doubt. There is. again, 
complete absence of any sacred shiincs associated with Dvaraka in the neigh- 
bourhood of Junagadh. 

Next, we consider Muladvaraka on the sea, about 22 miles east of 
1 Vabhasapaiyuia . Being at a distance of about 60 miles south of the Gimar 
hills (which some identify with Mt. Raivataka), it cannot be said to be by 
the side of the hill. However, it apjxars that late traditions consistently, bring 
in Muladvaraka. as would appear from the references in the Skrnula Purdna.'-' 
The description in the Sisupulavadhu has no evidentiary value, being merely 
based on flights of poetic fancy. But the Pinclarakatutha mentioned in the 
Mahitbhdrala is not located in Muladvaraka. This, coupled with its distance 
from the hills, goes against its identifications with the site of old Dvaraka. 
Other sites on the coast line also are at some distance from the hills ; and 
hence do not appear to be* the sites of ancient Dvaraka. 

Next, we come to modern Dwarka on the extreme western coast line. 
The main argument against this site is that it is about 110 miles from Mt. 
Gimar (identified with Mt. Raivataka by some). It is true, there is no 
mountain close to modern Dwarka ; but, as suggested by Mr. Pa.rc.iter, the 
Barada hills in Halar are not far from the site, and they can be identified 
with Mt. Raivataka. 1 " As already indicated, Dvaraka gained position as a 
sacred site after the period of the Bharata war. In the enumeration and des- 
cription of the tirthas by Narada, Dvaraka is dealt with at some length. It 

36. Cf. Hart. II. 56.26-7 ; Brahma. 17.33 ; Brahmanda, U. 71.91 ; Vdyu. 96.90 : 

forc II 

m jiw i 

$$ ( v. 1. ) -ddPQwin: II «TI3, Wj It 

Trikatidaiesa (p. 32) calls Dvaravati, an “ Abdhtmgari 

37. Mbit., Or. Ed., I. 212. 6-7 ; II. 1 tj50. 67. 

38. Cf. LAW, op. cit., p. 102. 

39. Cf. Hathibhai Shastki. Proc. Oriental Conf ., VII, pp. 1171-2. 

40. Mdrkandeyu Parana, Eng. Trans., p. 289 note. 



224 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


is stated that in the Puxkarakatlrtha are found coins or seals with the marks 
of padma, and lotuses with the trisula marks of Sankara indicating the pre- 
sence of Safikara also." 1 Phjdarakatlrtha is still to be found at modern 
Dwarka. It may, therefore, be said that the antiquity of the present site of 
Dwarka goes back to over 2,000 years. The. Mahdbhdrata expressly states 
that ancient seals or coins were found at the site ; if excavations are carried 
at the sites which lay claims to having been the ancient DvSraka. it is pos- 
sible, we may cornd across seals or coins to which the Mahdbhdrata refers 
and to which attention was drawn by Dr. Jayaswal .-* 2 This will, indeed, 
decisively settle the question of the identification of Dvaraka. 

It is true, we get no epigraphic records; or copper-plates about the site 
of the modem Dwarka, which indicates that it was not known in the historic 
period. The copper-plates and inscriptions brought forth in connection with 
Junagadh, refer to it as Girinagara, and never as Dvaraka ; besides, it is far 
from the sea. Thus, there are objections to the identification of Dvaraka either 
with Junagadh or with modern Dwarka, and we cannot establish the identi- 
fication with absolute certainty ; but the objections and difficulties in the lat- 
ter case are not so weighty as they are in the case of Junagadh. Besides, taking 
into consideration the facts that successive sacred shrines arise on the same 
ancient spot and that the 2.000 year old tradition must have got some basis 
in reality, I am inclined to look for the old capital of Snkrsna at the site of 
modem Dwarka. 


41. Mbh., Cr. Ed., III. 80 82-4 : 

SR: Hirtl II 

dfSflRftsf *TfT*nn i 

arcnfa dtvgcwftgtf li 

BrojWft 'renft i 

42. Proc. Oriental Con., VII, p, lxiii. 


TWO DECADES OF MADURA (1734-1754). 


By 

T. V. MAHALINGA SASTRI, M.A., D.UTT. 

Madura, the Athens of South India and the radiating centre of an ancient 
culture, a city known from the earliest beginnings of South Indian history for 
power, plenty and prosperity, a city that was the capital of many dynasties of 
rulers beginning from the pre-Christian period passed through calamitous 
vicissitudes of fortune on the disruption ol the Nayak rule in the region. 
After the extinction of the Sultanate of Madura about 1373 as a result of the 
military activities of Kuinara Kampana, the son of Bukka I of Vijayanagar, 
Madura was included in the Vijayanagar Empire. In the sixteenth century, 
in order to provide for the efficient administration of the Madura country, 
Madura was constituted as a Nayakship and one Visvanfitha Nayaka was 
appointed for the place. The Nayak period was a very bright one in the 
history of Madura, when great encouragement was given to the. promotion of 
arts and letters, big irrigation works were undertaken, and everything great in 
the Hindu civilisation was patronised. “ A Government whose wealth and 
whose tastes are manifested by its temples and statues and whose readiness to 
employ all its resources for the benefit of its people, as proved by the number 
and nature of the irrigation works it completed, implies a contented and a 
prosperous people ; while a high state of the arts and knowledge is abundantly 
testified by the exquisite design and workmanship discoverable in many of 
the temples and statues as well as by the grasp and mastery of the principles 
of irrigation -a complicated and difficult branch of the Engineering Art - 
displayed in their irrigation systems”. 1 Among the great rulers of this 
dynasty were Visvanatha Nayaka, Tirumalai Nayaka and Rayi Mangamma}. 

Vijayaranga Cokkanatha Nayaka (1706-1732) who had no male issue, 
was on his death succeeded by his wife Mlnnksi and she ruled for five years 
till 1736, being supported by her brother Venkata Perumal. Her short reign 
was a period of great internal strife. Queen Minak«i adopted Vijaya 

Kumara Muttu Tirumalai Nayakkar, the son of one Vangaru Tirumalai, a 
member of a collateral branch of the royal family. But Vangaru TirumaJa 
attempted to depose Mlnakji and usurp the royal authority. The Nawwab 
of Arcot during that time was Dost ‘All (1732-1740), the nephew of Saadat- 
‘Ullah Khan (1710-1732) who inaugurated the Nawwabi. He sent his son 
Safdar ‘All and son-in-law Chanda Sahib to the Tanjore and Trichinopoly 

1. A. J. Stuart : Manual of Tinnevelly, p. 69. 

16 



226 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


area to bring the region under his control if it failed to pay tribute. Van- 
garu Tirumala took advantage of the presence of the Muslim army near by 
and sought the help of Safdar ‘All against Minaksi. Safdar 'AH offered to 
arbitrate on behalf of the two. decided in favour of Vangaru Tirumala and 
left the area leaving instructions with Chanda $ahib to give effect to the same. 
But Queen Minaksi managed to bribe Chanda ^ahib for a crore of rupees, 
and he promised on the Koran that he would stand by her. But soon the 
differences between Vangaru Tirumala and Minaksi were patched up, and 
therefore Chanda Sahib returned home, being frustrated in his plans. In 
1736 he again came down to Madura with a view to reduce it, taking advan- 
tage of the political confusion there, lie offered to subdue her enemies, and 
sent a large force which took possession of Dindigul. The place was stormed 
and Vangaru Tirumala, who was in charge of the Dindigul area organised 
resistance at Ammayanayakkanur against the Muslim invader but was 
defeated by him." Vangaru fled from the battlefield and took refuge in the 
fort of VeJJikuricchi under the protection of the Raja of Sivaganga. Chanda 
Sahib who became the master practically of the whole of Madura, took Queen 
Minaksi prisoner quite in violation of his promise to her on the Koran , 
The Queen who could not brook her fate committed suicide in the same year 
by taking poison. 

Chanda Sahib, during the period of his administration in the south 
strengthened the fortifications of Trichinopoly and appointed his two brothers 
as the Governors respectively of Dindigul and Madura. But his rule was 
very unpopular, and aroused the great resentment and hatred of the Hindus. 

Vijaya Kumara Muttu Tirumalai Nayakkar, son of Vangaru Tirumalai 
Nayakar, and Vcflaiyan Servaikkaran, the vasal dajavdy of the Setupati left 
the area. The managers and attendants of the temples of Minaksi Sundares- 
vara and Kudal Alagar at Madura took w r ith them the Gods of the above two 
temples to Vanaravirarmadurai (Manamadura) and stayed there for two 
years (1739-41). The Setupati made necessary provision for the puja and 
daily offering of the Gods as also food and drink for the servants of the 
temples, and thus kept them under his protection.*'* 

Vangaru Tirumala and Pratap Singh, the Raja of Tanjore, (1739-63) 
sought the help of the Mahrattas who were extending their power in the 
south. Raja Sahu sent Raghuji Bhonslc on an expedition against the Carna- 
tic. He defeated and killed Dost ‘AIT, the Nawwab of uie Carnatic, at the 
battle at Damalcheruvu Pass (North Arcot District) in 1740. Later, prob- 
ably at the instigation of Safdar ‘ All he marched against Chanda Sahib, sack- 
ing on the way Tiruvangamalai and Porto Novo and plundering the places. 

2. Taylor : Oriental Historical Manuscripts , II, p. 234. 

3. See pp. 6-7 of the .Madurai l tala varalaru in the T iruppanirnalai, Sen Tamil 
publication, No. 27. 



227 


TWO DECADES OF MADURA (1734-1754) 

The total estimate of the value of the plunder was about 150,000 pagodas . 
The Mahrattas first deceived Chanda $&hib by taking their forces beyond 
Trichinopoly, but when they found that he had sold the grains with him and 
was not prepared for an engagement, they besieged Trichinopoly in 1741. 
Bade fjafiib, the brother of Chanda Sahib, marched to the relief of Trichino- 
poly with large provisions, horsemen and foot. But he was intercepted by the 
Mahrattas with a body of 2000 cavalry near Dindigul from which place he 
went forth and defeated them. However Raghuji Bhonsle marched to the 
scene with 10,000 horse and attacked the camp of Bade. SSljib at Manalparai 
and killed both him and his sister’s son-in-law Sadiq Sahib. Later the corpse 
of Bade Sahib was richly dressed and sent to his brother Chanda §ahib at 
Trichinopoly, so that he might be warned of the impending downfall of his 
hopes. Raghuji Bhonsle then attacked Trichinopoly with the help of the 
Pindaris, KaHars and Poligats of the area and Chanda Sahib offered him 
stiff resistance. But his ammunitions and stores failed him and therefore he 
surrendered himself to Raghuji on 25th March, 1741. He was disarmed, 
taken prisoner and sent over to Satara where he remained within prison for 
seven years. The fort, of Trichinopoly was taken by the Mahrattas and 
Murari Rao Ghorpade of Gooty was appointed the Governor of Trichinopoly 
and the area deciding on it, assisted by 14,000 of the best troops of the 
Mahrattas. 1 

The Mahratta occupation and rule of the South seems to have been con- 
genial to the betterment of the condition of the Hindus. Murari Rao ap- 
pointed one Appaji Nayaka to administer Madura on his behalf and sent him 
to the place along with 2,(X)0 horses. The latter did not like to stay in a city 
where there was no God, and hence he visited Vanaravlrarmadurai, wor- 
shipped the Gods at the place, and with the consent of the Setupati, took back 
the idols of Miniiksi Sundaresvara and Kiklal-Alagar to Madura in July 1741 
and reconsecrated them in their respective temples. He also performed puri- 
ficatory ceremonies in the temples and made large provisions for the daily 
worship and services of the Gods in the old manner."’ 

But the rule of Madura by the Hindus was not destined to last long. 
The fortunes of the city were soon affected by domestic and political revolu- 
tions in the Carnatic. The course of the revolutions was as follows : Safdar 
‘ All Khan who succeeded Dost ' Alt as the Nawwab of the Carnatic on the 
death of his father in 1740 was assassinated in his bed by his cousin Murtaza 
‘All Khan on the night of 13th October 1742 by order of one Ghulam Murtaza 
‘All Khan the Governor of Vellore, and his own Diwfin Mir Asad was impri- 
soned. But the position of Ghulam Murtaza ‘Ali was not strong. Murari Rao 

4. See Prof. C. S. Srinivasachari, Awmdarangd Pillar, pp. 16-18; Also C. A. 
Kincaid and D. B. Parasnis, A History of the Mar at ha People, pp. 276-7. 

5. See Madurailtalavaralaru in Ttruppartimalai. p. 7 ; Also R . Satyanatha 
Ayyar, The Nayaks of Madura, p. 379. 



228 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of Trichinopoly refused to recognise him and the army also mutinied. There- 
fore Murtaza ‘All escaped to Vellore ; and Sayyid Muhammad Khan the 
young son of Safdar ‘ Ali was declared the Nawwab of the Carnatic. Nispamu’l- 
Mulk the Subedar of the Deccan who was anxious to restore order in the 
south marched to Arcot with a large army of horse and foot which seemed 
“as though the sea was rising and flooding the land.” He subdued the 
Carnatic and appointed Khwaia Abdullii Khan, one of his own important offi- 
cers to administer the Carnatic and keep as his ward Sayyid Muhammad 
Khan. Then he marched towards Trichinopoly which was ruled by Murari 
Rao. The Mahratta chieftain trembled within his shoes at the approach 
of Ni?am‘ul-Mulk, and therefore evacuated his headquarters on 29th August, 

1743 and went north. Thus by the mere strength of his arm, without waging 
one battle, the Nizam got possession of the Carnatic including the far south. 
So the Mahratta rule of Trichinopoly and Madura was put an end to in 
1743. The attempt of Murari Rao to revive the power of the Maluattas in 
the south soon after failed. The Nizam returned home along with Nawwab 
Khwaia Abdulla and confirmed him in his office. But on the night of the same 
day the Nawab of the Carnatic was found dead in his bed, having been kill- 
ed by an unknown hand. Therefore one Anwar-’uddin Khan w'ho was in charge 
of the administration of tire Northern Circars was appointed Nawwab of the 
Carnatic, and the young son of Safdar ‘ All was sent along with him to be 
taken care of. The young lx>y was killed by a body of Tahiran soldiers in June 

1744 apparently at the instigation of Gulam Murtaza ‘ All of Vellore. Hence 
Ar.w'ar-’ud-din was confirmed in the Nawwabship of the Carnatic in 1744. ^ 

Amvar-’ud-din Khan appointed his son Muhammad ‘All to be in charge 
of the general administration of the Carnatic and Mahfuz Khan to be in 
charge of the administration of the Trichinopoly country, and from this time 
for more than ten years the Madura area was under the rule of Muslims. 
Mahfuz Khan attacked Pratap Singh, the Mahratta Raja of Tanjore and 
extracted from him a bond for the payment of an annual tribute. During 
this period an attempt was planned with a view to recover the Trichinopoly 
fort from the Muslims and establish the rule of the son of Kalftu Raja (the 
Zamindar of Udaiyarpala iy am ) when it was arranged that the Mahrattas 
must invade the country being helped by the people of Tanjore and Mysore, 
the Tondaiman Raja of Pudukkottai and the Setupati of Ramnad (Maravan). 
But such grand schemes and designs did not fructify. 6 7 

Matters went on for about four years, till 1.748, when certain incidents 
of momentous significance took place in the Deccan and the Carnatic. In 
that year Ni?am-’ul-Mulk died leaving behind him six sons, Ghazi’uddin, 
Na§ir Jung, Salabat Jung, Nizam ‘All, Muhammad Shariff, and Mir Moghal. 

6. T uzak-i- Walajahi, trans. by Dr. Muhammad Husayn Nainar, (Madras Uni- 
versity), I, pp. 82-4 and 106-08. 

7. See C. S. Srinivasachari, op. ci {., pp. 113-14 and p. 114 fn. 17. 



229 


TWO DECADES OF MADURA (1734-1754) 

He had also a grandson Muzaffar Jung by name, by his daughter. Ghazi- 
ud-din was at Delhi, engaged in imperial politics. Hence Nasir Jung, the 
second son of Nizam-'ul-Mulk succeeded to the Nizamat on the death of his 
father. Muzaffar Jung was anxious to succeed to the position of his grand- 
father. A common cause was made between Muzaffar Jung and Chanda Sal.iib 
(the latter anxious to become the Nawwab of the Carnatic) and Raza Sahib 
the son of Chanda Sahib sought the help of Duplix the Governor of French 
possessions in India. It was learnt that the Mahrattas would be willing to re- 
lease Chanda Sahib if they were paid a ransom of seven lakhs of rupees. The 
money was paid, Chanda Sahib got his release and the confederates marched 
towards Arcot. The French and their allies effected a junction with them, 
met Anwar-’ud-dTn at Ambur, where the latter was killed on 3rd August, 
1749, owing to the treachery of one of his own commanders. Husain Khan 
Tahir, the Jagirdar of Amburgadh who persuaded Nawwab Anwar-’ud-din 
to fix his camp before his fort having treacherous designs. 8 

It was this political condition in the Deccan and the Carnatic where there 
were rivals for the Nizami and the Nawiviibi that rendered the recall of 
Muhammad ‘ All and Mahfuz Kh an from the south necessary and inevitable. 
Under such circumstances they left the south for the Arcot region in 174S 
placing Madura under the charge of one Mayana, apparently a Muslim. It 
is not known how long he was in charge of his post but within a few 
years he appears to have been supplanted by one. ‘Abdul ‘Ahmad "Khan who 
captured the fort of Madura and ruled from that place. This was followed by 
another revolution at the place. One ‘Alam ‘All Khan, probably a brother- 
in-law of Mayana. took possession of the city from ‘Abdul ‘Ahmad Khan. 
According to Orme, he was a soldier of fortune originally in the service of 
Chanda Sahib and the Raja of Tanjore.” Taking advantage of the course of 
events and the political confusion in the Carnatic he proclaimed himself as 
an adherent of Chanda Sahib. He brought under his control Tinnevelly. 
Madura and other places and subdued the Pdlaiyagars of the parts as. far as 
the territory of the Tondaiman Raja of Pudukkoftai . This meant that Muham- 
mad ‘ Ali the rightful successor of Anwar-’ud-din Khan had lost a good slice 
of territory in the Carnatic and the hands of his adversary had become 
strengthened. Therefore, the Nawwab of the Carnatic, Muhammad ‘All, 
sought the help of the English for retaking Madura. Consequently a contin- 
gent of force was despatched to Madura under Captain James Cope who was 
in command at Trichinopoly assisted by ‘Abdul Wahhab Khan, the brother 
of Muhammad ‘All. One ‘Abdul Rahim, an officer who was in charge of the 
Tinnevelly area, also helped Captain James Cope in his operations against 
Madura. ‘Alam Khan was a great military general, and successfully resisted 
the attack of Madura. Captain Cope was foiled in his attempt to take the 


8. Tuzak-i-Walajahi, I, pp. 144-47. 


9. Tuzak-i-Walajaki. 1. pp. 169 ff. 



230 


D. C LAW VOLUME 


fort and hence was forced to withdraw to Trichinopoly. ‘Abdul Wahhab 
Khan’s troops betrayed their master and went over to the side of ‘Alam Khan. 

Saunders the Governor of Madras thought that he could effect the re- 
duction of Madura by diplomacy and therefore on the 22nd of July 1751 he 
wrote a letter to ‘Alam ‘All Khan as follows : 

“ I have heard of your courage in the defence of Madura, which though 
against my own people I cannot but highly commend. Merit ought highly 
to be rewarded, instead of which I hear you are to be divested of your Gov- 
ernment and the French to take possession of the fort. This I think is but a 
bad return for much bravery. You are a soldier and your sword may make 
your fortune. If you will espouse, the cause of Muhammad ‘Ali and assist 
his affairs I promise you shall have a Government under him which will afford 
you wealth and a great name and support you and your family in affluence.” 10 

‘Alam Khan however refused to accept the suggestion. In the next year 
a battle was fought by the British and Muhammad ‘Air against Chanda Sahib 
and the French at Trichinopoly. ‘Alam Khan went to Trichinopoly, sided 
with Chanda Sahib and fought against the British. In the course of the bat- 
tle he was killed. 11 When he left Madura for Trichinopoly he left the former 
under the charge of his brother-in-law, Mayana. It appears that the latter 
was not able to maintain control over the region and therefore he sold the city 
to Kuku Sahib, a Mysore general who was moving about the Dindigul 
area, of which the Mysoreans were in possession at that time. 1 - The city of. 
Madura suffered very much during this period, and the sentiments of the 
people were defiled by him. Cows were killed and eaten and cocoanut trees 
were cut and destroyed. 

The Hindus became disgusted with this rule and organised a revolution. 
Hence VeJlaiyan Servaikkaran commander of the Setupati’s guard and Taijda- 
varaya Pijlai, the Pradhani of the guard of IJdaya Tevar (Zamindar of Siva 
ganga) took up the cause of the Hindus and laid siege to the fort of Madura 
for about a month, at the end of which, as a result of an arbitration made 
between the Hindu invaders and Kuku Sahib, the latter left the city under the 
charge of the Setupati and retired towards Dindigul. Having defeated the 
Mysore general, both VcUaiyan iservaikkaran and Tandavaraya Pihai entered 
Madura and restored order in the city. Since Madura had been under Mus- 

10. Country correspondence, 1757, No. 97, quoted by S. C. Hill, Yusuf Khan 
the Rebel Commandant, p. 30. 

11. See Ormc, Vol. I, pp. 200 ff. 

12. Nelson thinks that this Kuku §ahib was the same as General Cope, who 
was in command at! Trichinopoly. (Nelson, The Madura country, III, pp. 270-71). 
This is due to the author’s taking that the two persons were one. While General 
Cope died on Feb. 3, 1752 fighting at Krishnavaran, Kuku Saljib lived for some 
years more and is “ mentioned by Colonel Heron in a letter to Council dated 29th 
October, 1754 aa causing trouble in Madura with some Mysore horse and sepoys. ” 
See S. C. Hill, Yusuf Khan the Rebel Commandant, p. 31. 



231 


TWO DECADES OF MADURA (1734-1754) 

lim rule for about ten years the temples and religious practices in the city 
had suffered much. Hence both of them performed purificatory ceremonies, 
threw open the temples that had been kept closed, restored services in them 
and made provision for the renewal of wot ship in them. They also restored 
Hindu rule over Madura by taking Vijaya Kumara Muttu Tirumalai Nayaka, 
son of Vangfiru Tirumala from Vel|ikuricchi and crowning him as the ruler 
of Madura in the sanctum of the Goddess MInaksi. J: ’ 

But the revival of the Hindu power in Madura was not to last long. Ac- 
cording to certain local accounts, Vijaya Kumara Muttu Tirumalai Nayaka 
ruled only for sixteen months and was dethroned on 29th November, 1752, 
by the combined efforts of three Muslims. Mianah (Mahomed Barkey), Mode- 
miah (Mahomed Mainach) and Nabi Khan who were the subordinates of 
Muhammad ‘All. This is indicated by a signed document in which they recog- 
nised the authority of the Nawwab over Madura and Tinnevely. 1 * Madura 
again appears to have suffered under Muslim yoke. Temple lands were confis- 
cated. The gardens and wells were destroyed and the trade of the merchants 
was paralysed. Therefore Vcllaiyan Servaikkaran seems to have sought the help 
of Kuku Sahib the Mysore general. Both of them marched towards Madura 
encamped at a place called Panaiyur Anuppaladi near the city and besieged the 
fort of Madura for six months. 

But the forces of Mayana were successful, in the battle and killed both 
Vejlaiyan Servaikkaran and Kuku Sahib. Thus the Muslim chieftain was 
able to maintain himself as the Governor of Madura from 1753. Mayana 
however was not loyal to Muhammad ‘All and was not regular in the pay- 
ment of the annual tribute to him, to which, he was legally entitled as the 
Nawwab of the Carnatic which included Madura and Tinnevelly also. Hence 
Muhammad All appealed to the English to help him in the lestoration of 
his authority in the far south. The Governor of Madras sent Colonel Heron 
and Yusuf Khan (the latter a Hindu convert to Islam who had distinguished 
himself in the siege of Trichinopoly (1752-54) and had won great praise from 
General Lawrence as a “ born soldier ". Heron reached Madura early in 
March 1755 to find that Mayana had fled away from the place to Koyilkudi 
and taken refuge in the strongly built temple at Tirumbur, and took posses- 
sion of the city. He also concluded a treaty on his own responsibility with 
the Sctupati of Ramnad. Then he marched to Tirumbur, stormed the 
temple, set fire to its gates and allowed his soldiers to plunder the temple and 
carry off a large number of idols from it. But Mayana had made good his 
escape from that place also. Later Colonel Heron marched into the Tinnevelly 
country and reduced it to submission after attacking Kattabommu Nayaka 
and othei chieftains in that region. M'ahfuz Kha n was appointed as the 
renter of Madura and was required to pay an annual rent of Rs. 15,00,000. 

13. See Maduraittalavaralaru in the Tunppaninialai, p. 8. 

14. S. C. Hill, op. tit., p. 31. 



QULI QUTB SHAH, A POET-KING OF GOLCONDA 
(1543 A.D.— 1550 A.D.) 

By 

Prof. Dr. K. K. BASU, M.A.. ph.d., 

T. N. J. College, Bhagalpur. 

Jamshed QuJi Qutb, the son of Subban Quli Qutb, the founder of the 
Qutb Shahi dynasty of Golconda — ascended the throne with the title of Quli 
Qutb Shah. He was the second king of the house to which he belonged. 
Though a parricide, the historians like Ferishta, Rafi-ud-din Shirazi and 
others call him as such, he was in the words of the author of Hadiqat-ul 
Alam, a sovereign perfect and excellent, and one who had gained eminence 
among contemporary rulers. In addition to his abilities as a ruler, he pos- 
sessed a fine taste for literature. In fact, lie has been credited with having 
composed fine pieces of poetry, noted alike for high thoughts and fine diction. 

The Sultan’s literary compositions have now totally disappeared but a 
few sjiecimen of his writings have been preserved by the author of Hadiqat-u!- 
Alam, for which all our thanks go to him. The few remains of the {ioen s 
comjjosed by Quli Qutb Shah belong to the particular types of Persian poetry, 
called qasidahs and ghazals. The former, it need be explained, are “ purpose- 
poems" or better panegyrics, that commemorate some memorable event in 
the career of the poets’ patron or are written in praise of the Prophet or his 
descendants. The ghazals, on the other hand, literally mean “ talking with 
women about love,” and they represent or reproduce the joys and sorrows 
of love, divine and human. Being a Shia’ite in religion, the Sultan has bes- 
towed unstinted praise on ‘Ali, the grandson of the Prophet, as will be evi- 
denced from the single piece of qasidah quoted below. 


A* ^jA 


jyu wit y jl Jic £ 

J W. j (•**»■ j-*-*. 

iS 1 

J&" J J ^ =U . -A 

J li J *-*) j 0& i 


Jly. j, liS j* jJ jiT 

J V' k & j* *j 


jr* 

) y* J j I • 

* aA 

i J’y 1 3 J*® 

O* jl *yj y 

r* 

J J. £3 f t 


-dr 

J IjT sjy i-| tS^sa y \ 

• w-i-* j-i y jo j i vj 

.L*iT 

J\j\ y 

fW-A y m * 

o* 



QULI QUTB SHAH, A POET-KING OF GOLCONDA (1543 A.D.-1550 A.D.) 233 






<4j*> 



• V- 

JVlM 

^ * J f* l j*- 

jIj 


• 3 J J Jj 

<jr^ 


C-* * 

0 jU-» 

JVS 

o»IJ - • 

J* 


y j. 



i ^ j L ■. 



u I o lc* A y 
w * > < C-* j _ £.» ^ j 

*JJ VS l»- y 3 p-— l; a: “^r 

«*»JJ c£^ 

jO* ^jW -) j ^ ur:- 

<J C 1-r J* 

^jjU jl ^ fly f^ft 

O^r J J A Jl y {j ,**** l 

® o * i y t£ ^*^= > ^ 


Translation 
(one of his qasidhs) 

Oh thou ! with thee the country’s beauty is at an end. 

By thee the affairs of love have attained fame : 

(Oh thou !) whose hairy locks, their folds and the mole on thy lips 
Each perfect in its beauty ! 

lie who has put his feet on the road of thy love 
lias at length knocked his head in despair : 

The Sun is put to shame at the beauty of thy face 
(And) makes his exit from the azure vault : 

(Oh thou ! ) thy playful looks have made me thy captive 
Have carried away my wit, intelligence and all my patience. 

All the sovereigns lie waiting at thy door 
In anxious expectation of thy presence : 

Ashamed is the Sun at thy beauty 

(It) has caused the clouds to veil its discomfitures : 

For madness have I attained notoriety, 

For excellence and beautifying the world hast thou gained renown : 
Thou art the very same sun that has no rival, 

(And) I the very same ixjrson — an object of mercy : 

How long must I wait in thy expectation, 

Take pity on me who is all helpless ! 

How long shall 1 be tempted by thee, 

(Oh how long) shall I be looked upon as one insane ! 

Lookest thou at the condition of mine, if not, 

I shall clamour for justice near the Wise ; 

And near the King, who has in this world 
Hardly ever been challenged by any one : 

‘ Ali is the King of the two worlds, 

This comely universe is under his bidding : 



234 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Oh King, thy most devoted servant am I, 

My service to thee has made me prominent : 

Thou art a King at the entrance of whose court 
Faithfully serves Khizr as a water-bearer 1 : 

I. who am destitute, have made the dust of thy feet 
A collyrium for mine eyes ! 


CJ lJ J iiS \ • 4* 



rV. 


\j» z 

| A 2 U l'l 

\ j* 5 ^ ^ 





& 1 y 




r vjj j oT ^ i / JU- 

c ~\ « 

JiZ • Ul» » (l J y 



-- 1 fta 

1 y 51* t j\ 

O j JL 

i y j I sA 

Jl C>\*j A 

iy 


^ Ci’} 3 Mr*" £ o* 

OV 

J a r! u * y** J 

& cs. 1 


•=— :, hj 

. jl & i-Ci| <t; ^ | 





Translation. 

A specimen of ghazal 

To me the wine is forbidden without the Vermillion- lips of the beloved, 
Show me the ruby-coloured lips when T hold the wine-cup : 

Mad am I in love after thy dark ringlets 

Oh ! what an attachment is this that brings ill-luck : 

In the locks of thy hair my heart like a bird is ensnared 
The mole (on thy face) is to me an object of attraction and thy locks 
a snare : 

In every moment have I approached thee to catch thy glimpse 
And have ( thus) made my habitation at the place of danger ! 
Disappointed though, I wish not to give up my attempt 
A Jamshed , 2 * * am I, who leaves nothing incomplete ! 

All that happen appear to me as stars of fortune, 

It is not tears that come out of my eyes ! 


1. Reference here is to Khizr who discovered and drank the water of life 
( uU or wT ) whereby he became immortal. Khizr, signifying green, 

is spoken of as the Green Old Man of the sea or the forest, who puts those to the 
right track who lose their way in the wilderness. 

2. Jamshed was a legendary King of Persia who reigned for 700 years. He had 

in his possession a talismanic cup ^ “ world- re fleeting goblet” that 

could foretell events and reflect everything that was going on in any part of the 

world. Jamshed is said to have discovered wine. 



QUL1 QUTB SHAH, A POET-KING OF GOLCONDA (1543 A.D.- 1550 A.D.) 235 

^ Cow* ^ li *ii La & yg ^ ^ ••a* 3 | 

Oji) y (_$ I j j 

Translation. 

Another piece . 

The tears that thou dost see coming out of the eyes 
Are but agents from the city of the insanes ! 

Oh Jamshcd ! how long shoulds’t thou be frantic for the love of the 
beloved ? 

This act of thine if done by others might bring them shame ! 

' ' - * . 

• lX 5 v ^ jji _ 41 

jf j -*L* o U^- -tX : . vl?l 

La o-»! ■* y* V* 1 .! ^ i y c£ I ^y* 

ijZ* I JL- Oj? S' A-i Cy*-y- <£j j Olj 

Jk‘ L i|> • J 3 lo <A j J*n ^ I (j L» 3 am.| ^ 

Translation. 

Another piece. 

‘ May the light ol Ck)d be on him. * 

Behold, how docs the fair-faced come 

She has taken the heart out of me now she comes for my life : 

My heart 1 have pledged to you, so that I may secure profit. 

Oh, what a return ! a misery everlasting : 

It’s for this I desire the candle of my ownself to the consumed 
And words of lamentation come out of me ! 

When the beloved looks at me, she speaks out in proud disdain 
Lo, here the ruler of the world comes out of attachment for me ! 

£)l ••iit) • Jjjl ^ (5 I 

OL* a;U j^r CjLxl* y tlj J JL9J S' cAj Uy 1 

jf J \ ^ I yiiy \j^ y J> 

O I •*» Jj - * l* 1^*5 y S I L 3y S' L 4~*» ; 3 J^/I ^ L*C^ 

OljfeJ • ! Ol J*j» I *T | J I A* 3j 3 jl 



236 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


Translation. 

Another piece. 

Oh, thou ! thy face illuminating the vision of the clear-sighted 
It is thy separation that has bled the heart of thy lover : 

Ages have passed, and thy lover is expectant till now 
My eyes are wet out of steady gaze fixed at thee : 

Life is not worth anything without thee, nor do I wish to live (in thy 
separation) 

If the years pass like this and there's repetition of it in the years to 
come ! 

As in the past, thy beauty is still stamped on my heart 
I am what I was, may you be what you were ! 

Oh, Jamshed cares not the beloved for the lover’s anguish 
Pity for this neglect of thine, oh, what pity ! 

9 

-e- y j- - j > I j*;’ (V.1 -ci <^V1> jl 

Translation. 

Another piece. 

My glory lies in my attachment to thy beauty, 

My disappointments are due to my love for thy silky ringlets ! 



jO ty \j 'J.ty. Cj\tjjs* 
U <L|j )j- I J : *i crj)s.\ 

Translation. 

Another piece. 

I have put the cypress 3 of my heart within the eyes 
So that it may get nourishment from the tear-drops ! 



<£j y jyy } l*»- jl jr® y j* jti 

Translation. 

Another piece. 

I cannot bear the burden of oppression but thine, 

I hardly need anything else than thy tyranny. 


3. Iij Persian literature (sarv) , the cypress tree, stands for a sweet 

heart 



THE SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN THE 
POLITICAL SYSTEM 

By 

Rao Bahadur C. S. SRINIVASACIIARI, m.a. 

Professor of History, Annamalai University, Annamalainagar. 

1. Their Origin and Character 

From about the middle of the 17th century, the poligar system was in 
active swing in the southern districts of the present Madras Presidency. The 
poligars of the Trichinopoly and Madura country were a prominent element 
of administration and well-known to the Pondichery Diarist, Ananda Ranga 
Pillai, who, writing in 1751, has furnished us with the names of 34 poligars 
1> longing to the Trichinopoly country and 38 as belonging to Madura and 
Tinnevelly. According to the Fi}th Report f 1812) the jxjligars were mili- 
tary chieftains of different degrees of power and consequence and their 
origin could be traced to a number of factors. 1 hus those whose palayams 
were situated in the jungly and frontier parts of the country were represented 
to have been, for the most part, leaders of banditti or free-booters ; while 
others had been entrusted either expressly by the indigenous rulers with the 
charge of the police, or had been suffered to take upon themselves, that kind 
of service. Some of them traced their descent from the ancient rulers of 
the land or from their chiefs and officers ; and their ancestors had received 
certain villages in indm either as personal holdings for the support of their 
rank, or as rewards for their services. Their tenure was mostly based on 
the feudal principle of sup]x>rting " a body of horse and foot, which were to 
be at the call of the sovereign, whenever they might be required. ” Other 
poligars had been renters of taxes, or revenue officers who had contrived to 
become hereditary and had succeeded in usurping the lands which had been 
originally given for the support of their offices. These had consolidated their 
position and come to constitute a subordinate, but very potent, class of rulers 
by themselves. Further “ even potails of villages had by these means, at- 
tained the footing of poligar chieftains, though on a smaller scale. In some 
districts, which were favoured by the natural strength of the country, it ap- 
pears that this description of people had generally assumed the character 
and name of poligars ; and though in some cases, their incomes did not ex- 
ceed a few hundred pagodas, yet they kept up their military retainers, and 
their nominal officers of state, and were regularly installed with all the forms 
and ceremonies of a prince of an extensive territory ; assuming and exercis- 
ing, in this contracted sphere, many of the essential powers of sovereignty. ” 



238 


B. C. I,AVV VOLUME 


The poligar considered his territory as a palayam, or encampment, and 
the Nayak rulers of the Madura country (cir. 1550-1736 A.D.) and their 
successors (the Nawabs of the Carnatic) did not attempt to exercise, or 
even to claim the right of exercising, civil or criminal jurisdiction in the 
limits of the poligars’ dominions. If the ruler’s tributes were paid and his 
feudatories sent him assistance in his wars, his demands were satisfied. A 
very considerable portion of the country south of Trichinopoly had thus 
passed into the hands of the poligars. Hardly anything remained in the 
hands of the sovereign in the Madura and Dindigul regions ; while all the 
country north of the Tamraparani river was in the hands of poligars. The 
palaiyam organisation likewise spread into the Carnatic and Mysore regions 
as well. 

Discussing the origin and nature of institution of the palayam sys- 
tem, the following information has been gathered from authoritative treatises. 
The term, Poligar. is peculiar to the Madras Presidency ; and “ the ]X'rsons 
so called were properly subordinate feudal chiefs occupying tracts more or 
less wild, and generally of predatory habits in former days ; they are now 
much the same as zamindars in the highest use of the term. The word is 
Tamil Pdlaiyakdran, the holder ol a Palaiyam or feulal estate ; Tel. Pale- 
gadu ; and thence, Mahr. Pale gar ; the English form being no doubt taken 
from one of the two latter." [Yule and Burnell- Hobson Jobson- - New edi- 
tion by W. Crooke (1903) p. 718]. In Tamil the word Palaiyam means 
the country or district of a feudal chieftain — camp or town, or village sur- 
rounded with stones ; and pdlaiyapatlu means a town or village governed 
by a poligar or his estate. 1 2 * 

Poligar according to Wilson [A Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms 
of British India, (1855) p.. 391] means a petty chieftain in the south of India, 
especially in Karnataka, occupying chiefly tracts of hill and forest, subject 
to pay tribute and service to the paramount state, but seldom paying either, 
and more or less independent, subsisting in a great measure by plunder. 

The poligars founded by the dynasty of the Madura Nayaks are known 
by the name of Southern Poligars ; many of them are of the Toticr caste 
and preserve the Telugu language of their ancestors as distinct from that of 
the Tamils. 8 

Bishop Caldwell gives the literal meaning of pdfaiyakara, as the holder 
of a camp and secondly as the holder of a barony on military tenure. The 
English seem to have taken their favourite name, Poligar, not from the Ta- 
mil Pa|aiyakara, but from the Telugu P&lcgadu, or the Cananese Paleg&ra, 

1. M. Winslow : “ A Comprehensive Tamil and English Dictionary of High 
and Low Tamil ” 1862, p. 766. 

2. Vide Mark Wilks : Historical Sketches of the South of India in an at- 

tempt to trace the History of Mysoor ; 2nd Edn. Vol. I, p. 34, note. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 239 

the meaning of which is the same. Similarly the Anglo-Indian word, Pollam, 
(Poligar’s holding) is derived rather from the Telugu, Palemu, than from 
the Tamil Palayam. 3 

There is a tradition that under Vijayanagara rule, each palayam was 
normally composed of 33 villages ; but there is no trace of this prevailing 
among the fiefs of the Tamil country. In the Kannada country, the Poligar 
was originally deemed to be an Udayar (Wodeyar —lit. proprietor) . The 
Tamil term, Udayar, was frequently used by the Tamil country chiefs and 
is found occasionally among the titles of ancient rulers in inscriptions. The 
Zatnindari of Udayarpalayam is an illustration of the use of the term Uday- 
ar in the sense of proprietor, and feudal chief. The far-famed fort of Pal- 
amcottah (in Tinnevelly) is held to be derived from Palaiyan (a chief, mean- 
ing a Poligar) and Kottain (fort). 

The Madura country, as organised by Visvanatha Nayak, the son of 
Nagma Nayak, and the founder of the Nayak rule of that region (dr. 1529- 
1364 a.p.) stretched from Caix? Comorin to Valikandapuram on the north 
and from Coimbatore, Erode, and the Western Ghats to Rameswaram and 
the sea on the east, according to tire Mrtyunjaya Manuscripts, translated by 
W. Taylor. Visvanatha and his chief co-adjutor, Ariyanatha (or 
Ariyanayaga) Mudali, who combined in himself the double offices of com- 
mander-in-chief and prime-minister ( Dalavdy and Pradhani ) were very 
efficient administrators and restored order in the country by the insti- 
tution of the Palayam system of administration as the most practical and 
organised solution of the many difficulties confronting the settlement of the 
country. Visvanatha was trained in the administrative system of the Vija- 
yanagara Empire and “ made his mark in applying its principles in a sys- 
tematic manner. ” The chronicles of the time attribute a larger share of 
constructive work to Ariyanatha than even to Visvanatha, in the matter of 
the. establishment of the Palaiyakara (Poligar) system. 

The number of poligars in Tinnevelly and Madura is considerable even 
to-day ; and the title is held, by one writer, to have been given by the Vijay- 
anagara kings to the chiefs of the Telugu colonics planted in the neighbour- 
ing provinces for the purpose of overawing the original inhabitants. Visva- 
natha Nayak had brought with him to Madura a large number of his own 
dependents and adherents whom he had to reward ; besides these there were 
the. old hereditary Tamil chieftains and the Telugu and Canarese adventurers 
who had previously settled in the land in Hoysala and early Vijayanagara 
days and whose good-will it was necessary for him to secure ; and above all, 
there were the impoverished and discontented adherents of the ancient Pan- 
dyas and their clansmen whom he had practically abolished ; as well as “ the 
old and turbulent Canarese and Telugu adventurers who had seized with a 


3, History of Tinnevelly, p. 58. 



240 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


strong grip the northern and western divisions of the country.” The poli- 
gar system was the solution of Visvanatha and Ariyanatha of the difficult 
problem of reconciling the conflicting interests of all these classes ; its object 
was to enrich and ennoble the most powerful of each class, and at the same 
time to secure their and their descendants’ allegiance. 

The scheme was possibly the best that was devisable under the circums- 
tances ; but it contained elements of danger and seeds of decay and contri- 
buted. in a large measure, to the decay and subversion of the dynasty. The 
turbulent adventurers had to be conciliated and rendered loyal to the dynas- 
ty ; and they knew only too well how to profit from anarchy and misrule. 
As has been remarked, there aTe two opinions on the merits of the Poligar 
system expressed however only by those who had intimate knowledge only 
of the decadent phase of their rule. One view is that the evils of the sys- 
tem would apply with equal force to feudal institutions in Euroiie in the 
middle ages, and the system served the purpose in the epoch in which it 
actually flourished and it secured “ protection from foreign foes and intern- 
al order and progress, though frequently accompanied by oppression and 

misrule to an extent which would have been otherwise impossible." 11 

On the other side. Dr. Caldwell, while admitting the appropriateness of the 
parallel drawn, would not admit that the system could have been produc- 
tive of any marked internal order and progress ; he laid disproportionate 
stress on the part these poligars played in the devastating internal wars of 
the 18th century and on the evidence furnished by Orme, Welsh, Fullarton 
and other contemporary writers on the devastating anarchy of that century 
that marked the evening, and not the midday, of poligar rule. 

II. The Powers of The Poligars 

Every considerable town and village in the Madura kingdom was fortified 
and garrisoned with regular troops, artillery, trained elephants and horses ; and 
a dalakarlan was in charge of the defence of each town and responsible for 
its safety. Madura was also under a dalakarlan who commanded the garri- 
son and the police of the capital and who had become a most powerful offi- 
cial by the commencement of the 18th century. The jroligars were all to 
perform their military duties effectually and were to keep in perpetual readi- 
ness a mind of military properly equipped for service and ready to take the 
field at a moment's notice. “ This militia was exceeding 1 ^ numerous, in fact 
nearly all the able-bodied ryots resident in the Poligar’s dominions were mili- 
tia men and liable to be called out, whenever there was danger of invasion or 
a prospect of foreign service. ” Some of the feudatory nobles supplying 
troopers were placed in authority over others and they were made answer- 
able for the good conduct of their subordinates. Thus the Sethupathi of 


4. Stuart : Tinnevelly Manual. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 241 

Ramnad was the head of a section of them ; the Poligar of Dindigal was 
the chief of the 18 poligars of that district and “ occupied a most distinguish- 
ed position in the time of Tirumala. ” Whenever troops were required by 
the Nayak for military operations, the Dalavdy ( Dalakarian ) of Madura 
sent requisitions to the poligars concerned and directed them to furnish the 
required number of armed men within a certain time ; the poligars imme- 
diately sent round orders to the da\akartans and headmen of the towns and 
villages in their respective jurisdictions, and on the appointed day the levies 
were expected to be ready for service at the headquarters and in marching 
order. In times of pressing necessity every great leader of these levies 
throughout the kingdom would be called to arms, and large bodies of troopers 
would hurry to the Nayak’s assistance from every quarter. The soldiers of 
the poligars wen? mostly ryots supporting themselves by tax-free lands 
granted to them on condition of their rendering military service, and receiv- 
ed only batta when they were marching or fighting, while the expense of 
maintaining them in military efficiency was very trifling. 

The defects of such an organisation have been well pointed out by Nel- 
son. “ Apart from the lack of training and discipline characteristic of such 
troops, they were kept in order only so long as their leaders continued to 
be animated by a common hope of plunder and personal advancement, or res- 
trained by a common fear of the enemy, or of the king’s vengeance. A jealous 
quarrel among the leading chiefs or the retirement from the scene of action 
of one or two Poligars, who fancied themselves slighted or ill-used, would 
be amply sufficient to btcak up a force in the presence of the enemy or even 
in the very hour of success. Consequently, however numerous might be the 
King’s battalions, however brave his generals and officers, he could never 
for a single moment feel absolutely safe or regard even the slightest indica- 
tions of disaffection with indifference. This was a fatal obstacle in the way 
of Madura becoming a first-rate Hindu power and ultimately as we shall 
see, contributed not a little to the bringing about her downfall.”* 

The poligars* peons exercised police duties not only in their own villages, 
but presumed to protect the property of the inhabitants and travellers in 
the adjoining sarkar villages and roads. This extension ot authority was 
wholly based on encroachment and easily converted into a pretext, “ for the 
most severe oppressions of the people in the form of fees and ready money 
collections. ” The power exercised by the Poligars of the Carnatic (the do- 
minions of Nawab Muhammad Ali) in regard to police and the manner in 
which it was exercised either to raise revenue or to augment their influ- 
ence is described in the report of Mr. Lushington, the Collector of the Poli- 
gar Peshcush in the Southern Districts, dated 20th August, 1790. The poli- 
gars collected two sorts of fees, as district-watchers, and village-watchers. 

5. The Madura Country , A Manual , Part III, p. 158. 

17 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


242 

The village fees known as Tallum (Slalom) or Kudi Koval were of a much 
older creation than the poligar’s influence and authority, “ being coeval with 
the establishment of villages and constituting the fee for the support of the 
talliars or officers of police.” The poligars had so encroached upon and 
assumed these rights that more than four-fifths of the villages in Tinnevelly 
had come under their influence and their peons had superseded the talliars 
or retained them on condition of receiving from them a share of their per- 
quisites. The Desha (properly Disai) Kdval or district watching fees origi- 
nated either from a grant of the ruler or from the voluntary action of the 
villagers, who, being unable to protect themselves, submitted to such contri- 
butions. The former was generally known as the village fee and the latter 
was the district watch- fee. In later times these were levied by the poligars 
from defenceless villagers as the price of forbearing to plunder them. 

The claim of kaval was the most usual method employed by the poligars 
for the purpose of extending their |>ower. Every village from time imme- 
morial had its Kdval-karas (spelt usually Cauwalgars) or watchmen ; and 
they had been remunerated for their services by a small fee usually in the 
form of a rent-free holding. The right of exercising this function of collect- 
ing this fee and of levying a still heavier fee for protection from abnormal 
danger like war was in time claimed by the poligars and their dependents, 
and this claim had been so generally submitted to, that Mr. Lushington 
found in 1799 that out of 2.113 villages in Tinnevelly the kaval of 1,635$ 
was in the hands of the poligars and their men. Another step of encroach- 
ment was taken when the poligars, wherever they found they could not ap- 
point their own followers to the kaval of a village, rigorously levied an an- 
nual contribution on the kaval-karas who were appointed by other agencies, 
like the indigenous village corporation. The disai (direction) watch, called 
usually desa kaval was the additional fee imposed on all the inhabitants of 
the area concerned for the exercise of a wider guardianship, especially over 
roads and wastes, than the village watchmen were capable of. Probably, tire 
amounts claimed in both cases were originally insignificant and were paid 
willingly. They were violently and arbitrarily increased probably in the 
years 1740-6 ; and by 1799, they had risen tenfold of their original level. 
These contributions were levied by the poligars from the defenceless villagers 
as the price of their forbearing to plunder them, and were confirmed by the 
strength of the poligars and the inability of the Nawab’s government to en- 
force a due authority over them. Mr. Lushington adds that “when this 
contribution is not quietly submitted to, torture and the whip are applied, 
whole people of the village put into confinement, every occupation interdict- 
ed, the cattle pounded, the inhabitants taken captive to, and not unfrequently 
murdered in, the pollams (the Poligar’s own domains), and in short every 
outrage of . violence and cruelty is committed until their purposes are 
obtained.” 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 243 


The poligar received a contribution from the area around his fort in 
consideration of protection afforded against armed invasion. Ilis servants 
and retainers received fees and sometimes rent-free land for undertaking to 
protect the property of the villagers against theft and to restore an equival- 
ent in value for anything lost. “ These contributions comprehended pay- 
ments of money, grain, plough cattle, and various other articles, and were 
made by armed peons detached from the fort of the Poligar for that pur- 
pose ; they were not regulated by any fixed principle ; but the amount de- 
pended upon the conscience of the Poligar. The fees and collections thus 
made on account of the police, were exclusive of other assessments to which 
the inhabitants of the neighbouring drear villages were subject equally with 
those in the pollams, under various pretences such as hunting, batta, mar- 
riage expenses and presents.’’* 1 

They also claimed rights over lands in the sarlcar villages which they 
presumed to hold rent-free, This was partially caused by the fact that 
tire palayam lands were indiscriminately intermixed in many places with the 
circar villages and to some extent caused by the poligars being allowed by 
the Nawab's government (o farm the lands in those villages. They frequent- 
ly ejected the ryots from the lands of which they themselves held the inam 
rights and acquired a permanent interest in tire kaval villages. 

The details of the traditional account of the institution, rather reorganisa- 
tion of the poligars, by the founder of Nayak rule in Madura as given in 
the Mackenzie Ms. Chronicles are thus condensed by Nelson. There were 
72 bastions to the fort of Madura and each one of them was now formally 
placed in charge of a particular chief who was bound for himself and his 
heirs to keep ready at his post at all times and under all circumstances. He 
had to pay a fixed annual tribute to the Karla (Nayak) and to supply him 
besides with a quota of cavalry troops and lancemen and maintain peace 
over the particular tract of country entrusted to him. In return he was 
given charge of a number of villages proportioned to the size of his contin- 
gent and his rank as well as the title of P6\aiyakaran (Poligar), besides other 


6. Besides the Poligars also levied in all possible cases taxes on ploughs, looms, 
shops and labourers. They confused by their encroachments the distinction bet- 
ween palayam lands and sarkar lands. They had usurped, in a large number of 
the sarkar villages, the power of appointing and controlling the Slala Kavalkars 
and receiving from them russooms or fees. They also levied hunting batta, contri- 
butions to marriage parties and a number of other payments, either fixed in a 
lump on the whole village, or levied on ploughs, looms, shops and labourers. They 
also received allotments of lands in the sarkar villages on which they received the 
government share or assessment and' claimed the right of madisum ( madyastam ) on 
behalf of the sarkar ryots as against the latter’s revenue coileotors ; and thus dis- 
contented sarkar ryots would be settled in palayam villages. Their right of arbit- 
ration was recognised, the sarkar renter’s power was diminished and the desakaval 
of the poligars fortified 



244 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

valuable gifts and privileges. The sources of Nelson's information stand now 
somewhat discounted in their historical value. “ All that can be regarded 
as probable is that the existence of the Poligars as a class dates from the 
period of the commencement of the rule of the Nayaks. Very few of the 
Zamindars (the principal exception is the Sethupathi of Ramnad) can claim 
that their estates or chiefships were conferred U]X>n them, prior to the Nayak 
period by the old Pandya Kings. ” 

III. Their classification 

Some of the chronicles of the Madura poligars who owe their origin to 
Visvanatha Nayak claim a much higher antiquity for themselves. A list 
of the names of the chiefs actually appointed by Visvanatha and Ariyanatha 
can be made out from the materials contained in Ward’s Survey and in the 
two lists published in Taylor’s Oriental Historical Manuscripts (Vol. II, pp. 
160-68) as well as from an unpublished Mackenzie Manuscript. Many of these 
chiefs are called Nayakkars 7 ; one is a Reddiar, another is a Tondaimanar and 


7. The Toltivars are, according to IT. A. Stuakt, writing in the Madras 
Census Report of 1891. a caste of Telugu cultivators settled in the districts of Ma- 
dura, Tinnevclly. Coimbatore and Salem ; and they arc probably the descendants 
of poligars and soldiers of the Nayakkan kings of Vijayanagar who conquered the 
Madura country about the beginning of the 16ih century. The traditional story 
of their migration to the Madura district is given in several of the Mackenzie 
Manuscripts. They are also called Kambalattars, and they reverence the Pongu 
Tree (Pongamia Glabra) and believe themselves to have originally lived north 
of the Tungabhadra river from where they migrated and took service under the 
kings of Vijayanagar. There were two sections of them, cultivators and petty za- 
mindars and those who wandered about begging and doing menial work. They are 
divided into endogamous sects, and their most important sub-divisions correspond 
to the Telugu Gollas and Yerragollas. (Thurston and Rangachari : Castes and 
Tubes of South India . 1909, Vol. VII, pp. 183-197.) 

Besides the first section comprising these, the second section contains the palai- 
yams of Ariyalur (Malava Rayar or Nainar) Turaiyur (Reddiar) IJluppaiyur. Ku- 
lattur, and Kattalur-Perambur. Attached to the Manappar taluk were Marunga- 
puri, Nattam, and Ramagiri. Attached to the Dindigul area were Palani, Virupak- 
shi, Ayakudi, Mampurai, Idayakottai, Ayyalur, Marumuttu, Emakalapuram, Tav- 
asipadai, Amartaru, Periyakulam, Cambam-Gudalur. 

Attached to the Madura country were Kavandankottai, Velliyakundam, Sirup- 
alai and Kachaikatti. Attached to the Tinnevelly country were EJayiram Parutai, Et- 
tayapuram, Panjalankurichi, Sivagiri, Seitur, Kolarapapatti, Nagalapuram, Dttumalai, 
Kumkkavetti, Alaga devi Maniyachi, Chokkanpatti, Surandai, Naduvukurichi, Ta- 
laivankottai, KoIIapatti, Singampatti, Neykattansevval, Orkadu, Kadambur, Kadal- 
gudi, Kulattur, Memandai, Mavilodai, Arankolam, Sennal-kudi, PiavSli, Mannarkottai- 
Attankarai, Alagakudi etc. 

Attached to Coimbatore, Taliyethu. 

Attached to Salem, TaramangaJam. Others were Mannimaipialayapattu, Kuru- 
vikkulam, Yclambaram, Rajanpalayam. 

Forts on the boundary at Dindigul, DhAitpuram, Coimbatore, Satyamangalam, 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 243 

others are Kaunder, Sevai, Tevar and N&yan&r. . The actual number 
must have frequently fluctuated. Taylor’s list divides the fiefs into nine 
sections, beginning with the kingdom of Malayalam (Travancore) and 
the principalities of Ramnad, Sivaganga, and Pudukottai, which were 
" like adopted children of the Madura Government.” Ramnad was 
founded in the year 1605 by Muthukrishnappu, rather restored to the an- 
cient line of the sSethupathis — guardians of the Isthmus of Rameswara, (ac- 
cording to the manuscript History of the Carnataka Governors , and the other 
accounts of the Sethupathis, translated by Taylor and the historical memo- 
randum furnished to Nelson by Ponnuswami Thevan, the then manager of 
the Ramnad Zamindari), The* ancient line of the Sethupathis had always 
been dependent on the Pandya kingdom and had been in existence for 
centuries before Sadeika Thevan Udaiyan Sethupathi was crowned as Sethu- 
pathi by the Nayak ; and Sivaganga was an off-shoot from Ramnad ; and it 
dates as a Zamindari only from about 1730 a.d. ; from which time Ramnad 
came to bo known as the Great Marava, and Sivaganga as the Lessor Mar- 
ava or Nalukottai. The Tondaimans of Pudukottai got first into prominence 
on account of their services to the? Nayaks ; and Pudukottai was given the 
same rank as Travancore, Ramnad, and Sivaganga — these four being called 
the “ adopted sons of the Kings of Madura* ” while the other chieftains 
were called Palaiyakara servants. 

Anrmda Rnnga Pillai, the famous Diarist of Pondicherry, writing under 
date. May 1751, under instruction of Dupleix, to the Rajahs of Tanjore and 
Mysore and to the 72 Poligars of Trichi nopoly and the South Country whose 
names he enumerates divides them into two general categories, the 34 jx)li- 
gars belonging to Trichinopoly and 38 as belonging to the South, asking that 
the poligars should not help Muhammad Ali on pain of losing their fiefs 
but should help Chanda Sahib who had the support of Muzaffar Jang the 
Nizam. W. Taylor gives from the Mackenzie MSS. a list of the 72 palay- 
arms established to guard the bastions of the Pandyan capital as they were 
in the time of Tirumala Nayak, including Travancore, Ramnad, Sivaganga 
and Pudukottai [the three last being like the adopted children of the Madura 
Government] and Ayalur, Turaiyur, Iluppur, Marungapuri, Nattam etc. 


Andiyur, Erode, Kangayam, Vijayamangalam, Kariir, Namakal. Sc“n daman da lam, 
Periya Salem, Scmalur, Sangeigiri, Kurichi Sambali. KAveripuram, Attur, Ananta- 
giri, Bramatti, Mohanur, Arava kurichi. (W. Taylor : Oriental Historical 'Manus- 
cripts, Vol. II 1835. pp. 161-167) . 

The list should have been subject to perpetual fluctuations, being "increased 
or diminished with the absence or existence of any one preponderating power 
among them. (Wilson's Historical Sketch of the kingdom of Pandya . English- 
Tamil Edn. p. 43). 

This list is based on the traditional account of the 72 palaiyams appointed to 
guard the bastions of Madura fort in the time of Tirumala Nayak and also on a 
sort of synopsis of the chiefs and their towns. (Vide the Mackenzie MSS.). 



246 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The following table, comparing Taylor’s list with Ranga Pillai’s enu- 
meration may be useful. Where it has not been possible to equate names 
in the Diarist’s list with those of Taylor, a blank space has been indicated. 


Taylor 

1. The Ramnad Sethupathi 

2. Udaiya T6var of Sivaganga 

3. The Reddi of Tutaiyur 

4. Puchi Nayak of Marungapuri 

5. Leckiya Nayakkan 

6. Viramalaipalayam : Kama Na- 

yakkan 

7. Iluppaiyur : Kamakshi Nayakan 

8. Nattam ; Lingama Nayakan 

9. Pillai-Muzhungi ; Muttaya Na- 

yakan 

10. Ideiya-kottai, Ayalur ; Vala- 

kondama Nayakan also Ma- 
duvur ; Valikondama Naya- 
kan. 

11. Ramagiri ; Sami Nayakan 

12. Marujuttu ; Amiya Nayakan 

13. Yemacalapuram ; Kulappan Na- 

yakan. 

14. Kannivadi ; Appayya Nayakan 

15. Palni : Chennatna Nayakan 

16. Periakulam ; Ramabhadra Na- 

yakan 

17-25. 

26-32. 


33. Malayalam ; Nanjinattu Raja 

34. Ayalur ; Nayanar 


Ananda Ranga Pillai. 

Sethupati (Sella Tevar, alias 
Vijayaraghavanatha (1748-60). 
Udaiya Tevan 
The Reddi of Turaiyur, 

Basava Reddi (1742-62). 

Puchi Nayakan. 

Lakkaya Nayakan (of Kumaravadi) 
Kamaya Nayakan (of Valayapatti 
in the Dindigul taluk). 

Kamakshi Nayakan. 

Lingama Nayakan. 

Muttayya Nayakan (of Kadavur in 
the Madura taluk). 

Vallakondama Nayakan. 


Samaya Nayakan 

Ammayya Nayakkan (of Ammaya 
nayakanur) . 

Kulappa Nayakan (either of Nila- 
kottai or Sandaiyur). 

Appaya Nayakan. 

Sennava Nayakan (of Palnipala- 
yam). 

Ramabhadra Nayakan (of Virupak- 
shi, resumed in 1802). 

The nine Gounders and Poligars of 
Kangayam. 

The seven Hill Poligars living in 
Kambam and Gudalur, west of 
Dindigul, east of Uttamapalayam 
and north of Nagamalai range. 

Nanjanadu. 

Malavarayan (of Ariyalur) 

North-east of Trichinopoly (he made 
himself master of Udaiyarpalayam 
and assisted Basava Reddi). 



SOUTHERN POLICARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 247 


The Poligars of the South. 
Taylor 

1 . 

2. Sivagiri ; Varaguuarama Vanni- 

yar 

3. Alakiipuri Rettai kudi (Rettai- 

kottai ) Vanniyanar. 

4. Alakapuri Rettai-kuddi (Rettai- 

kdttai) Vanniyanar. 

5. Seilur 'I'inivannata Tevar 

6. Kollang-konda 

7. Kttaiyapuram : Ettappa Naya- 

kar 

8 . 

i). Dnmbichi Nayakan 


10 . 

11. Kollfu patti ; Kalanka Nayakar 

12 . 

13. Eraniadai 

14. Chokkanpatti 

15. 

16. Panchalankurichi ; Kattabom- 

ma Nayakan 

17. irftumalai Mauthappa Tovar. 

18. 


19. 

20 . 

21. Urkad ; Servaikaran 

22 . 

23 . 


Amanda Ranga Pillai. 

(Chinnananja) 

Sinnananja Tevan (probably ol 
bhokkampatti ) . 

Sivagiri Vanniyan. 

Irattaikkudi Vanniyan. 

Alagapuri Vaniyan. 

Soitur Turuvana Tevan. 

Vanda Tevan Kollangondan (west 
of Palamcoltah). 

Etlappa Nayakan. 

Annichi Nayakan (of Kolattur west 
oi Palamcottah) . 

Tumbinji Nayakan (of Peraiyur in 
Madura district), chief of all the 
Tottiyars. 

Kama Nayakan (of Saptur). 

Kalanga Nayakan (of Kolarappettai 
north-west of Palamcottah). 

Kandama Nayakan 

Elumadai Nayakan (Elumalai). 

Chokkathalavan (of Maniyachi). 

Thadiyathalavan (Kadambur). 

Kattappa Nayakan. 

Marudappa Thevan. 

Tali Veli (title assumed by Irattai- 
kudi Vanniyan). 

Naduvakurichi 

Sutalai Tevan of (poligar of Nalur- 
cudy north-west of Palamcottah). 

Saluva Tevan of Soumden. (Sandai- 
yur ?) 

Seturayan of Urkad. 

Nallakutti (possibly Ncllakottai Poli- 
gar of Singampatti). 

Nambi Thalaivan (poligar of Tiru- 
kurungudi, south of Palamcottah). 



248 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Taylor 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. Nagalapuram ; Irayappa Naya- 

kan 

34. Melnvindai Nayakan 

35. 

36. 

37. 


Ananda Ranca Pillai 

Ananja Thalaivan. 

Ramabhadra Reddi. 

Ramaswami Reddi. 

Ramaraswami Reddi. 

Venkatachda Reddi. 

Sankaranarayana Reddi (Pajjnaiyars 
of Mulaikaraipatti in Nanguneri). 

Kechalappa Nayakan (of Gollapat- 
ti) 

Pethana Nayakan (of Attankarai). 

Kadalkudi Nayakan 

Nagalapuram (north-west of Palam- 
cottah ) . 

Sirumalai Nayakan (of Melamandai 
north-west of Palamcottah). 

Indra Thalavan (of Talavankottai). 

Kumara Thalavan 

Eravappa Nayakan (of Nagalapur- 
am). 


( Only 37 poligars are enumerated by the District). 

A number of palayams mentioned by Taylor are not found in the list 
of the Diarist which includes several later creations. The chiefs of Perambabur 
and Kattalur who were Tcvans by caste were among the poligars of Timmala 
Nayak’s time ; and Marungapuri of the Puchi Nayak family threw off an 
offshoot which formed a separate palayam (of Karisalpattu-Varappur) of 
the Boma Nayaks. 

Mr. Dodwell’s notes to the Diarist’s list (pp. 6-9 Vol. VIII of the Diary 
footnotes) identify the then fief-holders of Ariyalur, Turaiyur, Kollankon- 
dan, and Kolarapettai ; he fixes also the fiefs of several of the poligars men- 
tioned by the Diarist ; but the places mentioned by him are not in all cases 
the same as those of Taylor and can be explained by the assumption that 
the original palayams might have been shifted. Light’s Report (Military 
Consultations) of 1781 has been thoroughly utilised by him in locating these. 

A list of palayams with the amounts of their tributes or peshkash is given 
as they stood in the 5th article of the Treaty of 12th July 1792, concluded 
by the British with the Nawab of the Carnatic (22nd Zulkada 1206 a.h.) 

Peshkash Amounts 
Pagodas Fanams 

1. Lingama Nayak of Nattam 8,598 12 

2. Sangama Nayak of Comavady 

(Kannivadi ?) 


10,483 


12 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 


249 


Peshkash Amounts 




Pagodas 

Fanams 

3. 

Sami Nayak of Ramagiri 

11,731 

4 

4. 

Mulhia Nayak of Pillai Muz- 




hungi 

9,556 

4 

5. 

Kamayya Nayak of Viramapa- 




layam 

6,400 

0 

G. 

Ramanathapuram 

62,857 

14 

7. 

Sivaganga 

50,000 

0 

8 . 

Poligars of the Madura District 

3,751 

0 

9. 

Sivagiri 

11,176 

0 

10. 

Ettayapuram 

11,176 

0 

11. 

Uttumalai 

8,128 

0 

12. 

Naduvnkurichi 

1,574 

8 

13. 

Talaivankottai 

609 

6 

14. 

Suranclai 

508 

0 

15. 

Kadambur 

1,016 

0 

1G. 

f'rkad 

304 

8 

17. 

Singampatti 

314 

0 

18. 

Maniyachi 

1,016 

0 

19. 

Panjalam Kurichi 

11,176 

0 

20. 

EJayiram Pannai 

6,096 

0 

21. 

Melmandai 

1,016 

0 

22. 

Nagalapuram 

6,604 

0 

23. 

Kadalgudi 

1,320 

8 

24. 

Attankarai 

1,727 

2 

25. 

Mannarkkotlai 

2,540 

0 

26. 

Pavali 

1,168 

4 

27. 

Alakapuri 

108 

7 

28. 

Gettaputty (?) 

1,168 

5 

29. 

Kollapatti 

6,604 

0 

30. 

Saptur 

5,791 

0 

31. 

Chokkampatti 

6,604 

0 

32. 

Landioor (?) 

1,930 

0 

33. 

Zelmuny (?) 

1,016 

0 

34. 

Sennalgudi 

1,696 

5 

35. 

Kulattur 

1,016 

0 

36. 

Parvar 

3,332 

5 

37. 

ScTtur 

5,080 

0 

38. 

Kollankondan 

365 

0 

39. 

Avudaydpuram (Nelkattansev- 




val) 

1,224 

0 


Besides peshkash was due from the great northern Carnatic palayams of 



250 B. C LAW VOLUME 

Venkatagiri, Kalastri, Saidapur (Madras) and Arne and from Bonnavasse. 


IV The Citiej Fiefs 

Sivaganga was an offshoot from Ramnad ; and its existence as a separate 
fief dates only from about 1730. as noted already ; it was then ruled by 
Periya Udaya Tevar. the son of its founder Sasiva r na Periya Udaya Tevar. 
The Tondaimans of Pudukottai, not mentioned separately by the Diarist, 
and evidently included by him in the divisions of the Kallars, came into 
prominence on account of their services to the Nayaks, about the close of 
the 17th century. They rose from one of the Kaljar tribes settled near 
Anbil, in the land east of Trichinopoly, south of Tanjore and north of Ram- 
nad, which were originally known as Arasu. Vijaya Raghunatha Tondaiman 
was the ruler at the time and took a very prominent part in the* operations 
round Trichinopoly that followed. 

The main sub-divisions of the Kallars which were returned in the great- 
est numbers at the Census of 1891 was Tsanganadu ( Visanganadu ). Kungi- 
liya, Mcnadu, Nattu, Piranmalainzidu, and Sirakudi. The Kalians of 
Madina are however divided into 10 endognmous sections which are terri- 
torial in origin. Mr. T. Turnbull, writing in 1817, says that the Kallars 
apr>ropriated to themselves various nads (regions) in different parts of the 
southern districts ; and in each of these territories they had a chief among 
them whose order and directions they must all obey. 8 9 The Visinganattu 
Kallar, the Firanmalai Kallar and the Tannarasunfittu Kallar f-eem to have 
been tribes living in the Fudukotta territory. 5 ' The filiations of the i’allars 
are hard to iix ; but they have got. according to tradition some close connec- 
tion with the Maravars and the Agamhadiyans. 10 

In the time of the famous Tirumala Nayak (1623-59) of Madura, the 
greater part of the lands constituting the several territories under his rule 
were held as military fiefs by the poligars ; the Sethupathi of Ramnad (the 
Great Marava of Anglo-Indian historians) rendered him homage, but paid no 
tribute; and the ruler of Tiruvadi (a portion of Travancore) paid tribute 
only when compelled ; and the others were held under a fairly firm grip. 

Studying the result of the organisation of poligars by the Nayak rulers 
of Madura, it can hardly be said that the idea of governing the country by 
means of an order of rule, rapacious feudal nobles, such as the Poligars 
generally were turned out to lie a happy one, for down io the period of 
their final subjection and submission to British authority in 1801, whenever 

8. Thurston and Rangachaii : Castes and Tribes of Southern India , Vol. Ill, 
p. 53. 

9. A Manual of the Pudukottai State , (2nd Edn. 1938; ; pp. 106-12 ; and 
S. Radhakrishna Iyer’s A General History of the Pudukottai State, p. 67. 

10. Sir Athelstanc Baines : Indian Ethnography ( Encyclopaedia of Indo - 
Aryan Research) t pp. 81 and 47-48. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 251 

they were not at war with the central authority, they were at war with one 
another, and it was rarely possible to collect from them the tribute or revenue 
due to the central authority without a display of military force, which added 
greatly both the unpopularity and the expense of the collection. 

V. The Poligars in the 18th century. 

A palaiyam or pollam, as the English wrote it, was not merely a jaghir 
or zamindary. It was a district conferred by the sovereign on a chief, the 
holder of which, the palaiyakaran or poligar, was bound not only to pay his 
lord annually peisheush or tribute, but also to help his lord in his wars. Palai- 
yam literally means a camp, Palaiyakaran means the chief of a camp. It 
may therefore, be concluded that originally the poligar was the leader of a 
body of armed men, who placed his services at the disposal o( his sovereign, 
and who held the district he received in return for bis services by a military 
tenure. He was always to consider his territory’ not as a nadu, a country but 
as a palaiyam, an encampment. Hence, though tire sovereign might have 
exercised civil and criminal rights in the portion of country that remained in 
his own direct possession, he did not seem to have attempted to exercise, 
or even to have claimed the right of exercising any civil or criminal juris- 
diction whatever, within the limits of his i»olignrs' domains. If his tributes 
were paid and his feudatory sent him assistance in his wars his demands 
were satisfied. 

The events that happened between 1741 and 1S01 arc remarkable for 
“nothing but a wearisome state of anarchy and confusion, the monotony of 
which was but slightly varied at intervals by various fortresses changing 
hands after more or less bloodshed and treachery. ” The Sritala Chronicle 
of Madura and other manuscript sources may be used to supplement the ac- 
counts of Orme. and the Madras records, recording the activities of the Mu- 
hammadan governors of Madura from the time of Chanda Saliib ( 1 736) 
and Murari Rao’s deputy, Appaji Rao (1741) onwards. Yusuf Khan’s 
period of rule was vigorous, but distracted by the claims of the renters ap- 
pointed by Nawab Muhammad Ali at the instance of the English Presidency. 
The encroachments of Haidar Ali into the Dindigul district were another 
complicating factor. 

The poligars were bound to attend the camp of the Nawab, whenever 
summoned, with troops proportioned to their power and territory. They 
were often truculent and disobedient to him and retaliated their spite upon 
his officers and representatives like Mahfuz Khan, Muhammad Yusuf Khan, 
Barkatullah and others. As early as 1756, i.e., soon after Muhammad Ali 
was firmly established in the Nawabship, the English resolved to take more 
decisive action with regard to the political settlement of Madura and Tin- 
nevelly country. Orme describes, in a detailed and admirable, manner, the 
desultory warfare that had to be waged by the Company’s officers, Caillaud 



252 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and Yusuf Khan, who, according to Malcolm, was “the bravest and ablest 
of the native soldiers that ever served the English in India against the 
Poligars and their tools, the Mussalman adventurers from the Nawab’s Court. 
In 1760 Hydcr AJi 11 having made a secret alliance with the French at their 
last gasp in Pondicherry, where they were besieged, fought with some Poli- 
gars whose estates lay between Dindigul (already in the possession of Mysore) 
and Trichinopoly. Yusuf Khan made himself very powerful in Madura, 
subdued most of the Poligars, over-ran the Sivaganga and Ramnad countries 
and even exacted payments from the Rajah of Travancore for his territories 
east of the ghats. The capture of Pondicherry by the English in January 
1761 and the departure of Mahfuz Khan, the rebellious brother of the Nawab, 
from the Tinnevclly country where he was so long giving trouble, had damp- 
ed the rebellious ardour of very many poligars. The subsequent rebellion 
of Yusuf Khan, his besiegement in Madura by an army of English 'soldiers 

11. About 17-12 Dindigul passed into the hands of ihe Mysoreans and its his- 
tory The Dindigul Polayatns for (he next four decades consist largely of the alternate 
resumption and restoration of the palaiyams included in it. Madur was first se- 
questrated for arrears in 1748. Haidars memorable incursion in 1756 resulted in 
the plunder of. the poligars of Palni, Kannivadi. Eriyodu, Chokkampatti, Bodina- 
yakanur and Uttamapalayam. When he entered the Dindigul country only two of 
the palaiyams were under resumption. By the time he left he. had resumed all 
the palnyains except five, viz. Ammayyanayakkanur, Idaiyankottai, Kombai, Nilak- 
kotai, and Mambarai. In 1772 the Dindigul country was granted on military 
tenure to Mir Sahib, a brother-in-law of Haidar : and he resumed several more 
palaiyams, only a few having been restored in the meantime. When Dindigul 
surrendered to the English in the Second Mysore War in May 1783, all the dis- 
posseved poligars were reinstated. But when the Province was restored lo Tipu 
Sultan by the treaty of Mangalore, it was granted to Sayyad Sahib, a nephew 
of Mir Sahib on much the same conditions. Sayyad Sahib resumed five of the 
palaiyams and in 1788 Tipu Sultan himself came to Dindigul and resumed fourteen 
others for arrears, leaving only three palaiyams not under attachment, viz . Idai- 
yankettai Kombai and Mambarai. 

In 1790, the English took the Dindigul fort and district and all the dispos- 
sessed poligars were reinstated by them. The Dindigul Poligars were then 26, 
spread over the present Dindigul, Palni and Periyakulam taluks. At that time the 
Poligari example was so infectious that even Government, land was annually leased 
either in blocks for fixed sums to renters or village by village to the headman. By 
1803, when Mr. Hurdis wrote his monumental report on the settlement of the Ma- 
dura district, 12 of these palaiyams had come under Government management, viz . 
Eriyodu, Palni and Virupakshi forfeited for rebellion, Devadanapatti, Madur and 
Rettiambadi for want of heirs and six others ’including Tdaiyankottai, Nilakkottai, 
Sandaiyur and Chokkampatti resumed for arrears. These 12 sequestrated palai- 
yams along with government lands in the Dindigul country were carved up into 
40 zamindaris and sold to sundry purchasers or previous owners'. On the surviv- 
ing palaiyams which were left in the hands of their owners, a charge peshkash of 
70 per cent, of their value was made. 

Mr. Hurdis was able to deal with the turbulent Poligars of the Dindigul 
country one by one since they acted isolatedly in the disorders of 1797 and 1798. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 253 

and Maravas, and his subsequent execution which at this distance of time 
seems all but inexcusable, should not blind us to the fact that it was for 
the first time during his governorship of Madura, the tributes from the poli- 
gars were regularly collected, the property of individuals was secured from 
the depredations of the Kallars (the Colleries of Orme) and the public re- 
venue was greatly augmented . 12 


12. The more southerly palayams Yustif Khan’s suppression of the Poligar 
troubles is very noteworthy. hi 1756, as an assistant to Mahfuz Khan, Yusuf 
pasted a strong garrison in Srivilliputtur to threaten the Western Poligars who 
were mostly Maravas and whose leader was tile redoubtable Puli Tevan of N elkat- 
tansevval. The Nawab's renter turned against Yusuf, but was defeated. Mahfuz 
Khan proclaimed himself to be the renter of the Nawab and allied himself with 
the Puli Tevan and his allies. Muhammad Yusuf tried to bic-ak this combination 
which was worsened by the Travancore troops in possession of Kalakkari. When 
Yusuf Khan was' recalled to Madras to help against the Fienrii besiegers towards 
the end of 1758. Puli Tevan effected an alliance witli the eastern Poligars of the 
Koilpatti country, prominent among whom were those of Panjalankuricbi and Ki- 
taiyapram and the powerful Kaltabomma Nayak now declared himself against the. 
English and Yusuf. When the latter returned to the Tinnevclly country in Lhe 
summer of 1759, he tried his best to break this affiance between the eastern and 
the western chiefs. I ft* captured Kollaukondan near Srivilliputtur from Puli Tevan 
and the foit of Surandai from the Poligar of l.TLumalai and Vadagarai from the 
Poligar of Chokkampatti near Shcncotlah. Yusuf Khan got the alliance of the 
Travancore ruler and made an attack on Yasudevanallur, a strong mud fort of 
Puli Tevan, but had to retire. The Dutch who had several factories on the 
'Tinnevclly coast, were now invited by the rebellious poligars and sent, some of 
their troops (1760) but they withdrew them as soon as Yusuf appeared with a 
formidable force before them. 

In 1761. Yusuf claimed that he had reduced the entire district to submission. 
After his miserable end {October 1764) Major Campbell secured the surrender of 
Falamcottah ; and after some negotiations an agreement was concluded with 
Travancore in 1766. 

In 1797, the Western Poligars again rose in revolt and in February an English 
force was repulsed in an attempt to storm the fort of Panjalankuriciii. Hut the 
forts of Seitur and Sivagiri were levelled to the ground. Vasudevanallur was cap- 
tured and garrisoned and a cantonment was established at Sankaranainarkoil. An 
attempt was made to cease hostilities against the poligars. But a new danger 
suddenly appeared. The Poligar of Sivagiri was in open revolt, had entered into 
a treaty with the Dutch at Colombo and had collected ammunition for the supply 
of the force that he expected from Ceylon. He was also negotiating with Haidar 
All, while the Nawab's renter was suspected of treachery. On the other hand, the 
Dutch at Tuticorin were then actually professing friendship with the English as 
against Haidar Ali and the Governor-General was engaged in negotiating with 
them an agreement by which in return for a force of 1,000 European infantry, 200 
European artillery men and 1,000 Malays, the whole district of Tinnevelly was to be 
given over to them, of course under the nominal sovereignty of the Nawab. It 
was in 1782 that open hostilities with the Dutch broke out. Tuticorin was cap- 
tured and the negotiations came to a dead stop. 

In the latter part of 1781, the Nawab assigned by treaty to the Company the 



254 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The subsequent administration of the Madura country under the Nawab 
continued to be as greatly troubled as before while the situation grew worse 
after Haidar's celebrated invasion of the Carnatic in 1780. The campaign 
of Col. FuIIaiton in 1783, into the country south of Trichinopoly, following 
on the Assignuiont Treaty of 1781 produced some quiet as was reflected in 
his report of 1785 on the state of the country. 

VI. Fullarloris Account of them . 

Col. Fullarton. writing in 1783, thus describes the Poligars of Tinnevel- 
Iv : “Adverse to industry they suffer their own ix>scssions to remain 

waste while they invade each other and plunder their industrious neighbours. 
Such is the dread of these ravagers that every district in the province lias 
been forced to purchase their forbearance by enormous contribution. ” Ilis 
account of the whole south country is very interesting and accurately des- 

management and control ol* the revenues of the districts of the Carnatic ; and super- 
intendents were appointed to the districts for revenue? collection. But the country 
was still In confusion. In ,1782 a poligar erected a fort near Tinikurugudi and 
plundered the neighbourhood. Finally Col. Fullarton who commanded the army of 
the south, had to march into the Tinr.evelly country and attacked Panjalankurichi, 
which he took with an enormous quantity of guns of ammunitions and in which he 
found the original of a treaty, above noted, between Kattabomma and the Govern- 
ment at Colombo. Fullarton next proceeded to Sivagiri and defeated iu forces. 

The assignment was surrendered to the English in 1785; bin later, ince the 
Nawab was unable to pay his share of the Company's expenses. Government as- 
sumed by proclamation the management of the country and established a Board of 
Assigned Revenues and appointed a Collector of Tinnevelly and the dependent Poli- 
gars. In July 1792. by virtue of a definitive treaty with Ihe Nawab, (Government 
undertook to collect ihe whole of the peshkash or dues of the Poligars and to al- 
low the Nawab credit for the amount collected as against the contribution due by 
them and in the same year an English Collector was appointed for the collection 
of the /.amindar and Poligar peshkash in the Tinnevelly, Madura, Trichinopoly, 
Ramanathapuram and Sivaganga districts. 

The poligar troubles however did not end. While the Collector proceeded to 
make a seUk-meiu with the poligars, numerous acts of violence and anarchy con- 
tinued to be perpetrated by the chiefs of Sivagiri and of Pan ja latikurichi . There 
was great confusion in Sivagiri and Settur. The Nawab ’s ultimate sovereignty 
continued to be recognized over the poligars and by virtue of their kaval rights 
the Poligars exercised control over sarkar villages (See Directors' Despatch dated 
10th June 1795). The system showed itself to be clearly unworkable and the 
poligars readily took advantage of the opportupitics which the divided control be- 
tween the Nawab and the English gave them. The chief centre of disaffection 
was the Poligar of Panjalankuriehi the leader of the Eastern Poligars, who joined 
the great rebellion of the Ramnad country in 1797. He was supported by the poligars 
of Nagalapuram, Kadalgudi, Melmandai. Kulattur and EJayirampannai. The situa- 
tion reached a dimax in 1797 with his murder of Lieutenant Clarke at Ramnad 
where he was summoned by the Collector of Poligar peshkash and from which he 
escaped. Kattabommu was acquitted in the trial that followed. The Collector 
was recalled and an impetus was given to the Nayak’s depredations and lawlessness. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 255 

criptive of the situation caused by the turbulence of the Poligars, there be- 
ing at that time over one hundred thousand “Colleries” and Poligars in 
arms, being “ naturally brave and habitually impatient of all regular gov- 
ernment. ” Fullarton was astonished that the Company should have ever 
planned to offer the rich Province of Tinnevelly to the Dutch “ for less than 
a trifle, for the use of one thousand Dutch mercenaries ” and to sacrifice for 
this mean return a land yielding an annual revenue of a quarter million sterl- 
ing. 1 ® 


13. Fullarton. A View of the English Interests in India (1787). Letter 
II, a sort of r.Ginpte rendu to the Select Committee of Fort St.. George, which con- 
tains an accurate, though harrowing pictuic of the condition of the land. Pp. 
86—87, i t scq. 

The country of the Colleries including the territories of the Tondaiman, Melur 
and Naitam extending from the sea c».xi>t to the coniines of Madura in a range of 
60 miles by (jo was in a bad condition. The Colleries could put forth 30 to 40 
thousand men in ai ms under different chiefs. The Tondaiman f< is less unculti- 
vated than Ids neighbours and has :ii all limes proved himself the* most faithful 
adherent of the Nabob and the Company. The father of the present Chief, by 
his thinness and attachment in the days of General Lawrence, supplied the force 
at Tridunopoly with provisions, at a rime when their cause seemed desperate and 
the Nabob, sensible of the obligation, ever afterwards exempted him from tribute. '* 

'Idle territory of Sivagangn or the Little Marava stretched from the sea -coast 
to Melur and Madura on the west and from the country of the Tondaiman and 
N attain on the North lo the territories of the Great Marava on the south, being 
50 miles in length and 40 in breadth. The land was over-grown with thorn and 
bushes and the woods of Kalayarkoil which served as a refuge were inhabit.! by 

men who could bring 12,000 fighters into the field armed with swords, pikes, spears 

and firelocks. They were Jess barbarous than the Colleries and the land yielded 
five lakhs of rupees to the Rajah who paid about Rs. 175,000 to the Nawab. 

General Joseph Smith reduced Sivaganga in 1783 and brought it under effec- 
tive subjection to the Nawab ; but the woods and barriers were allowed to remain 
and the disaffection of the subjects' continued. The Great Marava or the Rajah of 
Ramnad was the chief of a country, 50 miles by 30 miles, extending from the 
boundaries of Melur and Sivaganga on the north to the sea upon the east and 
the south and to the confines of Tinnevelly uix>n the west. Art and industry were 
better and the sea coast was skirted with a track of open woodland. The revenue 

was about five lakhs and the tribute to the Nawab Rs. 1,75,000. The Chief was 

reduced by Col. Smith in 1773 and a garrison of the Nawab’s troops stationed at 
the Capital. 

The Madura district was bounded by Melur on the east, by the Nattam Col- 
leries on the north, by Dindigul belpnging then to Mysore on the east and by 
Tinnevelly on the south, being 45 miles in length and 35 in breadth and the an- 
nual revenue had diminished to £34,000. 

The Tinnevelly country lay further south, being separated from the mountains 
on the north by the wild valleys of Watrap and Uttamapaiayam. The Pol i gar 
Chiefs could bring 30,000 men into the field. The productions that enrich the 
neighbouring island of Ceylon would flourish here, and might render us the rivals 
of the Dutch in the cinnamon trade : but the particular tenure under which Tiii- 
nevelly ha9 been held, the convulsions it has endured from the first intrusions of 



256 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


VII. Their Final Pacification by the English. 

When the poligars of the Carnatic including the Southern Districts were 
transferred to the control of the Company in 1792 by a treaty concluded 
with the Nawab, the Company regarded them as usurpers of authority, but 
subject to the Nawab whose camp they were bound to attend whenever they 
were summoned with a military force proportioned to their power and terri- 
tory. They had been a perpetual source of violence and distraction to the 
weak government of the Nawab upon whose officers they frequently retained. 

After the Company took up the management of the Carnatic, the Court 
of Directors issued a despatch in 1795 in which they entered into a very 
lull discussion of the principles underlying the treaty of 1792 and of the 
rights acquired by the Madras Government to reform the administration cf 
the poli gars’ possessions. An interesting report was submitted by the Board 
of Revenue on this subject in 1797 and a minute was afterwards recorded 
by Ijord Hobart in which he pointed out to the Court, of Directors the means 
by which the Poligars might be rendered useful subjects and obedient tribu- 
taries of tire iSriiibii GoveaiinuU. ihu Directors expiessed their agreement 
with the views of Lord Hobart, and in their despatch of 5th June 1799 in- 

the Mussulmen in the course of this century, and the depravity of its rulers, have 
counteracted the benefits of nature. Even when a native Rajah governed this 
province, the flat and open country only was reduced, and was let for specific sums 
to great renters, who were invested with despotic powers, and harassed the peaceful 
subjects ; while various leaders, possessing considerable territory, maintained armed 
force, and withheld their stipulated tribute on the first appearance of disturbance. 

It was in 1782 that the English Presidency began to tackle the situation. The 
Rnmnad country was then infested by a host of rebels under Mappillai Tevar, a 
relation of the ruling family, who overran the country and invested for many 
months the garrison of Raninad. Sivaganga was controlled by the Murdu brothers, 
who frequently ravaged the territories of the Company and the Nawab. Madura, 
Melur and other neighbouring districts were harassed by the Col lories. All the 
Poligars of Tinnevolly were in rebellion and in close communication with the Dutch 
Government at Colombo, from which attempts were planned in conjunction with 
their own forces and with Mappillai Tevar to reduce both the Tinnevelly and 
Marava dominions. Nearly a hundred thousand Poligars and Colleries were in arms 
throughout the southern Provinces. The situation was worsened by the oppres- 
sions of the renters and the revenue officials. The campaigns of Gol. Fullarton 
are detailed in this above letter and included the reduction the Poligars of 
Melur and Sivaganga, a march into Tinnevclley, an attack on Panjalankurichi and 
on Sivagiri. Finally peace was concluded with the poligars on their paying or 
giving a bond for 15,000 pagodas each and agreeing to the demolition of the de- 
fences of Panjalankurichi. Col. Fullarton’s dealings with the poligars were mark- 
ed by a combination of severity and clemency. He released most of the Poligar 
prisoners held in detention in Palamcottah and expected that the poligars of 
Panjalankurichi and Sivagiri who had been singled out for punishment would be 
punctual in their, payments and the rest of the poligars would also be equally 
punctual. 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 257 

sisted on “ the absolute suppression of the military power of the Poligars and 
cn the substitution of a pecuniary tribute, more in proportion than the ordi- 
nary peshkash to the revenues of their pollams, and more adequate to the 
public demands for defraying the expenses of general protection and 
government.” 

The Collectors of the Southern and Western Poligar Countries /Were 
ordered to report fully on the military establishments of the poligars and 
the mode of their maintenance as well as on the revenue and other resources 
of each Poligar, and on the nature of the various oppressions to which the 
inhabitants were subjected. The events preceding Major Bannerman’s ex- 
pedition on the so-called Bannerman-Poligar War which centred round the 
conduct of Kattaboma Nayak, the poligar of Panjalam-kurichi, convinced 
Government that the time had come to fully and finally vindicate their au- 
thority and quell the rebellious spirit that was beginning to spread ; but 
they temporised a little till Seringapatam was taken and their anxieties had 
vanished. Major Bannerman restored peace in some measure ; but within 
two years there had to be waged another Poligar War which had been well 
described in the Military Reminiscences of General Welsh who was staff 
officer to the commander throughout the campaign. After the final suppres- 
sion of this rebellion 14 Government in a proclamation, dated 1st December 


14. The Poligar Wars of 1799-1801 — The recrudescence of anarchy which 
culminated in the murder of Lieutenant Clarke at Ramnad in 1798, led to the 
undertaking of strong measures by the British. Kattabomma Nayak was now 
entirely alienated from all the Marava Poligars of the West. The Vanniyan of 
Si vagi ri suffered from the depredations of the Poligars of Kolarpatti who was loot- 
ing his country. A dangerous confederacy of the Eastern Poligars was concentrat- 
ing on Elayirampannai with the plan of attacking all the palayams of the west. 
Thus, west was closely united against the cast mid even the Pulli Thevan had 
receded from die ranks of the rebels. But the Chief of Ettaipuram did not join 
his brother poligars of the east and proved himself strictly loyal to the Company. 
Mr. S. R. Lushington, who was the new Collector of Poligar Peshkash , could not 
try persuasive measures with Kattabomma Nayak. In September 1799, Major 
Bannerman proceeded against Panjalankurichi and attempted to storm the fort. 
After some struggle the Poligar and his followers evacuated the fort. At Kollar- 
palti, Kattabomma Nayak was engaged in a battle and his troops were disbursed ; 
but he himself escaped. His minister, Subramania Pillai was captured and hanged. 
Bannerman got the surrender of Nagalapuram and its Poligar and executed the 
latter's youngeT brother, who was a more dangerous rebel. After some time, Katta- 
bomma was secured from his refuge in Pudukottai and was condemned to death in 
the presence of all poligars. He was hanged at Kayattar and the memory of that 
event is even now kept alive and all passers-by throw handfuls of small stones by 
the side of the site for repose of the soul of the victim 1 and for the freedom of the 
traveller from the torment of his visitations ; and offerings of sheep, rice and fruits 
and chaplets are made for the cure of diseases and for the remedy of blight on 
land. Various legends and some ballad literature have grown round Kattabomma. 

Panjalankurichi was confiscated and also the estates of the five Poligars who 

18 



258 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


1801, suppressed the use of all weapons of defence and promised besides a 
general amnesty a permanent assessment to the Poligars on the principles 
of Zamindari Tenure. According to Bishop Caldwell, writing in 1881, the 
most remarkable of the changes brought about is that of the Poligar him- 
self. “ The Poligar has become a Zamindar and has changed his nature as 
well as his name. One can scarcely believe it possible that the peaceful Na~ 
yaka and Marava Zamindars of the present day are the lineal descendants 
of those turbulent and apparently untameable chiefs of whose deeds of viol- 
ence and daring the history of the last century is so full. One asks : can it 
be really true that the peaceful Nayaka ryots of the present day are the 
lineal descendants of those fierce retainers of the Poligars? The change 
brought amongst the poorer classes of the Maravas is not perhaps quite so 
complete, but many of them have merged their traditional occupation of 
watchmen in the safer and more reputable occupation of husbandmen ; and 
it may be fairly said of the majority of the members of this caste, that 
though once the terror of the country, they are now as amenable to law and 
reason as any other class. ” 

The proclamation of Lord Clive, dated 1st December 1801, was. made 
soon after the assumption of the Carnatic by the British consequent upon 
the new treaty of July 1801 entered into with the nephew and successor of 
Nawab Umdatu’l-Umara. It insisted on the surrender by all inhabitants of 
the provinces of Dindigul, Tinnevelly, Ramnad, Sivaganga and Madura of 
all arms consisting of muskets, matchlocks, pikes, gingauk and sarabogoi 
into the hands of the British military officers : It gave amnesty to all the 

had joined in the rebellion, viz. Elairam Pannai, Nagalapuram, Kolarpalti, Ka- 
dalgudi and Kulattur. It was ordered that all the forts should be destroyed and 
every firelock, matchlock, pike or spear, should be surrendered! on pain of death. 
The other rebel Poligars were sent as prisoners including two brothers of Katta- 
bomma and garrisons were stationed at Sankaranainarkoil, Kayattar and Palam- 
cottah. 

After over a little more than a year of peace, trouble broke out again. The 
imprisoned poligars escaped from Palamcottah to Panjalankurichi (February 
1801), where the walls were defended against the attack of British troops. One 
by one the forts fell again into the hands of the Poligars and it was not till re- 
inforcements arrived from Tri chi nopoly that Panjalankurichi was again attached 
and reduced. The fugitives including the dumb brother of Kattabomma escaped 
to Sivaganga and joined in the rebellion of the Manidus there, who had to be sup- 
pressed after a most difficult campaign ending with the capture of Kaliarkoil. 
(October 1801). The brothers of Kottabdmma were brought to Panjalankurichi 
and hanged. The Manidu brothers were hanged at Tirupatlur. The Panjalan- 
kurichi fort was razed to the ground ; the site was ploughed over and sown with 
castor seed and the very name was expunged from the records. Lushing ton hunt- 
ed down gangs of rebels that were still at large. The Dalavay Pillai, one of the 
chief supporters of Panjalankurichi fled to the Maravas of Naiguneri, where a 
little rebellion was enacted and had to be suppressed by troops, (vide Caldwell's 
History of Tinnevelly— Tullivan’s Tracts upon India (1795). 



SOUTHERN POLIGARS AND THEIR PLACE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM 259 

Poligars and Servaikaras except Virapandya Nayaka and Mookkat Nayaka 
of P&njalankurichi, (the brothers of Kattabomma) Mulapen of Ramnad 
and the persons under restraint and it assured a permanent assessment of re- 
venue on the lords of the palaiyams upon the principles of zamindari tenure. 

Thus the real dawn of a new peaceful and prosperous era began for the 
southern countries with this Proclamation. It was like the emergence of 
light after the darkest hour of predawn, when the situation had reached the 
Nadir of anarchy. As Dr. Caldwell remarks : “ Things were worse under 
the Nayakas than under the Pandyas, worse still under the rule of the Na- 
wab, and worst of all — as the night is at its darkest just before the dawn — 
during that deplorable period immediately before the interference of the 
English^— when the Nawab’s power had become merely nominal and the 
real power that survived was that of fierce Poligars and avaricious ‘renters.’ " 



THE MORAL ROLE OF INDIAN ART 
By 

Dr. RADHAKAMAL MUKERJEE, M.A., p.r.s., ph.d.. 

University of Lucknow 

Integration of Personal Emotions and Attitudes into Social Universal s. 

The more significant the art work, the more universal and impersonal 
is its appeal. It is a paradox that the artist selects and presents his subject- 
matter for interpretation through the mediation of a specific pictorial pattern ; 
but the success of his artistic expression lies in that pattern embodying some 
universal quality or relation. Artistic genius consists in the expression of 
universal from concrete relations and situations. For man is so constituted 
that his profound satisfaction can come only from a conscious or unconscious 
identification of himself with other-than-self. A lyrical poet, a musician, 
a painter, or a sculptor may so express the individual passions and sentiments 
of love, grief and exaltation that these become abstract, typical, and universal 
as embodied in all actual or possible relations and situations. 

When personal emotions, attitudes and experiences are thus intellectual- 
ised or organised into the abstract, the impersonal and the generic aesthetic 
pattern, there is change in quality and intensity, breadth and distance asso- 
ciated with a sense of competence and insight. These are lifted to another 
plane and aid in social adaptation and integration. We may call these sesthe- 
tic expressions ‘ social universals.’ Their appeal unlike that of the * sensuous 
universals ' in art work is not of the widest range, bound up as they are in 
sonic measure with the mental and social characteristics of a particular civili- 
sation. But within a particular civilisation they are the chief instruments 
of the good, and working through the desires and emotions of man disclose 
human relations not to be found in axioms and admonitions, precepts and 
codes. 

The social universals are products of a complex process of creative imagi- 
nation in which idealisation, synthesis, selection, and variation of individual 
features and attributes and evaluation are involved, so uiat personal moods 
and eccentricities are eliminated, on the one hand, and the type does not 
become too abstract or insipid but elicits a large variety of human reactions 
on the other. Thus the social type, symbol or universal in art is created, 
and it may be created in such form as by its power and imaginative unity 
acquires far greater strength and preeminence than a living example, the 
experience of single individuals. Art thus becomes the incomparable imple- 
ment of education not directly but through appeal to man’s imaginative ex- 



THE MORAL R&LE OP INDIAN ART 261 

perience, through the creation of the social universal that raises him above 
the narrow range of personal moods and emotions, and envisages new human 
relations and possibilities that are as yet unrealised, and that insinuate them- 
selves into his consciousness and purpose. Art has been the means of clari- 
fication and strengthening of man’s aims and goals of life that transcend 
moralities and social conventions, the moral precepts of scriptures or tlie in- 
junctions of the state. Tradition and custom, myth and religion come to 
reinforce the expression of the social universal that an individual artist 
presents out of the crucible of his own experience. These also create the 
so-called archetypes that the artist adopts, beautifies and strengthens captur- 
ing the imagination of a people and eliciting their devotions and sacrifices. 
Much of the material of artistic vision is in fact supplied by the religion and 
poetic heritage of a community. 

The moral function of art lies in the artist’s individual gifts of selection 
and interpretation of such human relations and experiences as may induce 
social universals i.e. generic social attitudes, values and aspirations and bring 
about the integration of self and society. But the artist is guided in this 
by the experience of his race, community or epoch that creates and re-creates 
ideals and archetypes and the less conscious purposes and faiths— the power- 
ful and cherished products of the collective mind comprising the pervasive 
moral and artistic environment without which neither morality nor art can 
be kept alive. Their massed constant influence shapes culture and the desires 
and purposes of the individual in a manner that anything directly taught by 
word and axiom can never aspire to. In Europe however, this encompassing 
moral and artistic environment has been largely disintegrated since the 
Renaissance, and the artist, left to his own resources, fluctuates between an 
extreme form of subjectivism and a pale and futile reproduction of past 
ideology and emotional unity. In a well integrated society or epoch the 
problem of art for art’s sake would not arise. All art work is moral vision. 
Tire archetypes of the community do not permit the separation of art, morals 
and ordinary life and bring about on the plane of meanings and values the 
fusion between man’s emotions, imagination and achievement. 

Art and Social Control. 

Art induces the range of human emotions and experiences by opening 
up new vistas of man’s one-ness with fellow man, and with the entire realm 
of Becoming. The power of art consists in the presentation of the universal 
and the symbolical in the individual. 

What is presented with great charm and attraction as the social, the un- 
personal and the typical thus determines and regulates the thoughts, feelings 
and faiths of large bodies of men in all epochs and religions. All great art 
has created archetypes and symbols of social universals that have contributed 
towards the cohesion of society and solidarity of the race and effective and 



262 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


sure guidance for the individual in selecting the values of life. Art has 
been the chief and easy means by which man’s collective consciousness or 
the insight of individual artists into the finer things and relations and pro- 
founder truths and values of life has aided him in facing the trials and tri- 
bulations of the world. Both the genius of single individuals and the crea- 
tions of the people or race have enriched the heritage of expression of social 
universal in art. 

Art . and Social Tradition. 

The greatest of the world’s art forms have not been the work of single 
individuals. Myths, parables, stories and doctrines have given the world the 
finest and the noblest ideals, types and symbols. What more beautiful and 
truer products of imagination can be conceived than the majesty and detach- 
ment of the sphinx in Egyptian art, the fortitude and enterprise of Hercules 
and the physical charm and alertness of Hermes in Greek art, tire severity 
and poise of Siva who has conquered life and conquered death and the com- 
passion of Bodhisattva who has tendered his life as sacrifice for all sentient 
creatures in Indian art and the suffering and faith of Jesus on the cross or 
the immaculate purity and universal maternity of the Virgin in the 
Gothic Cathedrals of France? All these gods of religion and living faith 
differ from those of metaphysics. They have been loved and adored 
as ideals of their own hearts by men, and art forms, Hindu, Buddhist 
and Christian, have been the spontaneous embodiments of this passionate 
love and adoration. Thus the materials of metaphysics, faith, history and 
tradition are melted and refashioned by the pious imagination of sculptors 
and painters into the glorious figures of Siva, Buddha, Christ and the Virgin 
in art that command the loyalties, penances and charities of men through 
the centuries. On the other hand, art spreads and conquers territories and 
people by bearing its message of social univcrsals and morals. A remarkable 
example in world’s history is the establishment of Indian art in Central Asia, 
Pegu, Siam, Cambodia, Ceylon, Java, Sumatra, Bali and Borneo. Chinese 
art made little impression in these territories that came under the ambit of 
the influence of Chinese traders for long centuries, chiefly because it could 
not, unlike Indian art, present through imaginative vision such social and 
moral ideals with attraction and clarity among the indigenous peoples of 
these lands. 


Art as an Escape^ from Society. 

Though mankind's visions of truth, beauty and goodness is the same, 
in the context of the social system morality assumes different accents among 
different peoples. Society in the Orient has shown a sharp and rigid grada- 
tion of castes and classes that have thwarted individual initiatives and 
achievements. Thus both religion and art stress the supreme values of com- 
passion, non-violence and self-sacrifice, while the doctrines of transmigration 



THE MORAL R&LE OF INDIAN ART 


263 


of births, of Karma (deed) and its fruition and of God’s immanence in 
every form, however fixed that may be, enter into their very substance. It 
is thus that art smoothes the acerbities and excesses of the social system, 
enabling the individual to accept his lowly status and position in society 
with greater complacence, and his adversity in a long sequence of births 
and deaths with greater fortitude. Art, therefore, is a most efficacious 
cultural instrument for expressing man’s repressed and baffled emotions and 
sentiments, for securing his psychological and social adjustment. As a matter 
of fact the success of Oriental art in bringing about social equilibrium is 
illustrated by the stress of different levels of existence and the sequence of 
births and deaths and transmigration of souls in a vast panorama of life, 
where sorrow and joy, despair and promise intermingle, bridging the gulf 
between actual conditions and possibilities. The notes of frustration, sad- 
ness and pessimism are in fact drowned by the elegant display of the delights 
of the senses and the intoxication of enjoyment embodied in the array of 
surging and dancing figures, scenes of domestic life and love, sports of ani- 
mals, and the blossoming of flowers and the ripening of fruits that one comes 
across at Ajanta, Borabodur and Angkor. 

At the other extremity of the world of art, we find in Greece a kind of 
art that stressed the harmony of proportions in statuary, temple building, 
vase-making and composition of the tragedy that are in such utter and sad 
contrast with the political turmoil and moral chaos of the Hellenic world. 
If the social and political system could not assure sanity and serenity to 
the Greek citizens the harmony and the order were to be found in the magni- 
ficent art works of Hellas glorifying Gods and heroes rather tlian ordinary 
mortals, and depicting the ideal events of myths and legends rather than 
the affairs of the earth. But the Hellenic gods and heroes were imbued with 
all human desires and passions, acting and suffering like the mortals of the 
earth. Yet the sovereign power of Zeus, the heroic manly strength of Her- 
cules, the womanly dignity of Hera and the noble wisdom of Pallas Athene, 
though largely conceived in human terms were the sources of consolation for 
the individual, though not of integrity of the Hellenic city states that pursued 
their sanguinary course of class struggles and internecine conflicts. Similarly 
the High Renaissance Painting of Italy, with its marvellous linear rhythms 
and colour harmonies and idealisations of the human situation was a counter- 
balance in the domain of art to the egoistic individualism and license of the 
aristocracy and the common people* and the chronic turbulence and wicked- 
ness of the Italian towns. The immense vitality and terrific vigour of the 
art of Michael Angelo, who denied himself all the pleasures of companionship 
and good living and devoted himself to endless toil, had their counterpart in 
the grandeur, magnificence and brutality of Italian life. Similarly the touch- 
ing humanism and mysticism of Fra Angelico revealed the faith and devo- 
tion of the ineffectual minority that were being smothered by the sensualism 



B. G. LAW VOLUME 


264 

and luxury as well as the storm and the stress of life. Art expressed the 
social universal Uiat were challenged by the crass materialism, unashamed 
vice and extraordinary release of energies in the new social environment. 
Thiough the epochs, art provides a refuge and an escape to the individual 
when society appears to him as a system of chaos and disorder. 

Art as Remaking Society. 

Art by bringing about the unity and the order in the ideal plane, saves 
civilisation from disintegration and bears within its bosom the elements of 
its re-making. It is for this reason that one cannot call art. ‘ religious or 
‘ secular or ‘ ethical ’ for art mobilises, all the truths of religion and meta- 
physics, and all the axioms of morality to give peace to the individual in 
his social regime. Art in fact combines metaphysics, philosophy, religion 
and ethics, and makes all these human and concrete in its task of bringing 
about the equilibrium between the individual and the society through an 
ideal collective representation that sometimes has an even greater power to 
mould humanity than the actual society and its institutions. 

The Social and Ethical Significance of Early Buddhistic Art. 

In the Orient what largely passes for religious content of art is social 
and ethical. In those early Buddhist sculptured decorations at Bharhut, 
Sanchi, Bodh Gaya and Amaravati we see illustrations of the birth legends 
of Buddha (Jatakas) with exquisite characterisation and loving attention 
to details, neither articulating a religious experience nor portraying a reli- 
gious episode, but depicting a moral tale that for all time to come stands 
for the glorification of certain generic social virtues like self-sacrifice, tender- 
ness, compassion, purity and truthfulness that have been accepted by the 
Oriental peoples. At Sanchi we find illustrated in several reliefs the generos- 
ity of Prince Vessantara who gave away all what he had, including his chil- 
dren and wife, thus exhibiting “ the perfection of benevolence.” Similarly 
there is the story depicted of the monkey-king who to save his suite of eighty 
thousand monkeys against archers who surrounded them cleared the river 
Ganges by a prodigious leap with a rope permitting the monkeys to cross 
safely. But a malevolent monkey who was no other than the traitor Deva- 
datta in his past birth dropped on his back and broke his spine. Or, again, 
among the reliefs at Amaravati and the frescoes at Ajanta we find the touch- 
ing episode of the royal elopement with six tusks (Chaddanta), sawing off 
with his own trunk his tusks in order td gratify the wish of the Queen of 
Benares, once his wife, who devoured with jealousy, due to the favour un- 
consciously shown by the elephant to another wife of his, sought her own 
death to wreak her revenge. Similarly, there is the story of the King of the 
Sibis portrayed in sculpture, who in order to save a dove that had sought 
refuge against a pursuing hawk in the king’s lap gave his own flesh and 
ultimately his whole body as offering when the weighing balance showed 



THE MORAL r6LE OF INDIAN ART 265 

that his freshly killed flesh grew lighter and lighter in comparison with the 
dove’s. 

The Jataka Illustrations at Ajanla. 

About the frescoes of Ajanta a whole book, may be written. We have 
here the entire procession of Indian life from love-making, dice playing, 
hunting, procession of horsemen and elephants and march of, armies in foreign 
lands to the episodes in the birth, life and death of the Buddha, from the 
sports of monkeys and elephants, and cock and buffalo fights to the flowering 
palasa tree along the trunk of which a swarm of ants climbs up. Nothing is 
here left out A strong sense of naturalism and a broad humanitarianism 
have mingled with an intense spirituality to animate the graceful men and 
women and their chaste gentle poses and gestures. Even lovers have a re- 
finement in their reciprocal attitudes and gestures which make amorous ap- 
proach something of a ritual. The drama of human life, of love and death, 
happiness and suffering, is dominated by the sense of the transience of 
existence, and a profound emotion of piety, with which the beholder becomes 
saturated as he devoutly wends his way from cave to cave in this sanctuary. 
In fact the idyllic scenes of Indian life, the rich panorama of the flowering 
jungle or the pomp and pleasures of the King’s court merely form the set- 
ting of the enchanting figures of the holy beings of wisdom and compassion, 
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, some of the loveliest and purest visions ever 
dreamt of and executed by artist. It is they who epitomise in their lovely 
slender bodies and meaningful, supernatural gestures the universal values 
that are dispersed among the variegated scenes of the pageant of Indian life 
at Ajanla. As an embodiment of the social ideals of Buddhism, Ajanta 
vies with Mathura, Sarnath and Borobodur, and influenced Central Asia, 
China and distant Japan. 


The Borobodur Bible. 

Not merely Buddhist legends but also legends from the Ramayana and 
the Mahabharata are depicted in bas reliefs and paintings in a thousand 
temples within the frontiers of India and in Java, Siam and Cambodia, 
where the Indian art traditions spread In the great stupa at Borobodur 
in Java we have the procession galleries adorned by a series of some two 
thousand bas reliefs, illustrating the life of the Buddha according to the 
Lalita Vistara, the Divyavadana, the Karmavibhanga, the Gangavyuha and 
the Ja taka mala as well as various other legends. Referring to these Coomara- 
swamy observed, “We have here a third great illustrated Bible, similar in 
range, but more extensive than the reliefs of Sanchi and the paintings of 
Ajanta. This is a supremely devout and spontaneous art, naturally lacking 
the austerity and the abstraction of the early Buddhist primitives, but 
marvellously gracious, decorative and sincere. The episodes represented 
are by no means so exclusively courtly as is the case at Ajanta, but cover 



266 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

the whole circle of Indian life alike in city and village. The narrative ele- 
ment is more conspicuous than at Ajanta the craftsmen closely adhering to 
the book while he portrays social life, bird and animals and vegetation of 
his own land ; the reliefs at Borobodur are so extensive that if laid end to end 
they would cover a space of about three miles. In these magnificent sculp- 
tured panels which have been seen by thousands of devoted pilgrims through 
the centuries, wc see unfolded a poignant epic drama of human emotions in 
a cosmic setting where man reaps the fruits of good and evil deeds (karma) 
in previous births, where god, man and animal form links in a continuous 
chain of sequence of existences, inexorably working out the universal law of 
Karma, and where the profound lesson is to end the uninterrupted cycle of 
births and deaths through the absence of desires and the good deeds of love, 
compassion and sympathy for all. Nothing is discarded in the scenic repre- 
sentations, the pomp of wealth, the might of arms, the ardent passion and 
serene grace of women and the beauty of nature, but all is subdued by tire 
sincere expression of the triumph of purity and wisdom as embodied in the 
story of Buddha’s enlightenment. This triumph is expressed in every single 
gesture and mood of gods and angels, men and women, animals and birds 
in the vast panorama. Step by step, from gallery to gallery pilgrims are led 
through illustrations of the law of retribution of good and noble deeds, the 
story of the Buddha’s preparation in the course of hundreds of past lives, 
the episodes in the life of the historical Buddha until they witness the search 
for the highest wisdom revealed by the Bodhisattvas of the Mahayana. 
“ When at last, ” writes Vogel, “ the pilgrim has reached the summit of the 
Stupa the phenomenal world vanishes from his sight, and he is transported 
into, the sphere of mere thought. 1 ” The unity of the realm of Becoming has 
nowhere been more sincerely expressed in sculpture than here. Over the 
procession of human episodes which are linked together under a master-plan 
and in each of which every figure is absolutely unique and sincere in ex- 
pression of face, gesture and pose of body, there broods the ineffable mystery 
of the oneness and harmony of life. Art here has immortalised itself by 
transforming small episodes and personal moods into the universals that help 
in the realisation of the oneness of life and of the divine wisdom which 
creates it. 

The Intermingling of Gods and Men at Angkor Vat. 

In Siam and Cambodia as well as in Java we similarly see the legends of 
the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the Srimadbhagavat, the Harivamsa and 
other tales connected with Vishnu and Siva illustrated in fine sculptures 
adorning the walls of the temples. The churning of the milky sea, the death 
of Bhishma, the banishment of Rama, the loss of Sita, the fight between Vali 
and Sugriva, the alliance of Ram and Sugriva, the meeting between Sita and 


1. J. P. Vogel, Buddhist Art, p, 100. 



THE MORAL RdLE OF INDIAN ART 


267 


Hanumana in the Asoka grove in Lanka, the fight between the armies of Rama 
and Ravana as well as the episodes of the life of Hari and of Krishna are 
all depicted in the famous temple at Angkor Vat. Here again art has truth- 
fully portrayed social universal among peoples who did not know the legends, 
but who have absorbed them so sincerely and deeply that modem artists now 
draw frequently on them for their mural decorations in the pagodas of to- 
day. In the sanctus sanctorum Buddha, Vishnu and Siva are installed in 
their divine aloofness like stars that dwell apart. But on the paintings and 
bas-reliefs on the walls of the corridors leading up to the divinities are de- 
picted the conjugal love and trials of Rama and Sita, the brotherly attach- 
ment of Lakshmana, the fidelity of Hanumana, the marriage of Siva and 
Parvati and the trials, sufferings and sacrifices of Bodhisattva in an all 
too human setting. The gods who arc the apotheoses of the social virtues 
come down with their human desires and sufferings to the level of the com- 
mon people, while the men and women in their devotion, thanksgiving and 
purity raise themselves to the level of the gods. Siva in order to save the 
gods and all living creatures undertakes the stupendous sacrifice of drinking 
the. poison cast by the ocean or by the universe serpent, Vasuki. Vishnu, 
Ramchandra and Krishna go through their hundred adventures for the sake 
of the protection of heaven and earth, gods and men against the Asuras. 
Similarly Buddha prepares himself for the message of enlightenment for hu- 
manity through innumerable lives of sacrifice and compassion. Then they 
come down to the earth, and mingle with all life. Wliat brooding pity and 
tenderness for all living creatures then radiate from them, and this is re- 
ciprocated by what trustful adoration of all ! The figures of nude female 
worshippers arranged in serene yet animated throngs with their infinitely 
sweet and chaste poses and gestures of adoration cannot but be an unfail- 
ing source of inspiration for the pilgrims. Even the foliage of the forest, 
the sheep, the elephants and the lambs, the nagas or the water-sprites and 
the ripple of the waters participate in the cosmic devotion not to speak of 
the homage of gods, angels and spirits of the upper air. Such is the picture 
the succession of mural jiaintings and sculptured panels unfolded before the 
throngs of observant pilgrims as Urey used to wend their way to the main 
shrine. Religions may change, kingdoms may perish, but the art which aids 
in elevating the moral tone of social life lives so long as society endures. It 
is the stress of the social universal that has brought about the merging with 
irresistible power of Beauty and Truth at Ajanta, Sanchi, Amaravati, Bor- 
dobodur and Angkor Vat. 

Biblical Scenes in European Christian Art. 

The Javanese sculptured panels have been compared with Ghiberti’s Doors 
of Paradise in Florence designed at the opening of the 15th Century. Ghi- 
berti, Jacopo della Quercia, Donatello and the della Robbias presented many 
Christian scenes with marvellous verisimilitude and elegance of composition. 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


268 

The creation of Adam and Eve, the Temptation and Expulsion, the story of 
Cain and Abel, Esau and Jacob, Christ before Pilate, the Crucifixion and the 
Resurrection were all pictured by Ghiberti in delightful natural backgrounds 
with superb illustrational effect. Like the Javanese scenes the various events 
from the old Testament and of the life of Christ and the Fathers of the 
Church formed the source of inspiration to generations of pilgrims who visit- 
ed the Bapistry at Florence. Similarly, Donatello presented with tragical 
pathos the Scourging, the Crucifixion and the Deploration of Christ and with 
great dramatic vigour the scenes of Salome and St. John. A profound pity, 
tenderness and compassion as revealed in the poignant Christian drama were 
unfolded and the figures of Mary, Christ, Magdalene and the dancing angels 
and cherubims were especially depicted with great fervour and piety. 

But the difference of treatment between Oriental and Renaissance art in 
Europe can hardly be missed. There is, in the first place, a tendency to- 
wards sentimentality marked in the Christian sculptors that found its apo- 
theosis in the delicious bambini and sweet madonnas of the della Robbias and 
Raphael. This is far different from the chastity and restraint of movements 
and the serene rhythm of gestures of men and women in the Amaravati or 
Borobodur reliefs. Many of the angels, madonnas and cherubims in Chris- 
tian art are similar, pictured it appears from local models. In the East there 
is no attempt at naturalism or realism, but at the same time a marvellous 
plastic beauty of nude figures has been reached, soft, smooth and chaste, 
that is enhanced by the rhythm of the poses and gestures, every one of which 
is of high plastic value. The beauty of the human body in Oriental sculp- 
ture is far different from the Grecian or the Renaissance conception. Such 
beauty, constituted by the harmony of limbs and movements and expressions 
of the face, is plastically transmuted into something more subtle and expres- 
sive of Ihe deep and noble stirrings of the human soul, thus aiding in its at- 
tainment of wisdom and bliss. 

The Notion of Super -sensual Perfection in Art. 

Man’s physical beauty appears in Indian art as the rapture of the soul ; 
it suggests supernatural capacity transcending the limitations of physical well- 
being. It is far different from the form of physical perfection derived by 
classical Greek sculpture from the spectacle in the national games, and that 
became almost an obsession of Europe for several centuries. Mankind has 
also dreamt of other kinds of perfection, and so the norms and types of phy- 
sical human beauty differ. The luminous beauty of Buddha, Bodhisattva, 
Vishnu or Siva is in subtle unison with the supernatural aims of the body 
as the receptacle of the soul. The glory and majesty of these gods in Indian 
sculpture represent the apotheosis of man’s beauty. Woman’s charm in India 
with the emphasis of full, rounded breasts and ample, slanting hips is the 
grace of motherhood that hides in the fair sex her supernatural possibilities. 



THE MORAL RdLE OF INDIAN ART 269 

For every woman the ideal of physical perfection is that of the primordial 
Mother of the Universe in the full radiance of her maternal glory. 

The ideal of beauty of the human form in the West no doubt has been 
largely dominated by the inclinations and standards of classical Greece where 
friendship was preferred to love and the well-poised athletic form of the 
human male became the standard of human beauty. In the Orient the norms 
of the perfect male and the perfect female are different and woman’s beauty 
is the flower and herald of motherhood. The Orient in its sense of beauty 
shows on the whole not merely a sounder biological judgment but also a 
sounder psychological judgment. In Western art, except in the Middle Ages 
with their Madonnas, Angels and Saints, woman’s loveliness and charm ra- 
ther than the serenity and beauty of her soul have been stressed. In Orien- 
tal art we have not only the Apsara’s and the Nayika’s captivating loveli- 
ness, like that of Aphrodite, but also the wisdom and tranquillity of Prajna- 
paramita, Tara and Parvati. Like the unique, serene and well-balanced figu- 
res of Buddha and Siva, Indian sculpture, stirred not merely by the physical 
charm but also by the tenderness, wisdom and mystery of womanhood, has 
produced new types of feminine beauty that only have a spiritual import. 

Metaphysical Conceptions In Art. 

In Indian metaphysics the feminine symbolises the mind in creation and 
movement, not in rest and withdrawal that are symbolised by the masculine. 
Indian art represents the female divinity in the state of profound medita- 
tion only in such Buddhist images of the goddess of wisdom as Prajnapar- 
mita and Tara seated in the rigid padma and vajrasanas with the legs firm- 
ly locked in. In some Buddhist images of Tara and the Brahmanical imag- 
es of Saraswati, Lakshmi, Kali and Parvati we find a relaxation of the rigid 
meditative pose by the adoption of sukhasana or lalitasana with the right 
leg hanging down and the foot resting on a lotus. Usually, however, the 
female divinities express movement, and are in the standing, gentle tribhanga 
or in alidha and pratylidha poses in vigorous action against the forces of 
evil. 

The female divinity or Sakti in Indian religion and art symbolises form, 
energy or manifestation of the human spirit in all its rich and exuberant 
variety. Thus the images of female divinities are far more diverse than 
those of Vishnu, Siva or Bodhisattva. The icons of the mother deity range 
from the benignant brooding mofyerliness of Parvati, the serene dignity of 
Prajnaparamita and Saraswati or the nubile charm of Uma to the omnipo- 
tence and majesty of Durga slaying the demons and the weird vigour of the 
dancing and grinning Chamunda and Kali wearing the garland of skulls. 

Religious doctrines in India lay down the injunction forbidding the sight 
of the nude female figure. But in India this injunction is got over by cov- 
ering the female form with thin or transparent apparel or by representation 



270 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


only of the upper part of the body as undraped. This has been due to the 
ancient and medieval Indian habit of clothing for women who did not cover 
the upper part of the body or used loose garments. Such, however, is the 
dominating sense of mystery and illusiveness in Indian iconography that 
the nude mingles freely and unconventionally with figures of religious or 
symbolical import. 

The Significance of Poses and Gestures : Feminine. 

Of the poses of the female form the most characteristic is the three-fold 
inflexion, tribhanga, that combines the fullness and straightness of the wo- 
man’s torso with the soft and graceful slant of the right, or occasionally, 
the left hip, and that expresses a most delicate and harmonious blend of 
poise and charm, serenity and springiness. This characteristic flexion goes 
back to the images in Bharhut, Sanchi and Amaravati. The most elegant 
instances are afforded by the images of the Tree spirits (Yakshi or Sala- 
bhanjika) at Mathura, Konarakand and other places, of Parvati at the Ele- 
phanta cave, of the river goddesses — Jamuna and Saraswati — at Ellora, of 
Tara at Munshiganj, of Mahesvari at Bhuvaneswar and of the South Indian 
bronzes, Parvati with Subramanya in her arm, Parmeswari and Gouri. Thi3 
pose is obviously derived from the Indian woman’s natural movement as she 
carries in her arm her child or a pitcher of water that cannot but strike an 
Indian artist 

The exaggerated hip effect (atibhanga) produced by the mother bearing 
the child in her own arm is seen at its best in the image at Khajurah and 
the Tanjore bronze image of Parvati with Subramanya. On the other hand, 
the atibhanga flexion is also illustrated in the voluptuous forms of the couple 
on the railing post at Amaravati, of Rati (with Kamadeva) at the Kailasa 
temple in Ellora, of the apsaras in the temples of Bengal and Orissa, of the 
many matlhuna couples at Khajuraho and Konarak arid of the South Indian 
bronze Mohini. 

The tribhanga pose is formed, as Stella Kramrisch remarks, as if brought 
about by a rotating movement, now circular, now flattened — a movement 
which proceeds from below upwards ; like a chalice it raises the globular 
breasts almost to shoulder height. The dynamic movement proceeds beyond 
the physical reach of the figure and symbolises the urge within the perfect 
human feminine body to ascend towards its ultimate spiritual destiny i.e., 
towards salvation. It is noteworthy that jthe tribhanga pose is adopted for 
masculine divinities in Indian art whenever the softer qualities, such as love, 
compassion and benignity are sought to be stressed. Thus this pose is char- 
acteristic of the figure of Bodhisattva at Ajanta, of Buddha at Bagh, of 
Vajrapani at the Visvakarma cave, of Maitrcya and Lokanatha in Bengal 
and Orissa, of the many figures of Krishna throughout Northern India and 
of the South Indian images of Siva as Gangadhara or Kalasamhara. 



THE MORAL RdLE OF INDIAN ART 


271 


The balanced tribhanga flexion lias been adopted in images in all Asia- 
tic countries from Central Asia and China to Java and Cambodia wherever 
Indian art traditions have established themselves. Thus both man’s and 
woman’s body in Oriental art is, in the first place, so transmuted as it may 
attain something beyond the possibilities of physiology that confine the Gre- 
cian and Renaissance search for physical beauty ; and, in the second place, 
the human body is so abstracted and rearranged in its essentials as to be 
useful in formal shape, proper to stone, metal or wood. The significance of 
Oriental art forms lies not merely in its rich symbolism and attempt to create 
super-sensual norms of beauty but even more in their abstract formal rhy- 
thms and movements. 

No attempt is made here to imitate human anatomy, but the features 
of the body, esiiecially the face, hands and feet are so represented as to make 
the suix-rnatural aims of the body easily comprehensible. Thus in a sense 
the representation of Buddha, Vishnu and Siva is a symbol. It expresses 
the idea of Being or Becoming. Secondly, if it be a stone, bronze or wood- 
en image, its abstract formal or geometrical quality transcends the naturalis- 
tic, for the copying of nature is the real enemy of symbolism. In different 
Oriental countries man's beauty or perfection is represented by art in diff- 
erent media in a blend of formal element and naturalism that has markedly 
differed in different epochs. But the emphasis is always twofold : first, to- 
wards the notion of extra-physical or supernatural perfection ; secondly, to- 
wards the formal, highly simplified image, almost geometrically conceived, 
that can express the inner life where the conflicts and struggles are resolved 
into a profound tranquillity, comjx'tence and majesty. 

The supernatural beauty of the male divinity, such as Buddha, Bodhisat- 
tva, Siva or Vishnu, is expressed in Indian sculpture by the smooth model- 
ling of broad shoulders such as those of the bull or the elephant and of a 
slender waist such as that of the lion and by an elegant roundness and soft- 
ness of the limbs such as those of the female body. All divinities are youth- 
ful and should look like sixteen years old, as enjoined in the Vishnudhar- 
mottara, should never show any muscles, veins or bones, and should bear a 
nimbus. The Vishnudharmottara adds that the face of the gods should be 
well-finished and benignant ; large arches, triangles and other geometrical 
shapes should be avoided in representing gods. A smooth and rounded bo- 
dily frame in which anatomical details are largely eliminated easily suggests 
superhuman grace and power. , 

An elaborate variety of ornaments decks the undraped divine figures. 
The crown or tiara, the ear-ring, the chain and the girdle are especially carv- 
ed with great artistic effect contributing towards the enchantment and illu- 
siveness of the figures. An abstract, super-sensible form becomes the fit 
vehicle of ideal attributes of the deity that are further symbolised and sup- 
ported by the addition of hands and beads so harmoniously balanced in the 



272 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


whole plastic composition that they do not engender any suggestion of the 
abnormal or the grotesque but on the contrary logically and happily trans- 
late the underlying motive of the icon. 

The Significance of Poses and Geslutes : Masculine. 

Mo6t of the male divinities in Indian Sculpture are in rigid standing or 
sitting meditative poses. The heavy solidity of the lower part of the body 
and of the firmly placed legs (samapadsthanaka) that are not much articu- 
lated as well as the unshakeably straight vertical line from the crown to 
the feet express powerfully in stone or bronze the omnipotence and inflexi- 
bility of truth asserting themselves above the impermanence of life and the 
world. The same notion is also represented by the rigidity of the seated 
pose of meditation in baddha padmasana, with the legs firmly interlocked 
and the soles turned upward. Buddha, Vishnu or Surya that belong to the 
highest level of spiritual existence are usually depicted in the above poses. 
But Bodhisattva, Siva and above all Krishna show curvilinear movement 
(bhanga) and rhythm of the body symbolical of the grace and compassion 
to man that are stressed. Since the deity is not a human individual but 
the embodiment of a supernatural or metaphysical abstraction, there is also 
often a striking departure from the human form or symmetry in the multi- 
plicity of heads, hands and feet so as to suit the cosmic vision. Oriental 
sculpture oversteps anthropomorphism, and seeks nothing more and no- 
thing less than tire expression of the Beyond, reached by cosmic meditation 
with none of the limitations set by measurable human goals and ideals. Thus 
what is a symmetrical from the standpoint of naturalism and realism becomes 
in sculpture the vehicle of the cosmic and the transcendental. It must, 
however, be remembered that in certain schools and epochs art retained its 
human anthropomorphic character, as instanced by Gupta art in India, Tang 
and Sung art in China and Nara art in Japan. 

Finally, the play of fingers of the hands, mudra, as these hold some 
flowers or implements, the sway of the limbs as well as general movements 
are devised in Indian sculpture as suggestive of the deity and of His or Her 
divine actions (divyakriya) far remote from human gestures and move- 
ments. Yet these are invested with a remarkable tenderness and subtlety 
of expression of what are really superhuman and spiritual emotions and 
attitudes. On the other hand the practice of such movements, postures and 
gestures has been found in Oriental yogi<j experience to engender the spiritual 
atmosphere, attitudes and virtues associated with the particular deity. Thu 9 
the artist for his image-making must resort to spiritual and sesthetic con- 
templation (dhyana) and not the imitation of any human model that he has 
been strictly enjoined to eschew. Thus he works directly from his own 
mental image that represents some aspect or other of the cosmic essence. 
Even where the image of a horse is to be made from a horse actually seen. 



273 


THE MORAL ROLE OF INDIAN ART 

the artist is required, as we read in the Sukraniti, to form a mental image 
in dhyana. Defect in portraiture is attributed in the Hindu canon of art 
not to lack of observation but to imperfect identification (sithila samadhi). 
Thus the practice of Hindu art is a discipline of meditation which eventuates 
in the skill of operation and technique (silpasthana-kausala). On the other 
hand those who look at earthen images “ do not serve the clay as such but 
without regard thereof honour the deathless principles referred to in the 
earthen images." 2 It is serene perfect meditation that can beget the perfect 
bodily poise of Buddha, Bodhisattva, Siva and Vishnu. 

But while the Orient has produced sonic of the world’s most perfect, 
inevitable and inspiring male and female images and poses of the profound 
serenity and silence of Being, certain other spiritual moods that embody the 
processes of Becoming or divine actions (divyakriya) have also re- 
ceived magnificent and unique plastic expression. These have usually taken 
the plastic forms of the various forms of Saktis, Hindu and Buddhistic. 
Such mother goddesses are found both in their static as well as active poses. 
In their postures of repose, as in the images of Parvati, Prajnaparamita, 
Tara, Mahapratisara and Saraswati. they represent the very incarnation of 
youthful charm and energy. But sometimes they are also represented as 
engaged in strenuous struggle against the Asuras or powers of evil when their 
gestures and movements become wild and terrible although their faces depict 
unperturbed tranquillity. A profound detachment and absence of emotion 
in the movement or action are combined with an absolute sense of omni- 
potence devoid of any the least inkling of brutality or vulgar exhibition of 
physical force. The Asuras, again, seem to succumb without opposition or 
conflict as if pre ordained according to the immutable cosmic law of the supre- 
macy of truth and righteousness that the goddess symbolises. Or again, the 
goddess is represented in a single image symbolising the struggle within the 
human soul, the power of destruction of the flesh and the devil in the mind 
of the worshipper and the beholder. Such are the animated images 
of Durga, Kali, Chamunda, Tara or Paranasavari that yet exhibit a magni- 
ficent beauty and feeling-import contrasted with those implicit in the mom 
serene and pleasant types of beauty* as Parvati, Prajnaparamita, Uma or 
Gouri. Their sitting posture is also relaxed in sukhasana or lalitasaua with 
the right leg pendent or placed on a lotus in soft self-conscious gesture of 
love and benediction, to man. It is noteworthy that in Buddhist or Brah- 
manical art outside India the perfect pose and symmetry that the Indian 
sculptor could give to the various images in their various seats and gestures 
(asanas and mudras) following the Indian yogic traditions could not be 
achieved. Many of these poses were no doubt unfamiliar to the Buddhist 


2. Divyavadana, Ch. XXXVI and Sukranitisara quoted by Cootnaraswamy 
in The Part of Art in Indian Life, Culture Heritage of India, Vol. Ill, pp. 501-502. 

19 



274 B. C, LAW VOLUME 

and Brahmanical converts in China and Further India. Finally, when tire 
divinity is represented in Indian sculpture in its wild destructive aspects, 
dwarf and pot-bellied bodies having none of the youth and elegance of Bud- 
dha, Vishnu, Siva and Parvati are figured. Heruka, a dancing Buddhist 
divinity terrible in his aspects, is a well known illustration from the sculpture 
of medieval Bengal. 


The Terrible In Art. 

In the art of very few countries has the universal mood of the terrible 
(bhayanaka) been expressed and that in such cosmic significance. Nara- 
Simlia or the God-lion and the female deities such as Parnasavari, Durga, 
Chamunda, .Kali and Ugra Tara symbolise the destructive assets of the 
cosmic process. All that is terrible and ivjidlenl arc combined in such images 
intended to detach the beholder or devotee from the life of the senses for 
reaching the truth, which is indeed assured by the grim dancing figures 
through the gesture of hope (abhaya) in one of her many swirling hands, 
the other hands usually holding skull, corpse, spear, kettle-drum or bone. 

It is easy to understand that in the human mind spiritual truth or 
wisdom becomes fierce resentment or righteous indignation when it encoun- 
ters wickedness, vice and ignorance and that love and compassion that en- 
compass everybody enforce themselves upon those who deny its power of 
deliverance. It is this psychology that underlies the expression of the ter- 
rible in Oriental painting and sculpture. In Mahayana Buddhism and 
Tantrikism of Tibet and China and in Shingon Buddhism in Japan several 
representations of the terrible are met with. In Eastern India and Tibet 
the God of Death is a familiar figure. In Japan there are the formidable 
images of Dai-Itoku and Fudo. The former is a modification of the Brah- 
manic Yamantaka, the god of death, and the latter is a fierce manifestation 
of Maha Vairochana, representing the subjugating powers of Buddha ovei 
the human passions.'* Often in oriental religious doctrine and art the serene 
and the fierce, the compassionate and the furious are contrasted phases of 
the supreme manifestation of the deity. 

No such reconciliation of opposites, of grimness and hope, darkness and 
light, sacrifice and renewal of life will be found in the treatment of the ter- 
rible in Michael Angelo’s ‘Last Judgment,’ Goya’s ‘Saturn’ or Delacroix’s 
Medea, three of the rare representations *of the terrible in Western art, while 
in the representation of the Dance of Death by Holbin, Rethel or other mas- 
ter artists or in the recent treatment of the same theme by Albin Egger-Licnz 
in Germany we encounter a morbid consciousness of mortality, of the omni- 
presence of death that has not freed itself from the narrow, medieval spirit. 

3. Anesaki : Buddhistic Art, pp, 37-44. 



27:5 


THE MORAL ROLE OF INDIAN ART 

Impersonal Love and Beauty in Art. 

Contrasted with the silent and the poised or the vigorous and the grim 
supernatural types of beauty in Indian art are the types of loveliness as re- 
presented by the Yakshis, Vrikshakas and Salabhanjikas in Sanchi and 
Mathura and the Apsaras and Nayikas (celestial nymphs) in Khajuraho 
and Orissa in the later centuries. The Apsara is the danseuse of heaven as 
the Nayika is of the earth. Each is free in her loves and wiles, unattached 
to the home and the family. In these figures Indian art expresses the de- 
lights and sports of sex, the incomparable charm of woman that lures men 
and gods. Such figures abound in the temples of gods and goddesses and 
embody the Indian ideal of feminine loveliness. About these Apsara figures 
Rothenstein observes : “ Today we look at Sanchi, Badami and Ellora, or 
at the loveliest of all the medieval carvings at Konarak, Bhuvaneswar and 
Khajuraho, 4 5 and accept them gratefully with the dancing Greek nereids, the 
figures from Boticelli’s Primavera or Venus rising from the sea as enchanting 
manifestations of man's delight in human beauty. The Apsara takes an 
equally important place in the Buddhist., Brahmanical and Jaina art. So 
racial a conception could not be changed with the form of religious dogma.”'’ 

The tree spirits, the nymphs and the heroines of love embody in plastic 
language all the similes that classical Sanskrit jxxtiy has used to meticul- 
ously delicate the features of female charm. The norms of beauty and of 
expression of erotic and seductive attitudes are in this case also not derived 
from any human models. Thus the Apsaras and the Nayikas of the medieval 
temples of Central India, Bengal and Orissa do not suggest gross sex but the 
spott and delight of the primordial energy (Sakti) that underlies the causa- 
tion of the universe and of every manifestation or appearance. Such images 
of female beauty have in fact contributed towards the sublimation and ele- 
vation of sex to a supersensible plane, following up the entire medieval Indian 
religious thought that found the sex motif as the symbol of the cosmic energy 
explaining the conception and creation of the universe. 

Enchanting male forms of human beauty are represented by the figures 
of Krishna in the medieval temples. There are, for instance, the South Indian 
bronze images of dancing Krishna (15th Century) and the supremely elegant 
wooden image of Krishna Govinda of Southern India (17th Century). It 
was, however, Rajput painting that created the most graceful types of human 
loveliness in the figures of Krishna* and Radha, the incarnations of eternal 
you tli and beauty in Krishna legend. Nowhere in Oriental art has such 
bewitching loveliness of the human figures been limned with such lyrical 
intensity and tenderness. But even here the symbolism of the human soul 

4. And also at Mayurbhanj. Vide the figure in R. D. Banerjee : History of 
Orissa, Volume 2, p. 420. 

5. Codrington : Ancient India, Introduction, p. 3. 



276 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(Radha) forsaking the world to unite with the Divine, the eternal and uni- 
versal bridegroom Krishna lends a profound mystery and other-worldliness 
to the treatment. Oriental art metamorphoses and exalts man’s natural de- 
light in human beauty and the associated eroticism into an abstract, intellec- 
tualised and universal sentiment that becomes the clue to profound know- 
ledge, insight and striving. The incomparable figure of loveliness becomes 
also the social symbol or universal that effectively drains the unconscious 
of the individual, and prepares him, according to the state of his psycholo- 
gical development, for a generic and impersonal vision of love, goodness and 
beauty. 



VEDIC GODS 


By 

Maliainahopadhyaya Dr. R. SIIAMASASTRY, B.A., pm.d. 

Who are the Vedic Cods is a question as old as Yaska, the author of 
the Nirukta. His attempt to answer the question has failed to .satisfy not 
merely his contemix>raries, but also modem scholars. The classification of 
Vedic gods as transparent arid translucent has been of no help. It is how- 
ever hoped that what has been stated in the 41 Drapsa,” “Eclipse-cult’ 1 and 
in my paix:rs published in Oriental Journals will be of some help in clear- 
ing the obscurity of Vedic gods and of the phenomena described in connec- 
tion with them in the Vedas. The Vedic gods are no other than the seven 
planets, the twenty-seven asterisms, Agastya or Canopus, and Sunasira, the 
Dog-star Serius and a few other periodical stars. These are the Devas. 
The Asuras are the imaginary dark spirits of night. Thus Agni is Mars, 
Angirasa called also ‘Go’ meaning cow or bull is Jupiter. Dirghatamas is 
Mercury and Bhrigu or Kanya is Venus. Varuna with his Pasas is Saturn 
with liis rings. Venus, Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury are also called Bandhu, 
Subandhu. Srutabandhu, and Viprabandhu in order. The sun is Indra while 
lighting with eclipse-demon. He is Savitar while revealing the world dhring 
the clearance of eclipse. The moon in eclipse is Soma-juice under filter to 
be drunk by Indra and other gods. The sun is Mitra when he arrives at the 
equinoctial astcrism. The old father and mother are the winter and summer 
solstices. The Dcvayana is the portion of the ecliptic between equinox and 
summer solstice. The Pitiyana is the path from summer solstice or winter 
solstice to equinox. The seven sages (Saptarshis, such as Atri, Bhrigu, Kutsa, 
Vasis^ha, Gautama, Kasyapa and Angiras, are also the same seven planets. 
Bhrigu is Venus ; Vasi§tha is Mars, Kasyapa is the Sun, Kutsa is Saturn, 
Atri is Mercury, and Angirasa is Jupiter. These are quite different from the 
seven sages of the Great Bear, though some names arc common to both the 
groups. 'I'hese are known as Atri, Marichi, Vasi$tha, Kasyapa, Angirasa, 
Pulaha, Pulastya, and Kratu. The seven vayus are the seven intercalary 
months functioning as wind. The seven lords of intercalary months, such as 
Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Aqisa, and Bhaga, and Indra are also the 
same seven planets, with different names having different functions. Dhatar 
is the moon, Aryaman is Jupiter, Varuna is Saturn, Mitra is Equinoctial sun, 
Indra is the Sun, and Amsa and Bhaga are Mercury and Venus. 

The Vedic poets such as Visvamitra, Vasi^tha and others are not ordi- 
nary mortals ; each poet is a representative of a particular planet speaking 



278 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of his own functions and merits. Thus Visvamitra is the moon, a born 
Kshatriya. He becomes Brahman by adopting Gayatri, the sun s merit, re- 
minding us of the necessity of combination of the sun and the moon. Vasil- 
ina is Agni, Mars. The Aitareya Brahmana (I. 28) says “ Agniravi devanam 
Vasi$tah.” Venus and Jupiter are poets and priests. (See the Pancha- 
janu, Poona Orientalist Vol. VII Nos. 1 & 2 ). 

The following analysis of the functions and the natural phenomena 
through which these gods or planets pass, as depicted in the first Mandala of 
tlw. Rig YYda will show that the subject matter not only of the Rig Veda 
but. also of the other Vedas is premeditated and preplanned by the learned 
among the Vcdic people— 

Agni is as important a Vetlic deity as Indra. He is called the son of 
the earth (V. 61), Grahapathi or Vastospathi (Lord of the House-hold). 
He is also called sruta-bandhu being one of the four brothers (X. 57-61). 
The period of his yearly revolution round the ecliptic or his own orbit, consists 
!>t 687 days, being equal to two nodal years of 343 days <ach. If we add 
to it one more nodal year, it amounts to 1029 days which is equal to an 
eclipse cycle of 1000 days and an intercalary month. Seven such cycles 
make up 7000 days and seven intercalary months, and are equal to 19 luni- 
solar years, the so called Metonic cycle. This idea is referred to in the verse 
“ Trimurdhanam Saptarasmin *' he has three heads and .--even ropes ( held 
in seven hands) in the last hymn of Rig Veda (!. 146) his domination 
over both the minor and major eclipse cycles is very well described in oft- 
quoted enigmatic Vedic verse “ Catvari sringa ” (IV. 58, 3). This verse 
has been variously interpreted. No less an authority than the author of the 
Mahfibhfjshya takes it to tie a description of grammatical parts of sjx'ech. 
Sayana's explanation is too well-known to need repetition here. The real 
meaning of the verse seems to be the description of Agni, Mars, as the lord 
of the three nodal years making up otic of tlie seven chakras or cycles of 
1000 days. The verse may be translated thus : — 

Four are the horns, three tlie legs, two heads, seven hands, are there to 
Agni. Fastened or bound with three ropes he bellows like a bull. This great 
god known as Mahadevan has taken possession of the mortals. 

Explanation : — 

Tlie two nodes are the two heads ; as each of them given two horns, 
tlie number of horns with which the bull assails his victims are four. Each 
of the three nodal years which make up the body of the bull has one leg. 
So the whole body has three legs. As each of tlie three legs is given a fasten- 
ing, his fastenings are three. The seven hands seem to be the seven cycles 
of 1000 each presided over by Agni. As he is regarded as Eclipse-fire, he is 
said to have power over mortals. There may also be some reference to 
number 7, the cube of which makes a nodal year 7 x 7 x 7 = 343 . Three 



VEDIC GODS 


279 


such years 3 X 343— one thousand and twenty-nine days. Agni or Mars 
is believed to have three heads and seven ropes or rays (in I. 146) to have 
the power of burning eclipse-demons and thus help India in his fight with 
Vritra, Sambara and other demons in solar or lunar eclipses. 

Agni Vaisvanar (58-60) is Indra or Vayu - (See Sayaga’s Commentary 
on I. 59). 1, 12, 21, 31, 36, 45, 58-00, 65-79; 93-99; 127-129, 143-150.’ 

There are the numbers of the hymns in which Agni is praised in the first 
Mandala. 

Indra lie is identified with Surya ; lie is Manu and Surya. lie is called 
Suiya fitV. X. 39). S. B. identifies India with the :-un, Vritra being the 
moon. \ ’ , .* • k* » t a ma d 1 ill va quotes; Brahmann. in Rv. I. C, i in support of the 
identity of India with the sun. It follows theieioie that the sun in his light 
with Eclipse- demon or causing lunar eclipses is called Indra. In his fight 
lie is sometimes accompanied by Vayu or horse, the intercalary month in each 
cycle of 1000 days (three nodal, years) being regarded as the sun's horse. 
Seven Vayu indicate seven intercalary months at the close of seven cycles or 
seven thousand clays 19 luni -solar years. Rv. 1. 2 is in praise of indra- vayu. 
iie m;E.c.r Ins appeal ance. in solar eclipse as a conqueror and as a drinker of 
soma juice (the moon) in lunar (4-11 ; 14-15: 17-18). In solar ecpliscs 
Minor planets become visible. They are called Charshinis, 19. The close 
of the major cycle of 19 years with an eclipse, Jupiter being visible : 21 years 
23 close oi a cycle. 24-25 eclipsed moon is called Sunali$cpa. 26-30 the same 
story of Sunahsepa. 32 lunar ; 33 Navagras and Dasagras mentioned here 
are of the class of several cyclic jupiters. Jupiter’s appearance for 9 or 1*0 
months before becoming invisible when the sun comes near him for two or 
three months in each year is regarded : s Jupiter's departure to heaven for t.wo 
or three months after performing Satra sacrifice for 9 or 10 months. Once 
in 12 years when Jupiter happens to be in Leo he becomes occulted by the 
moon. This is considered Atiratrasatra (See Rv. 10, 57-62 and my papers 
on “Planets in the Vedas’’). The Jupiter’s recovery of brilliance after the 
sun’s departure to Libra from Leo, is described here as recovery of Jupiter’s 
cows from Panis or non-sacrificing merchants infesting Libra by India under 
the guidance of Sanna dogs, or two groups of 4 stars in the Cani’s major 
or minor. In verse 8 eclipse is also mentioned. In 10 recovery of sun’s 
rays by India is described as Indra’s milking the cows. 34 Asvinis here 
are Mercury and Venus who are regarded as the sons of dawn appearing 
during the solar eclipse. 35 Savitar is seen emerging out of solar eclipse, 
making the world visible. 37-40 seven vayus or intercalary months are 
Dhatar, Mitra, Aryama, Varuna, Amsa, Bhaga and Indra. 41 Adityas are 
Dhatar, Aryan. They are the lords of seven intercalary months. 


1. These numbers refer to the hymns of the first Masala* 



280 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


44 Lunar, 46-48 lunar, 50 Dawn, 51 Lunar, Mercury becomes visible 
(Read the story quoted by Sayana here). 52 solar, 53 lunar at the close, 
1099 days or 1059 days. 54 solar at the close of 40 years which is equal to 
two cycles of 19 years each. Indra is said to have fought in 99 solar eclipses. 
55 lunar, 55-56 lunar, 57 solar. 61 solar. 63 Indra’s old exploits. 80-83 
lunar. 84 Indra and Dadhyanh. The latter is moon who is reduced to 
skeleton in new rwxin and India's slaying Vritra with his bone means re- 
moval of the moon resulting in the destruction of Vritra or shadow in solar 
eclipse. 85-88 seven Maruts indicating 19 years cycle. 89-90 all gods. 91-92 
lunar 100 solar, here Sayana says that five planets represent four varijas with 
Nishadas as the fifth caste (See also Varilltamihira’s Brihajjataka on the 
castes of Planets). 101-104 lunar 108-109 Indra and Agni and Varuna in 
lunar. 121 solar 129 Indra’s exploits, 130 Eclipse-demons ; 131-133 lunar ; 
134-137 lunar. 33-34, 46-49, 92, 112-113 ; 115-120, 123 Asvins or Mercury or 
Venus with or without Dawn in solar or lunar. If it. is second Dawn then 
it is solar Eclipse. 

20, 110-111 and Ribhus, called Prabhva, Vibhva and Vaja, three sons of 
king Sudhanva, divided the Chamasa cup i.e., the celestial sphere into 4 
divisions of 90 degrees each, assigning three months to each. (2) Made one 
horse i.e., one lunar month into two horses for the sun's chariot. (3) 
They made Mercury and Venus the charioteers of the Sun, since they are 
fore-runners of the sun. (4) They made out of the hide of a cow two cows, 
or one cow and one calf, here the cow is purvaphalgimi and its calf is Jupiter. 
(See Rv. X. 57-62 also my paper on Planets in the Vedas). 5. Tlie renova- 
tion of father and mother i.e., the .solstices so as to make them appear ever 
in youth. 22, 35 Savitar, the sun is called Savitar when he is emerging out 
of an eclipse making the world visible. 13 and 142 Apriverses for adjust- 
ment of calendar or luni-solar years. (See my Drapsa) . 43 and 114 Rudra 
i.e., the moon and also Vayus. his sons are praised here. 64 ; 85-90 Maruts 
or seven vayus indicating the close of 19 years cycle with or without an 
eclipse. 

62 reappearance of Jupiter after Sun’s departure from Leo and Vergo and 
Jupiter’s recovery of Cows i.e., his rays of light with the help of Indra or the 
Sun, is here referred to. 

89-90, 105-107, and 122 Adilyas. They are seven known as Dhatar, 
Aryama. Mitra, Varupa, Amsa, Bhaga, ml Indra. In other words the moon 
the Jupiter, the Sun in equinox, Saturn, Miercury and Venus and the Sun in 
his fight against Vritra or causing lunar eclipse. They are also the lords of 
seven in intercalary months. 

125-126 so called Danastutis or praises of gifts. The gifts are really ani- 
mals immolated on the occasion of eclipses. 



VEDIC GODS 281 

159-160 Dyava-Prithvl, the loci of the two solstices. Uttarayaria and 
Dakshinayana known as father and mother. 

122 Visvedevas or all moving luminaries are no other than the seven 
planets indicating the close of a cycle with an eclipse solar or lunar. 

105 Trita Aptya is no other than the third Rohita eclipse at the close of 
a cycle of 1000 days. In this series of three eclipses each falls back by 10 
days compared with the same in the previous cycle (See my Eclipse-cult) . 

From the above analysis it is clear that the same seven planets are dif- 
ferently named according to change in tlieir functions and that eclipses, occu- 
lations of planets are the most important subject matter of the Vedic hymns 
necessitating the performance of suitable sacrifices to appease the gods. 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY 


By 

Dr. NALINAKSHA DUTT, m.a., b.l., m.D., d.litt. 

Buddhism, in its historical, religious and philosophical aspects, has 
received a (airly exhaustive treatment in the hands of the present-day orien- 
talists. Still, it sotims, the appearance of a number of sects in the second 
century after Buddha's death has not received the amount of attention it 
deserves. It was noticed by distinguished scholars such as Burnouf [Lotus, 
357) and Wassilief ( Buddhismus , 223), Beal Kind . Ant., 1880, 299) and 
Rhys Davids ( JRAS. y 1891, 411: 1892, 5), Takakusu ( I-tsing , xxiii) and 
Csoma Korosi (As. Res. x.\\ 298), Burgess (Cave Temples of India) arid 
Buhler (JR AS., 1892), Walleser (Die SekU'ri des alien Buddhismus) , Olden- 
berg {Vinaya Pitaka, Intro.) and La Vallee Poussin (hid. AnL, 1908), and 
lately by Masuda (Asia Major, II) and Mrs. Rhys Davids ( Points of Contro- 
versy. Intro.). The galaxy of names, mentioned above, reveals that the import- 
ance of the topic was well realised but materials were lacking to add llcsh and 
blood to the skeleton. Masuda’s notes and translation of Vasumitra's work 
made a substantial contribution to the topic, and now by a comparative study 
ct the Kalhdvatthu and Vasuniitras work, it has been possible to form a 
fair idea of the sectarian differences, and it will be our attempt in this paper 
to point them out within a small compass. 

Towards the end of the first century of its existence the Buddhist sangha 
began to split up into several sahghas on account of the differences of opinion 
in matters of doctrines, disciplinary rules, and even in the manner of cutting 
and wearing robe's. 1 According to the Vinaya traditions of almost all the 
principal schools the first split in the Buddhist church took place, at the 
Second Council, held about a century after Buddluf.s death. The split is 
attributed to differences of opinion regarding the interpretation of ten points 
of discipline. An attempt was made in the Council to make up the differences, 
but it met with failure. There formed two parties, one favouring a more 
rigid interpretation of the rules while the other preferred the use of a little 
more discretion in the application of the rules. Among the former the monks 
of KauSambi, AvantI and other western countries were piedominant while 
among the latter were the monks of Vai^ali, Pataliputra and other eastern 
countries. Once the split commenced, it went on multiplying till we hear of 
the appearance of eighteen sects. From differences in disciplinary rules, the 
split encroached upon doctrines as well, and the Buddhist monks developed 

1. TakakuSu’s I-tsing, p. 6 : “ Each school has traditions handed down from 
teacher to pupil, each perfectly defined and distinct from the other.’* 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY , . 283 

distinct divisions among themselves, one espousing certain doctrines as against 
another, and some of the doctrines even going to the length of being almost 
un- Buddhistic. 

As far as the tradition goes, the party who were in favour of the letter 
of the law claimed themselves as more orthodox than the other, though it is 
doubtful if their claim was agreed to by the other. The orthodox party also 
could not remain in unison for a long time, for within a short time of its 
existence we hear of its being split up into eleven sub-sects known as Thera- 
vada (or Arya Sthaviranikfiya ) Mahisasaka, Dharmagupta, Sarvastivada, 
Sam, Kasyapiya, Sankantika (Sautrantika) and Suttavada, Vatsiputriya (or 
Sammitlya), Dharmottariya, Bhadrayaniya, and Chan nagarika. 

The un-orthodox party too were split into seven sub sects known as the 
Mahasahghika, Gokulika ( Kukkulika ) , Pannattivada ( Pra jfiapti vada ) , 

Bahusrutlya, Cetiyavada, EkvyavahFtrika and Lokottaravadu. 

Besides these eighteen, we. are told that there occurred a few more sub- 
divisions known as the Siddhatthika, Rajagirika, Aparasaila, IKiivnsaila 
(collectively called the Andhakas ) , Uttarapathaka, Vetulyaka, Ilemavavika 
( Haimavata ) . Vajiriya, Hetuvada, Vibhajyavada, Abhayagirivasin, Malta- 
viharavasin, Dhammarucika, and Sagaliya. 

The traditions slightly differ in naming the sects but on the whole there 
is a fair agreement, and the differences may lx: overlooked at present. 

Chronology ok the Sects 

In the Ceylonese chronicles, the emergence of the sects has been shown 
in a genealogical form without any indication of their chronology while in 
Bhavya and Vasumitra’s treatise some indication by centuries has been given, 
c.g., Sarvastivada appeared at the beginning of the 3rd century after Buddha’s 
death followed by the Vatsiputriya, Dharmottariya, Sammitlya, Channa- 
girika, and Mahisasaka. At the end of the 3rd century and beginning of the 
‘1th, appeared the Dharmagupta, Kasyapiya and Sautrantika. As far as the 
sub-divisions of the Mahasahgliikas arc concerned, the sects appearing in the 
2nd century after Buddha’s death were the Ekavyavaharika, Lokottaravada, 
Kukkutika (Gokulika) and Prajnaptivada. Towards the close of the 2nd 
century appeared the Caityakas and the Saila schools. There is no doubt 
that the sects appeared one after another, and it seems these came into exist- 
ence in close contiguity, and probably most of them may be dated within 
the 2nd and 3rd centuries after Butjdhas death. 

Inscriptional Evidences 

The only safe data by which we can proceed to establish the antiquity 

2. I -t sing, p. 10 ; Masudas translation of Vasumitra’s treatise in the Asia 
Major , II (henceforth referred to as “ Masuda ” only). 



284 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of a particular sect are the inscriptional evidences. Biihler 3 pointed out that 
he did hot come across the names of any sect in Bharhut and Sand inscrip- 
tions. In the inscription on Mathura Lion Capital ( circa 120 B.c) 4 * 6 the 
Mahasanghikas and the Sarvaslivadins are mentioned as two rival sects. In 
the inscriptions during the reign of Kanaka and Huviska these two sects are 
mentioned more than once. : ‘ 

It is only in the Amariivatl and Nagarjunikoncla inscriptions (3rd and 
4th centuries a.d. ) , we come across the names of the Mahisasakas, Bahus- 
rutiyas, Caityakas and the Saila schools. In the Samath inscription (300 
a.d. j there is a reference to the Sammitiyas as ousting the Sarvastivadins 
who had previously ousted the Theravaclins. 0 If vve rely on the inscriptional 
evidences alone, we may chronologically place the origin of sects thus : 

(i) Theravada and Mahasanghika. 

(ii) ' Sarvastivada and Mahisasaka. 

(iii) Bahusrutiya, Caityaka and Saila schools. 

(iv ) Sammitiya. 

Literary Evidences 

The Ceylonese chronicles place the origin of the eighteen .sects within 
a century after the Second Council, pointing out only the gradual sub divisions 
of the sects. Bhavya, Vasumitra and Vinltadeva are not more helpful in this 
rcsptx^. The only literary evidence which is of any use to us is furnished 
by Burldhaghosa in his commentary on the Kathavatthu. lie attributes the 
views discussed in the Kathavatthu to particular sects and thereby helps us 
in finding out how many of the sects were in existence before the Kathavatthu 
was composed. The list of sects so mentioned is as follows -Vatsiputriya 
(Sammitiya), Sarvastivada, Mahasanghika, Kasyapiya, Pubbaseliya, Apara- 
seliya, Rajagirika, Siddhatthika, Gokulika, Bhadrayanika, Mahisasaka, 
Uttarapathaka, lletuvadin and Vetulyaka. 

Unfortunately the date of composition of the Kathavatthu is still a 
matter of uncertainty. The fact that it discusses views of a sect like the 
Vetulyakas or Sunfiatavadins shows that though its compilation might have 
started quite early, accretions went on till a late date. The Vetulyakas or 
SuMatavadins need not be placed later than the 2nd or 3rd century A.D. 
and so we may take it for granted that the sects that the Kathavatthu had in 
view were in existence about the 3rd century a.d. The inscription too does not 
take us much earlier regarding the date of origin of the Saila and a few other 
sects. Vasumitra’s date would have been the best landmark but the difficulty 

3. JRAS., 1892, p. 597. 4. E. ix, pp. 139, 141, 146. 

5. See my Early Monastic Buddhism (henceforth abbreviated as EMB.), II, 

pp. 58 (., 122. 

6. E. I., ix,-p. 135. 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY 285 

arises regarding the identification of Vasumitra, the author of the treatise 
on the sects. 

Origin and Home of the Sects. 

During the first century of its existence. Buddhism did not spread beyond 
Vesali and Campa on the east, Kosambl and AvantI on the west, Mathura 
and snivastl on the north, the southern limit being the boundaries, of Anga 
and Magadha. The participants in the deliberations of the Second Council 
also hailed from this area. The two parties formed in this council lived 
together in Magadha but one preferred to proceed towards the west and the 
other to the east. The former adhered to the orthodox views and became 
known as Theravadins. or Sthaviravadins, and the latter sided with the un- 
orthodox and came to he called the Mahasanghikas. The division between 
the two groups grow wider and wider, ultimately, one paved the way to 
Illnayana and the other to Mahayana. 

The Mahasanghikas 

The Mahasanghikas continued to wield their influence at Vesali and 
Pataliputra and send out their monks to the north as well as to the south. 
Fahien 7 found the Vinaya of this .school at Pataliputra while Yuan Chwang 8 * 
states that the Ifinayanic monks of Pataliputra began the. Maliasahghika 
school. I-tsing y found the adherents of this school mostly in Magadha, a few 
in Lata and Sindhu, and some in a few places in northern, .southern and 
eastern India side by side with other sects. From the statement of the three 
Chinese pilgrims, it is evident that the Mahasanghikas remained in Magadha 
and had a few adherents in the northern and southern countries. The stupa 
at Andarab i Afghanistan) u> and die cave at Karle f Bombay Presidency ) 11 
are dedicated to the teachers of the Mahasahghika school. These are clear 
testimonies to the authenticity of the statement of I-tsing. 

Tlie offshoots, of the Mahasanghikas, however, were mostly local ones. 
The most prominent of them were the saila schools, known as Purvasailas, 
Aparasailas, and Uttarasailas and Caityakas. The Sailas or hills and moun- 
tains from which a particular branch derived its name are located around 
Amaravati and Nugarjunikonda in the Guntur district. Along with the Saila 
schools there were the Caityakas. who probably derived the name from the 
Mahiacaitya erected there, and the Lokottaravadins, who were so called for 
their deification of Buddha. 

From all these evidences, we may conclude that the Mahasanghikas were 
predominant in Magadha having their centres at Vesali and Pataliputra, and 
that their offshoots were localised in the Guntur District, in and around 
Amaravati and Nagarjunikonda. 


7. Legge’s Fahien, p. 98. 

9. Ltsing , p. xxiii. 

11. E . vii, pp. 64 f„ 71 f. 


8. Watters, Yuan Chwang, I, p. 269 
10. E. xi, p. 211. 



286 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The T jieravadi ns 

The Theravadins lived side by side with the Mahasanghikas at Pataliputra 
and other places in Magadha but as they probably could not maintain their 
orthodoxy in the observance of Uposathas and other ecclesiastical functions 
they preferred to withdraw themselves to centres, which were not so assailed 
by unorthodox monks. They mostly retired to the west, and settled in Kau- 
sambf and Avantx. The Theravadins also could not retain their solidarity 
for a long time for we hear of its disruption into several sub-sects, the pro- 
innviit ol which were the Maliisasaka. Dharnxagupta, Sarvtstivfula, Sam- 
mitiya and Sautrantika. 

TltERAV ADA- VlUH A J YA VADA 

There are ample evidences to shejw that the original Theravadins pre- 
ferred Avanti to Magadha. Mahinda, the propagator of this school in Ceylon, 
also hailed from Vidisa. In Ceylon the teachings of this school underwent 
certain changes, for which it was distinguished there as Thcravada-Vibhaj- 
javada. 1 - The Ceylonese monks of Mahavihara preferred to call themselves 
*'Vihhajjavadins, ,:; and not simply Theravadins. In Ceylon again the original 
school became further sub-divided into three sects known as Jetavaniya, 
Abhayagirivasins, and Mahaviharavasins. 

The Maiijsasakas 

Those of the Theravadins who wended their way southwards and sought 
an asylum in ancient Mahisamandala became known as the Mahisasakas. 
'I hey settled in Vanavasi (North lvanara) and Mysore . 14 It is an old 
school, claiming Pur an a of Dakkhinagiri as its patron saint. This school 
had doctrines and disciplinary rub's closely allied to those of the Theravadins. 

Dharmagupta 

Some of the Thera vada tnonks must have proceeded north, adopting 
Sanskrit as the medium of their pitaka , 15 They became known as the 
Dharmagupta. Prof. Przyluski 16 suggests that this school very probably 
derived its name from its founder Dharmagupta who may be identified with 
Dharmarakkhita, the Yonaka missionary sent to the north-western countries 

12. We have similar distinction made in the case of anotl.o school, viz., the 

Bahusrutlya-vibhajvavada ---. Prajnaptivada ; there was also a Sarvastivada-vibha- 
jyavada. See EMB., II, p. 196. * 

13. See Cullavagga, chap. iii. colophon; Tikapafthana Cy., Colophon ; Dtpa- 
vamsa xviii, 41, 44. 

14. EMB., II, p. 113-114. Fa-hien found the Vinaya text of this school in 
Ceylon. 

15. One of their texts is the Abhini$kr amana Sutra containing the life of 
Buddha. 

16. Le Concile de Rajagjha, pp. 325-6. 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY 287 

by Moggaliputta Tissa. Later evidences show that the Sogdians and Par- 
thians took interest in the disciplinary rules of this school, and De Groot 
also remarks that the Vinaya of the Dharmaguptas was actually in use in 
the Chinese monasteries . 17 Kouei-ki, the commentator on Vasumitra’s 
treatise, remarks that this school was popular in Central Asia and China. 

Sarvastivadins 

Another branch of the Thcravadins also moved north-wards, making 
their seats at Mathura, in Gandhara and Kashmir. This school, called the 
Sarvastivadins on account of its fundamental doctrine of “ sarvam asli 9 \ 
adopted Sanskrit as the medium of their pit aka . It became very popular 
all over northern India and carried the palm in the days of Kanishka. It 
put into shade the oldest school the Thcravadins and was for some time 
recognised as the best Indian exponent of original Buddhism. The monastic 
universities of the north made a sixxnal study of the Tripitakas of this school 
and it could count as its adherents some of the most distinguished writers 
on Buddhism like Sarpghabhadra, Vasubandhu, Dharmatrata, Ghosaka, 
Vasumitru and Buddhadcva. Besides the three Pifukas, it: iiosscsscd an 
extensive literature in the shape of commentaries ( Vibhdsds ) for which It 
became later on known as the Vaibhitsika. It extended its influence, beyond 
tire borders of India uptn Central Asia but does not seem to have obtained 
a footing in China. Its Tripiraka was carried to China by the Chinese pil- 
grims and so was preserved there in translation. Kanishka became an ardent 
supporter of this sect, and that accounts for its popularity all over northern 
India. The fact that its doctrines particularly were assailed by Nagarjuna, 
Vasubandhu (after Iris conversion to Yogacara). Sankara and other philo- 
sophical writers shows the amount of attention received by it from its opi>on- 
ents for several centuries. 


The SammitIvas 

This school is better known as the Vatsiputriyas or Vajjiputtakas. It 
issued out of the Theravada, and so its earlier home was AvantI for which 
it had the other appellation, Avantaka. It is mentioned in the Sarnath 
inscription proving thereby its existence for sometime at that place. Accord- 
ing to I-tsing, it became popular in Lata and Sindhu, with some followers 
in Magadha, and a few in southern and eastern India. 

It is not possible to locate the se maining sects of the Theravada branch. 
The only suggestion that we can offer is that the Kasyapiya, Sautrantika 
Haimavata and others remained, it seems, in the north, as they were collec- 
tively called the Uttarapathakas by Buddhagosa. The rivalry of the 
Sautrantikas with the Vaibhasikas, and the frequent mention of these two 


17. La Cade du Mahayana en Chine, p. 3. 



288 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


sects hint that they lived side by side in the monasteries of the northern 
countries, and had no particular local habitation. 

Differences in Vinaya Rules 

Vasumitra's text and the Kathdvatlhu have pointed out the doctrinal 
differences of tire sects but there is no source of information regarding the 
differences in disciplinary matters. That there, was a certain amount of 
differences among the sects is evident from the account of lire Third Council, 
the remote cause of which was that the monks of different sects refused to 
lrold tlie Patimokklia assembly together, as one group of monks was regarded 
as aparisuddha (unclean) according to the disciplinary code of another. In 
the account of tire First Council too, we read of differences of opinion be- 
tween Mahakassapa and Purana of Dakkhiriiigiri, relating to seven rules, 16 
and these seven rules were actually incorporated in the Mahisasaka and 
Dharmagupta Vixraya texts. The differences between the. Theravadins and 
the Mahasartghikas regarding the ten points are too well kirown to be recount- 
ed here. A detailed study of the Sarvastivada Vinaya, which is now being 
published, dearly shows that differences in disciplinary rules were no less 
important than differences in doctrinal matteis. Regarding the Samnritiya.s, 
l-tsing remarks that their Vinaya had special rules regulating the use of 
undergarment, girdles, medicines, arid beds. 1 " Those Chinese travellers also 
point out in a general way that in the cutting and wearing of robes the sects 
differed. In view of these findings, though stray and scanty, one has to admit 
that there were differences among the sects relating to disciplinary rules. In 
Chinese, as many as live Vinaya texts of live sects are preserved, indicating 
that there were differences in the recensions.'-" The remarks’ of l-tsing (pp. 
6-7) in this connection are intertssting and so they are reproduced here : 
“ There arc small points of difference such as where the skirt of the lower 
garments is cut straight in one, and irregular in another, and the folds of 
the upper robe are, in size, narrow in one and wide in another. The Sarvasti- 
vadins cut the skirt of the lower garment straight while the other three 
(Mahasahghika, Sthavira, Sammitrya) cut it of irregular shape. The same 
school ordains separate rooms in lodgings, while the Sammitiyas allow 
separate beds in an enclosure made by ropes. The Sarvastivadins receive 
food directly into the hand but the Mahasafighikas marks a place on which 
to place the food.” 21 

These points may appear minor to an outsider but were seriously taken 
by the monks, and even now such controversies rage among the monks in 
Chittagong, Ceylon and Burma. 

18. EMB., I, p. 331. 19. I-tsing, pp. 7, 66, 110. 

20. See Nanjio, Catalogue oj the Chinese Tripiiaka. 

21. This i* also the practice at present followed by the monks at Chittagong, 
in Burma and Ceylon. 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY 


289 


Doctrinal Differences. 

Along with the differences in disciplinary matters among the various 
sects, the differences in doctrines were no less keen. The Kathavatthu and 
Vasumitra’s treatise are devoted exclusively to the doctrinal differences, but 
their list does not take! into account all the sects. From this it may be 
inferred that some of the sects had disciplinary differences only and not 
doctrinal. In doctrines also, many minor matters of faith and psychological 
analysis have been included ; for our present purpose however, wc shall skip 
over those and point out only the broad differences. 

Re. Buddha and Bodhisallva : The Theravadins and their offshoots 52 

were more or less in favour of conceiving Buddha as a human being who 
after strenuous exertion, attained full knowledge 23 and visualised the Truth. 
He was subject to the human frailties though by his yogic powers he could 
overcome the everyday events of a man’s life. The Sarvastivadins and 
Uttanipathakas added only that the Buddha is above matlrl and koruna, to 
which however, the Theravadins were not prepared to agree. 24 

All the sects held that the mukti of the Sravakayana and Buddhayana 
was the same though the mdrgas might be different. 25 

Those who subscribed to the above view could not attribute to a Bodhi- 
sattva any superior qualities. According to them, Bodhisattvahood indicated 
only the previous lives of Gautama Buddha. 

The Mahasanghikas and their offshoots were quite opposed to the above 
view. They held that Buddha is lokottara (supra-mundane) and is made of 
anasrava (pure) dharmas. His body, length of life, powers, etc. are all un- 
limited. It is his created body that appears in the world. In the words of 
the Mahavastu (I, pp. 167-8), everything of the great r.st is transcendental, 
including his advent into the world. 28 

As a corollary to the above conception of Buddha, this group of schools 
conceived the Bodhisattva also in semi-transcendental form. According to 
them Bodhisattvas are self-born, and not bom of parents. They do not pass 
through the embryonic stages. They take birth out of their own free will 
in any form of existence. 

Re. Arhats : Next to the Buddhological speculations come the contro- 
versy relating to the attainments of an Arhat. In the eyes of the orthodox 
group, i.e., the Theravadins and their offshoots, Arhatliood marks the final 
stage of Sravakayana, i.e. an arhat* is a fully emancipated person, he has 

22. MahiSsakas, Sarvastivadins, Uttanipathakas, etc. 

23. It is the attainment of bodhi and omniscience that make a Buddha 
{EMB. II. p. 172). 

24. EMB., II, pp. 147-8, 172. 25. EMB., II, p. 164. 

26. For details, dee EMB., II, pp. 63, 154. 

20 



290 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


attained Nirvana, the summunt bonum. He cannot have any impurity, or 
ignorance about the truth, or doubt about the Triratna. He is not subject 
to temptation and is above good and bad deeds and so cannot be said to 
acquire merits. He can have no retrogression from arhathood. 

The Sarvastivadins, however, differ on certain points regarding the 
attainments of an Arhat. They state that arliats arc of two categories, viz., 
sa(st>a)-dharmakusafa ( aware of one’s own dharmas) or panhdvimutta and 
paradharmakusala (aware of one's own as well as other’s dharmas) or 
ubhotobhagavimutta. The Sarvastivadins hold that Arhats of the former 
category acquires only ksaya 27 and not anutpdda jfidna and they are subject 
to retrogression ; they do acquire merits. Of the 12 links of the casual chain, 
four only. viz. ndmarupa, saddy/ilana, sparsa and vedand remain active, in 
the. case of arhats. They are also subject to the effects of past karma. 

The Mahasahghikas and their offshoots on the contrary hold that arhats 
can have no retrogression from arhathood but there was a section of the 
Mahasahghikas, who were probably followers of Mahadeva who attributed 
to the arhats the following frailties : — (i) that they can be tempted by 
others; (it) they may have ignorance on certain matters; (iii) they may 
have doubt ; and ( iv ) that they gain knowledge with others’ help.- 9 

The saila schools, however, hold in agreement with the Sarvastivadins 
that an arhat is subject to the deed of his former lives. 

Re. Anupubbnbhisatnaya ( gradual realisation of the< stages) : According 
to the Sarvastivadins and Sainmitiyas, the realisation of the four stages of 
sanctification takes place gradually, but there is no bar to the realisation of 
the second and the third stages at one and the same time. 

The Thcravadins and Mahisasakas agree with the Maliasanghikas in 
holding that the realisation of Lhe four stages may take place all at once. 90 

Re. Percipient : The question raised is whether the organs of sense by 
themselves perceive or it is the vihnana of the organs of sense that perceives. 
The Thcravadins and a section of the M r.l tasangh ikas subscribe to the latter 
view' while the Sarvastivadins and the Saila Schools uphold the former. 31 

Re. Asatpskjtas : The Thcravadins hold that there are only three 
asarpskrtas, viz. Pratisanikhyanirodha, A pratisarti khydnirodha and AkdsaA- 
The Saila schools increase them to nine by adding the four higher samdpatiis 
(trances), pratttyasamutpdddngikatva (or the unchangeable law of causa- 

27. That his impurities are gone. 

28. That he will have no more rebirth. 

29. For detailed expositions of these four items, see EMB., II, pp. 64-65, 85 ff. 

30. See EMB., II, pp. 67. 156. 31. Ibid., pp. 67, 101. 

32. Kathiivatthu points out that even itkasa should be excluded from the list 
of asarnkhatas as it is not tap am leriaip accutam amatam. See EMB., II, p. 102. 



THE BUDDHIST SECTS : A SURVEY 291 

tion), and the aryamargahgikalva (or the fact of attainment of a mdrga or 
phala) . The Mahisasakas also count the number of asatfiskrtas as nine, 
and their list of the additional six is as follows : (*)l Acala (or immova- 

bility), (it) kusaladharmaiathatd (or the eternal law of good dharma), (Hi) 
akusaladharmatathata (or the eternal law of bad dharma)-, (iv) avyakjla- 
dharmatathata (or the eternal law of indeterminate dharma), (v) margdn- 
gal a that a (or the eternal law of the path) and ( vi ) piatityasamutpada- 
taihata (or the eternal law of causation ). 33 

Re : Antardbhava : The conception of a temporary existence of a being 
after death and before rebirth ( mrtyupapaltibhavayorantardbhavaliha yah) 
was brought in for the first time by the Sarvastivadins and then taken up by 
the Sammitiyas. and other schools. Buddhaghosa says that this conception 
was unknown to the Theravadins but it was suggested by the class of beings 
known as the Antar iiparinibbayi arhals. According to the Sarvastivadins 
and others, this antardbhava serves as a link between one existence and 
another. In the Saptabkavasutrd 31 it is even counted as one of the gatis 
(forms of existence) anrl in the Dharmaskandha it is said to have caksus, 
eaksufindrya, caksvdyalana and caksurdhatu , ss In the Prakaranagrantha as 
also in the Prajnaptisdr a of the Sarvastivadins, it is not counted as a gali, 
as it is neither kltsta (bad) nor knsala (good), it is avyakrta and aklifla. 8 * 
They further state along with the Sammitiyas that there is antardbhava in 
Kama and Rfipa dhatus only and not in Arupa. The Theravadins and 
Mahisasakas, and the saila schools deny the existence of antardbhava. 

Re. Reals. The Sarvastivadins maintain that live dharmas subdivided 
into seventyfive 3 '' exist in their subtlest form at all times whether in the 
past, present or future. They contend that constituted objects disintegrate 
but not the subtle dharmas themselves ; vedand, e.g., exists at all times, 
though it may temporarily be good, bad or indifferent. From the controversy 
as given in the Kalhdvattku, the opinion of the Sarvastivadins may be 
stated thus: — 

(/) The past and future do not exist but they are perceptible in the 
present. 

(it) It is the bhdva of each of the live dharmas and not dharmas that 
persist in the past, present and future. 

(Hi) An object may lose its pastness, presentness, or futurity but not 
its objectncss but that objectness is not identical with nibbdna or nibbdna- 
bhdva ; an arhat, e.g. has atita-rdga but he is not therefore sardga, in other 
words, his raga is so subtle that it is ineffective. 

33. Masuda in Asia Major, II, p. 61. 

34. See Abhidharmakosa, iii, p. 13. 

35. Ibid. 36. Ibid., iii, 4, pp. 14-15. 

37. For the list, stee EMB., II, pp. 141-2. 



292 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Among the Sarvastivadin teachers, there are again differences of opinion 
relating to the interpretation of sarvam asti. Bhadanta Dharmatrata main- 
tains bhdvdnyalhatva i.e. the past, present and future are differentiated on 
account of the non-identity of bhava and not of dravya. Bhadanta Gho§aka 
maintains laksanunyal halva, i.e., the dharmas in their transition from past 
to present and present to future undergo changes in characteristics (laksanas) 
only. Bhadanta Vasumitra holds avaslhanyathutva that the past, present and 
future of a dharnia indicate only the difference in condition {avast ha) of the 
same dhartna. Bhadanta Buddhadcva maintains anyonyathdtva, i.e. past, 
present and future are spoken of relatively. Vasubandhu accepts the third 
interpretation as given by Vasumitra. 31 * 

The above opinion of the Sarvastivada is accepted by the later Mahi- 
sasakas but not the earlier who state that the present only exists but not the 
past and future. All other schools including the Sautrantikas arc opposed 
to this opinion of the Sarvastivadins. 

Re. Pudgala : The Sammiuyas or the Vatslyas or the Vatsiputriyas 
advocate the doctrine that there is a pudgala (a self, a personality) besides 
the five elements ( skatidhns ) composing a being.-'' 3 The pudgala is indefinable 
and persists through the several existence of a being till it reaches nirvana. 
It is, however, neither identical nor different from skandhas. It is changing 
along with the skandhas, and disappears when the skandhas disappear in 
mrvaria. It is not ksanika (momentary) like the skandhas, and it has not 
all the properties of a constituted object ; again it is also not unchanging and 
ever existing like nirvana. In short, the pudgala is neither a constituted nor 
an unconstituted component of a being. 

The Sautrantikas may be pointed out as holding a doctrine similar to 
that of the Sammitiyas. They assert the continued existence of the very 
subtle citta (or bija or vdsand).* 0 Vasumitra attributes to them the doctrine 
of the transference of skandhamdlra from one existence to another, for which 
they may be identified with the Saipkantika or the SarpkrfLntivadins. 


38. See A bhidhavmakosa- vyakhya, Jap. ed., pp. 470-J. 

39. The Bhadrayanikas, Dharmaguptas and Saipkrantivadins accepted this 
view. 

40. The Darstantika-Sautrantikas state that citta only exists and not cailtas 
' while other Sautrantikas admit the existence of citta i as well as caittas,. 



SOME SANDESA KAVYAS & MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 


By 

Dr. C. KUNHAN RAJA. 

Kalidasa has described many places in Western India in his Meghasan- 
desa. The description stalls from somewhere near Nagpur and goes up to 
the Himalayas. It is mainly the Mahva country that he describes. After 
Malwa, the whole region up to the Himalayas is practically left off. Evident- 
ly ATalwa was his home. After Kalidasa, poets have written many Sandesa 
Kavyas. But there arc not many that have an interest from the point of 
view of either history or geography ; many of them have taken a philosophical 
and religious turn. It is only when countries, cities, temples and other places 
are described, that the poem has an interest for us from the point of view of 
history and geography. Such Sandesa Kavyas are rare, though the number 
of Sandesa Kavyas is very high in Sanskrit Literature. 

In imitation of Kalidasa’s Meghasandesa, the poets of Malabar have com- 
posed many Sandesa Kavyas and they have a real interest for the students of 
Malabar History. In these Sandesa Kavyas, the poets find an opportunity to 
describe many kingdoms, many temples, many palaces, many rivers and many 
such places. Many of these Sandesa Kavyas are not available in print and 
no attempt has been made to tap the rich source of information for the recon- 
struction of the history of ancient Malabar. 

What is called Malabar is the land on the west coast where the Malayalam 
language is spoken. The people have preserved a distinct mode of life through 
many centuries. It is only in recent times that the life in Malabar has shown 
signs of change and a tendency to be equated with the life in other parts of 
India. Caste distinction, the village organisation, marriage and inheritance, 
dress and food, houses and temples-in all such matters Malabar shows some 
distinctive feature. Malabar is at present divided into three political units, 
namely the States of Travancorc and Cochin and the Malabar District of the 
Madras Presidency. The advent of the Portuguese and the Dutch, the wars 
between the Zamorins of Calicut and the Rajas of Cochin in which the Euro- 
pean nations took sides, later the rise of the power of the Muslim rulers of 
Mysore and their interference in the affairs of Malabar, the' appearance of the 
English on the scene and the part played by them in shaping the political 
structure of the west coast in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries — these 
factors have changed the whole phase of Malabar history and geography. 

There was a time when Malabar was parcelled out into a large number of 
small kingdoms. There was no power that could be called the Paramount 



294 


B. G. LAW VOLUME 


Power of Malabar. The history of the days of the Perumals, when Malabar 
was supposed to have had a political unity, is shrouded in the veil of mytho- 
logy and anecdotes. The Paijdya and Cola kings had some sort of power 
over portions of Malabar at times, especially in the southern parts. But at 
the time. I propose to deal with, there was no such external authority wielding 
power in Malabar. In describing the geography of Malabar during this parti- 
cular period, which I propose to consider in this Paper, I have to deal with 
the following Sandesa Kavyas. I give below a brief account of each of them. 

I. The iSukasandesa. This is by tradition known to have been written 
by a Nambudiri Brahmin named Laksmldasa, belonging to the house of Kari- 
fuiampilly on the banks of the Alwaye River, in modem Travancore. In this 
Sandesa, the message is sent through a parrot from Rameswaram on the east 
coast to a place called Trikkanamotilakam (Item 28) near Cranganore (Item 
27). This was the seat of the kings of Malabar in ancient days and it was a 
very important city till a few centuries ago. The route is through Cape 
Comorin and Trivandrum. The work is available at the Mangalodayam Ltd.. 
Trichur (Cochin State). 

The exact date of this work is not known. According to local tradition, 
it is before the time of Sahkaracarya. But such an early date is not accepted 
by many scholars. Anyway it must be earlier than the thirteenth century a.d., 
as will be evident from the description of the next Sandesa. SukasandcSa will 
be designated as SK. 

II. UnnunilIsandeSa. This is a poem in Malayalam. Except in the 
matter of language, it follows the technique of Sanskrit Sandesa Kavyas, and it 
is an imitation of Kalidasa’s Meghasandcsa. The only difference is that in this 
poem there are six verses as an introduction, in which there is a Mahgala and 
a description of the heroine and a dedication of the work for the joy and glory 
of the heroine by the hero (who is evidently the poet himself). The author is 
a member of the Vadakkumkur royal family, the northern branch of the Bim- 
bill kings, now a part of the Travancore State. 

This poem must be assigned to the fourteenth century, since there is the 
reference to the messenger (a member of another royal family) having fought 
against the Tulugka army (evidently the Sultans of Madura). The route 
is from Trivandrum to Sindhudvlpa, the capital of the Vatakkunkur or nor- 
thern branch of the Bimbili kingdom (see item 16). Th»s poem will be de- 
signated UN. 

III. KokilasandeSa. This is by the poet Uddaixla, who is supposed 
to have been living in Malabar in the early part of the fifteenth century. The 
route described is from Canjeevaram in the Chingelpet District of the Madras 
Presidency to a place called Chennamaffgalam. (now a part of the Cochin 
State) between the two arms of the Alwaye river (item 24). The messenger 
is asked to enter Malabar through Mysore (Hosala kingdom) in its north- 



SOME SANDESA KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 


295 


eastern comer. The poem closely follows Kalidasa’s MeghasandeSa in tech- 
nique, and is supposed to be a complement to SukasandeSa (No. I above), 
in so far as this poem describes such portions of Malabar as are not included 
in the other. This will be designated as KL. The work is available at Man- 
galodayam Ltd., Trichur (Cochin State). 

IV. Ma yOras A nde§a . In technique, this follows No. II above, in so 
far as there are two introductory verses (a mangala and a mention of the he- 
roine and the poem in honour of her) before the hero in separation is intro- 
duced. The poem mentions Uddanna, the author of the previous ix)em, as a 
living poet and as such its date is also in the fifteenth century. The route des- 
cribed is from Trivandrum to a place called annakara ( item 35) near Trichur. 
(Item 31). 

The author of the poem is identical with the author of KaumidI, the com- 
mentary on Abhinavagupta's Dhvanyalokalocana ; this is all that is definitely 
known of the author ; so far as available evidences go, there is reason to assume 
that he belonged to a royal family in modern Cochin State (the writer’s own 
family). The poem will be designated MR. This is printed in the Poona 
Oriental Series. 

V. BhramarasandeSa. This is by one Vasudeva and must be assigned 
to the first half of the seventeenth century. It mentions Narayana Bhatta 
whose date is definitely known from many of his works, ft also mentions his 
teacher Acyuta (Pisaroti) the date of whose death is also known as 1624 a.d. 
The route described is from Trivandrum to a place in Malabar District called 
fivetadurga (white fort), which may be identified with the present Kottakal, 
a few miles to the north of the Tirur railway station on the Madras to Manga- 
lore railway line, 388 miles from Madras. (See under item 44). The work 
has been printed as No. 128 in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. This will 
be designated BR. 

VI. KokasandeSa. This is a beautiful Malayalam poem, of which only 
a portion has been found, and this portion has been published in the Quarterly 
Journal of the Pian-Kerala Literary Academy for October-November 1942. The 
date cannot be definitely fixed. The language is fairly old. It must be later 
than 1500 A.a in so far it records the conquests of parts of the Cochin terri- 
tory by Zamorin of Calicut. This describes the route from a place called 
Thriprahkot (item 44), a few miles to the south-east of Tirur railway station 
(mentioned in the previous section), to Quilon (Item 7) in Travancorc State. 
This will be designated KK. The portion received ends with the description 
of Idappilli (see under item 20). 

Although I have mentioned six works, and although there are many more 
SandeSa Kavyas which describe portions of Malabar, I am taking into consi- 
deration mainly three of the above, the Sukasandesa (No. I), Kokilasandesa 
(No. Ill) and Mayurasandesa (No. IV), since they exhaust the whole terri- 



296 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


tory from one end of Malabar to the other, and also since they are the earli- 
est. The Sandesa Ivavyas I and III would have been enough for the pur- 
pose. Yet the route in IV is slightly different from the route in III, and IV 
mentions and describes important places on the route not found in the others. 
I will make ample references to the others when there is occasion. 

What is noteworthy in these Sandesakdvyas is the fact that between 
Cranganore (item 27) and Quilon (no. 7), there is no mention of the places 
on the present coast line. Now we have two very important Ports in this 
stretch of land, namely, Alleppey and Cochin. It has to be assumed that in 
those days the coast line was much more to the east in this part of the country. 
Pei haps there were sandbanks, which later became habitable places. Thus 
except in the seventeenth century Sandesa (No. V), no other poem mentions 
a place on the present-day coast line between Quilon and Cranganore. The 
sea at that time must have been washing the shores at places now represented 
by Kottayam and Emakulam, and what are now back-waters were then open 
sea. 

Another interesting point that I have noticed is that there is no refer- 
ence to any boat traffic at all along this coastal region. Now, the so-called 
back-waters between the coastal strip of land and the mainland, joined toge- 
ther by occasional canals, form one of the most striking features of the west, 
coast, and boat traffic along these back-waters has become very important. 
Perhaps in those days there was nothing like a back-water system ; there 
was only the oi>en sea with occasional sand-banks. It is true that Ibn Batuta 
mentions his journey from Calicut to Quilon in ten days and his halting at 
the capital of a chieftain, now attempted to be identified with the principality 
of VillarvaUam, which about the year 1600 a.d. was merged into the Cochin 
State (set>. Cochin State Manual, p. 96). Perhaps he travelled by sea and not 
by a back-water. 

Now there is a connected water route from Malabar to Trivandrum for 
nearly three hundred miles. Until there was the railway line opened and 
motor vehicles also began to ply, the water-route was the only one available 
for long distance journeys. 

We have to assume that the Sandcsakavyas describe the route ordinarily 
known and used in those days, and such routes must have taken a direction 
which would pass along the principal temples and cities ar-d other places of 
public interest. Or perhaps, such places grew up in those localities on ac- 
count of the fact that the popular route* lay along that line.. Thus we are 
in a position to chart the old route in Malabar from one end to the other by 
an examination of these Sandefiakavyas. With these preliminary remarks 
I give below brief notes on the various places noted in these SandeSakavyas. 

I. Cape Comorin. Described in Sk. (35), where there is a temple of 
Kumarl. Starting from Rameswaram, the route comes to Malabar, which 



SOME SANDESa KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 297 

is spoken of as the country ruled by Brahmins, the mirror for the (prowess 
of the) hands of Parasurama, shining with betel-leaves, cocoa-nut trees and 
arica-nut trees. (24). 

2. Vakragiki. This comes after Cape Comorin, to the north, a little 
off the regular route, where sages perform penance and where celestial beings 
sport. The place is not definitely identified. (Sk. 36). 

3. Suchindra. The famous temple of Suchindra is described in SK. 
37 and 38. Here persons alleged to have been guilty of illicit relations with 
Brahmin ladies could get their innocence proved through the ordeal of 
dipping their hands into boiling ghee : this ordeal continued in that place for 
a long time. There is also a Brahmin Agrahara in front. 

4. Trivandrum. Designated Sydnmdiira, which is a Sanskrilisation of 
the Malayalam form Tircndram of the Sanskrit Sri Anantapura, which first 
becomes Tiru Anantapura and then Tirendra in Malayalam. (SK. 40 to 
48 ; MR. 26 to 35). Visaiu as Anantasayana, the great Bali festival, the 
jewels, silks and other shining objects that are very conspicuous in that 
festival, the young men and charming ladies who assemble to witness the 
festival all these are described in both. There is no mention of the royal 
residence there, since that city became the seat of the Government only at 
a much later time. UN. also describes the city ; and it too does not men- 
tion the royal residence. BR. mentions the reigning King there as Ravi Var- 
man ; but one is not certain if Trivandrum itself was the seat of the Govern- 
ment. It is said that the route starting from Trivandrum, lies through the 
country ruled by king Ravi Varman. It is not also quite certain to which 
political division in southern Malabar this city belonged at that time. Quilon 
was the most important kingdom at that time, in the south. SK. devotes 6 
more verses to describe the morning in that place. MR. speaks of the ocean 
immediately after leaving Trivandrum. So does IJN. also. Trivandrum is, 
to all the poets, one of the most important places in Kerala even in those times. 
The temple and the festival must have been known throughout the country. 

5. A Siva Temple. MR. speaks of a Siva temple after leaving Trivan- 
drum (50) and before reaching Varkala (next item). It is spoken of as sur- 
rounded by sea. There is now a temple called Kathinakkulam, which has the 
open sea on one side and the back-water on the other side. There is archae- 
ological evidence of once there having been a Siva temple in the sea itself, 
surrounded by ocean, which has now disappeared. The temple was known 
as Srimulavasam and it was at one time a Buddhist Temple. It must have 
been near Varkala and not further \o the north in the middle Travancore 
(see Travancore Archaeological Series, Vol. II, Part II ; the Paper on 
Buddhist and Jain vestiges in Malabar). It is more likely that it is this 
lost temple that is referred to than the present Kathinakkulam. UN. also 
mentions a Siva temple after leaving Trivandrum and before reaching Varkala 
(57 to 61). 



298 


B. C, LAW VOLUME 


6. Varkala. This is a famous Kr$na temple, now called Janardana, 
where the tank with crystal water is world-famous (MR. 50 ; UN. 66, 67). 

7. Quilon. This is another famous place, described in detail in all 
the Sandcsakavyas. It is famous for its wealth and opulence. It is the capi- 
tal of the Kukapa kings, who belong to the lunar race (SIC 54 to 56 ; MR. 
51 to 55 ; CN. 67 to 71 ; BR. 25 to 27). 

8. Two rivers. SK. speaks of two rivers after Quilon (57). We are 
not sure of the identity of these rivers. The coast line from Quilon to Cran- 
ganore has changed considerably and the topography too has altered. 

9. Otanad. MR. (57) speaks of the rich country of Gtanad and men- 
tions the fertile fields before reaching this country. 

10. Kan'TIyOr. This is another wealthy city on the west coast in olden 
days and this is the capital of the Kayankulam kings, who belonged to the 
Yadava dynasty. The country was annexed to the Travancore State by 
king Martanda Varma in the beginning of the eighteenth century. MR. spe- 
cially mentions the handsome ladies of the place (58 and 59). UN. also 
(100) describes the charms of the place. 

11. Panayanar. This is a Kali temple described in MR. (60), where 
the name is not given. UN. gives the name of the temple (113). MR. speaks 
of Kali playing with the skull of the Asura as with a ball. 

12. Tiruvalla. This is a famous Visnu temple, described in SK. ( ~ 
and 59); MR. (60 to 62) and UN. (119 to 121). Special mention is made 
of the learned Brahmins and the devotees in the temple. 

13. Manikantha temple. SK. speaks of a forest after Tiruvalla (60) 
and MR. describes this Vi§nu temple (63) where there is the Goddess who 
gives food to all (Items 12 and 13 are in Tekkunku country). 

14. Vancula river. MR. describes this in 64 and 65 and UN. in 129. 
MR. also speaks of the gardens and their beauties after this river. 

15. Ettumanur. This is a great Siva temple (MR. 67 and UN. 132). 
The place is designated in Sanskrit as kirtimadgrama. Ettam means “ fame ” 
(kirti) ; ana means "having” (.mat) ; ur means “village” (grama). 

16. SlNDHUDViPA. This is the destination in UN. Sindhu means 
“ocean” ( Katal ) and dvipa means “island” (turuttu). So Sindhudvipa 
is the Sanskrit equivalent of the modern Katatturuttu, near the famous Siva 
temple called Vaikom. This is the capital of the north ^.n branch of the 
Bimbill country (Vatakkumkur), the southern branch being round about 
Nos. 12 and 13 above, known as Thekkronkur. Both MR. and SK. speak of 
the elephants there. (MR. 68 to 70 ; SK. 60 and 61). These two countries 
were annexed to the Travancore State at a later time. 

17. Fhulla river. MR. describes this in 71 and 72 and SK. in 62. 
The river is now known as Muvvattupuzha, which joins the back-water 
south of Emakulam. 



SOME SANDESA KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 299 

18. Brahmin villages. Both SK. and MR. speak of the famous 
Brahmin villages after crossing this river. These villages were occupied by 
very learned Brahmins (MR. 73 ; SK. 62). 

19. Ravipura. MR. mentions this in 74. SK. mentions the temple 
where the deity has Ananta as pedestal, but does not mention the name of 
the temple. MR. also describes the deity in the same way. Both speak of 
the learned Brahmins who were well-versed in the meaning of the Upani§ads. 
The place is the modem Tripunithura. the residence of the Maharajas of 
Cochin. 

20. Subrahmanya temple. SK. speaks of a Subrahmanya temple here 
through a double meaning, there is reference also to a great Brahmin named 
Subrahmanya, who used to live opposite the temple. The temple lias now 
been identified as with the Vayattil temple, two miles to the north of Tripu- 
nithura. 

There is great difficulty in ascertaining a few names after this. Before 
we take up those names, I must state that although the route described in the 
old poems are along a more easterly line, that must have been the coastal line 
at that time. Katatturuttu, mentioned in item 16, can have that name only 
if that had been on the coast, Turuttu need not mean an island ; it may 
also mean sandy bank. Now it is a little inland ; then there is the back- 
water and also the coastal strip of land before we reach the sea. On this 
present coastal strip is the important port of Allepey and a few miles to the 
south of this town, there is the temple of Ampalappuzha, where once ruled 
King Devanarayaina, the patron of poets and scholars, a great scholar and 
warrior himself. The famous Malabar poet, Narayana Bhafta lived in his 
court ; so did at a much later time, the great Malayala poet Kuncan Nam- 
biyar and also a great Sanskrit poet of the same time named Rama Pfmivada. 
It is only in BR. that we have a mention of Devanarayana. One is not sure 
if even BR. is speaking of the coastal territory or only some town more to the 
east. The mention is after the two BimbiK countries. 

Vaikom is another famous Siva temple. This is not mentioned in any 
of the older poems. But BR. mentions it. The route in the older poems 
lies very near the temple. The inference should be that it was not an im- 
portant temple at that time or that the temple did not exist at all. 

After passing Tripunithura, BR. mentions the great anscestral palace 
of the Cochin Maharajas on the west coast. Perhaps this is the modem 
Cochin Plalace built for the Maharajas of Cochin by the Dutch. 

Even though those places might have become solid land at that time 
and even though some villages or even towns might have sprung up, the 
ordinary route in those days lay much to the east, of the present-day coastal 
line. That is certain. It may not be that Cochin and Alleppey did not exist 
then. The probability is that they were insignificant places and came into 



300 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


prominence when later the Portuguese and the Dutch came and settled down 
on the coastal region. 

21. A Siva temple. After Tripunithura and the Subrahmanya tem- 
ple (items 19 and 20) SK. mentions a great Siva temple. It is simply intro- 
duced as “that temple”. It must have been so very famous at that time 
that no special mention of the name was needed.. In the notes in the edition 
of the work in Malayalam script with Malayalam translation, the annotator 
says that the temple is the one at Trikakkara, two miles to the east of 
Idappilli (now a railway station next to Emakulam on the way to Shora;- 
nur). Others say that it is the temple at Trikkarur, a few miles to the east 
of Alwayc railway station on the same line (one next to Idappilli). There 
is a third opinion that it is the temple of Peruvaram in Parur, on the island 
formed by the two arms of the Alwaye river. All that SK. says is that in the. 
temple, the twelve, two, eight, and eleven (total 33) gods reside. MR. also 
speaks of all the gods (certainly the 23 gods) reside there. In Trikkakkara 
there are many minor deities installed. So is the case with Peruvaram. But 
SK. says that the river Curc.u (taken to be the Alwaye river) flows not far. 
So the preference is for Trikkarur. The minor deities installed in the two 
temples have nothing to do with the 33 gods. 

Now, KK. mentions a place called Ulanaij and also a temple there where 
the Deity had to give up half his body to Parvati after his defeat in his fight 
with Kama, and as for the other half, he had to remain content with being 
33rd in rank. Now in the Upanisad enumeration, Prajapati (i.e. Siva him- 
self) comes as the 33rd. This description has some relevancy only if in the 
temple there were the 33 gods. MR. speaks of the god “ who is a moon to 
the moon stone of the heart of Parvati.” Taking these things together 1 , we 
have to assume that in SK. and in MR. the temple mentioned is just the one 
mentioned in KI\. (SK. 65 ; MR. 75 ; KK. 88 and 90) . 

MR. here mentions a .Sankara, who is very liberal and who feeds Brah- 
mins, who is a great authority on Sukra and Barhaspatya niti. Since the 
place is in the Parur country, some scholars assume that Sankara is the king 
of that country who was known as Sankara rama. But he is known only as 
Sankararama or as Riimasahkara, and never as mere Sankara. It is very 
likely that he is the author of Jayamangala commentary on Arthasastra. If 
this is so, this gives us the date of that commentary, namely, about 1400 A.D.. 
which is the date of MR. 

22. Balya country. This is the mbst difficult place to fix. It is des- 
cribed in MR. (78 to 85). The place is not known in any other place in 
literature. All that we know from MR. about the location is that it is to 
the east of the route to be followed. In the palace the messenger is told that 
he could meet the great poet Uddai><ja. Uddanda is by popular tradition, 
known only to be connected with the Zamorin of Calicut and not with such 



SOME SANDESa KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 301 

a southern country. It is also said in the course of the description that the 
capital of the country is Bhutivahinl. This city too is not known in Malabar 
from any other source. 

From the similarity of the name Balya with Villarvattam, which is a 
known country, there is a tendency to identify the two places. The great 
difficulty is that Vilkirvattam is not to the east of the route, but rather on 
the route itself, in so far as it is identified with Chennamahgalam, the place 
where Paliyat Achan now lives. This is also the destination in KL. (See 
item 24 below). This is just to the north of Pcruvaram temple or Ulanad 
mentioned under the previous item and much to the west of Trikkakara or 
Trikkarur mentioned in the same item. There is another difficulty that in MR. 
the hero speaks of this country and its capital as “ my own ”. The author i3 
a king himself and he cannot be expected to speak of the capital of a petty 
chieftain like VilTarvaftam as “ my own/’ There is no way of bringing about 
any sort of relationship between the hero (who is also the author of MR.) 
and the Villa rvatlam family. 

I am inclined to identify Balya with Perumpa(appu family, the modem 
Cochin Royal family. According to Painini (V-ii-120), taken along with a 
Vartika, Balya means “having renowned army." Perum means “great" 
or “ renowned ” and pata means “ army ”. Thus Balya can be the Sans- 
kritisation of Perumpaia. sivavilasa. mentioned in item 26 below, denotes 
this family in Sanskrit as baliuvyapti, which means having great expansion 
(perum patarpu). Balya may be a similar adaptation into Sanskrit. MR. 
has many other similar adaptations like ihgudlbhuvibbaga for otanad (item 
9) and kirtimadgrama for ettumanur (item 15). This family is known to 
have had the overlordship of Malabar and they are styled Keralfedhlsvara, 
the Raja (see item 26 below). Thus one can understand how the hero 
(and the author, who is himself a king, speaks of this palace as “his own," 
in so far as it is the palace of his overlord. 

Then there is the word “ Bhutivahinl ” which is the name of the capital 
of the Balya country. Bhuti means ashes and vahin! means river, or even a 
tank. So some people try to identify this with a tank called Carakkulam 
(ash-tank), which is near the site of the palace, if the country is identified 
with Villarvattam. It may be that the palace had the name and the tank 
retains the name now. But Bhutivahini can also mean “ Vellar ” and it may 
be the place called Vellarppilli, which was the seat of the Pcfpmpatappu 
family for a long time. Thus the ‘Balya country can be the country of the 
Perumpafappu family. 

In this latter assumption, there is only one difficulty. The river Curpi 
is described after Balya country (Item 25). But Vellarpilli is after the 
Alwaye river with which Curaii is identified. Here one matter must be taken 
into consideration. The Alwaye river is known only as Marudvjtha and not 



302 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Currti. In all the descriptions, Cured is related with Tiruvaiicikkulam (item 
26). It may be that the name Curru is given only to the part of the river, 
after it joins the other river called Chalakkudi river now, and known to Sans- 
krit as Nau. The portion of the river after this confluence is short (Curqt) 
and Tiruvancikkulam is on that part. If this is what is meant by Cured, 
then Currri comes after Balya (even according to my explanation) and every- 
thing is all right. 

Here I must also say that, in KK. when Idappilli is described there is the 
epithet “ Vasutatimaiiavahimju§ta{tarsva.’’ This is identical with Bhuti- 
vahinT. The expression in MR. is “ bhutivahinyakhya ” (named Bhutivahini 
which may be a mistake for “ b ru t i va h i n y a h i n y a d hya ” (adorned by bhuti- 
vahini). Then bhutivahini is a river between the Idappilly country and Perum- 
patappu country. Since the coastal region has undergone much change, it is 
not possible to identify this river now. Even the course, of the Alvvaye river 
has changed much. Its southern arm now is not what it once was, if there was 
such an arm in ancient times. VasutatimahavahinI or bhutivahini can very 
well lie the upper part of the Alwaye river before it branches of! into the two 
arms. This may be another name. Idappili is only five miles from it which 
may be its northern boundary. Vellarppilli is on its bank a little further up. 
Bhutivahini and Vasutatatimahavahinl answer to the Malayalam word Muta- 
lar. Mutal means wealth and Ar means river. I am told that there is such 
a river in that locality. But when I made further inquiries, the first informa- 
tion has not been confirmed. The matter needs further elucidation. 

The only notable thing about Balya country mentioned is that there are 
extensive sugar-cane plantations in the country. 

23. Abhinavakurumba temple. This is mentioned in MR. (74) as 
near the palace of the Balya kings. There Brahmins are fed sumptuously. 
There are many Kali temples on the banks of the Alwaye river which are 
supposed to be later installations of the Kali temple called Putiya Kavu (new 
temple) near the site of Villarvattam ; but that is far too much to the west, 
to fit in with the route. Near Vellarpilli, there is a temple called Putiyedat 
(also meaning new temple), and this may be the temple that is meant here. 
Cranganore is called Kurumba and has also the name of Kotunhallur. Thus 
Abhinavakurumba appears to be the Sanskritisation of a name Ilannallur. 
But. I have not been able to locate a Temple dedicated to th Goddess in that 
locality, having such a name. All that I can say is that the Idappalli royal 
family has the name of liar allur also. • But the description is here about 
the Perampatappu family and not Idappalli family. 

24. Jayantamangala. This is the modern Chennamangalam, which 
lies within the two arms of the Alwaye river. There is the Narasimha temple 
described by Uddayda in his KL. (91). This place is the destination in KL. 
Uddaoda’s consort lived here in a house called Marakkara. At present the 



SOME SANDESa KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 303 

residence of the Paliyath Acchans, the minister and commander-in-chief of 
the Cochin Maharajas for a long time, is in this place. But no Sandesakavya 
mentions this. Villarvattam is supposed to have been here and the last mem- 
ber of the family gave over the rights of the family to the Paliyath Achan. 

25. CCrnI. This is supposed to be the Alwaye river ; most likely it is 
only the lower reaches of the river, after it is joined by the Chalakkudi river, 
that bore this particular name., All the poets describe this river with great 
enthusiam. It is described as a charming lady, whom it is very difficult to 
ignore and pass by. The sports of the ladies of Mahodayapura (next item) 
is specially mentioned in the poems. (SK. 65 to 67 ; KL. 87 to 90 ; MR. 86 
to 89). In BR. Cum! is supposed to form a moat on the eastern side of the 
ancestral palace of the Peiumpafappu kings on the west coast, which palace 
is identified with the palace at Cochin. 

26. Mahodayapura. This is the modern Timvancikkulam on the 
Alwaye river along it lower reaches. This was the seat of the Perumals. It 
was also the residence of the Peiumpatappu kings (modem Cochin royal 
family) and in a work called Sivavilasa the Perumpatappu king is mentioned 
as living at this place (Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras 
R, No. 5146. I have my own copy). The Siva temple here is called 
Anjanaksetra (MR. 90 ; KL. 87) and Pancaranga in BR. (63). It is spoken 
of as the seat of the Keraladhlsvaras (MR. 91) and of the Raja in SK. 
(68). BR. also uses the same expression (61). In connection with a para 
mount power in Malabar, it must be mentioned in this connection that in 
ancient literatures which I am now examining, the Perumpatappu kings are 
the only paramount power spoken of. There is no early literary evidence of 
the last Pcrumal having distributed his kingdom and titles to five of his heirs. 

27. Cranganore. This is Kurumba temple. The Kali temple here 
is well known in the whole of Malabar. The devotion to the Goddess, of 
even the trees is siwcially mentioned. (SK. 71 ; KL. 91 ; MR. 92). 

28. Trikkanamatilakam. This city is designated as Gunaka in all 
the poems. This is the destination in SK. KL. does not mention it. MR. 
speaks of it and mentions the great poets and the charming ladies of the place 
(93 and 94). This city was ruined long ago. It was once a very opulent 
city. Now it is only an ordinary village. 

29. Irinjalakkuda. This is called Sangamagrama. The Deity is 
described in all ancient poems as Visaju. MR. mentions the four arms of the 
Deity holding the disc, club, conch and aksa-beaff^ A very late poem speaks 
of the Deity as Bharata, son of Dasaratha and brother of Rama. The 
modern notion too is that the Deity is Bharata. There is a tank called Kuli- 
pinl. (MR. 95 to 97 ; KL. 85). BR. also speaks of this place (70) . The 
Brahmins of the place were well versed in Vedas and were performing the 
vedic sacrifices 



304 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


30. A Village. After Irinjalakkuda, MR. (98) mentions of villages 
resided by very holy Brahmins. 

31. Trichur. MR. (98) and KL. (81) mention this place.' The iSiva 
temple here is very famous. MR. says that the messenger can hear the drum 
beaten by Nandi during Siva’s evening dance, on his way. The route in MR. 
does not lie along Trichur, but only a few miles to the west. The route in 
KL. is through Trichur. 

32. Venkitangu. This is a village to the west of Trichur. This is 
mentioned in MR. (99) and also in KK. (38). MR. speaks of the famous 
fiankamarayana temple here, which exists even now. 

33. Rrahmakulam. This is a great Brahmin village a few miles to 
the north of the previous and a few miles to the south of the modern Guru- 
vayoor temple. The £iva temple and the great tank in front are mentioned 
in MR. (100 to 104) ; they are found even now. The great scholars of the 
place who learned the Vedas even in their childhood are specially mentioned. 
Namyana the commentator of Raghuvarpsa and Udaya commentator of 
Kausitaki Brahmann were natives of this village. 

34. I lavalli. Designated abhinavalata in MR. (105), this place has 
a famous temple of the Goddess ; the image is supposed to have grown on the 
spot and not installed there. It is an immense image. 

35. Annakara. This is the destination in MR. It is to the east of 
the previous, which itself is to the south east of the still previous one. The 
temple, is dedicated to the Goddess, who is supposed to be the giver of food 
to all. 

36. urakam. This is on the route followed in KL. This is to the 
north of Irinjalakkuda (item 29). There is a temple dedicated to the god- 
dess. It is even now a famous Devi temple (KL. 84). 

37. Peru van aM. This is mentioned in KL. (82, and 83). There is 
an ardhanarisvara temple, which is one of the so called Giiama-tempLes in 
Malabar (so are Irinjakkuda and Trichur). Vasudeva the author of Yudhi- 
ethiravijaya belonged to this village. 

38. Porkulam. KL. speaks of this place (78 to 80). The great 
MImaipsakas, the Bhattas of Payyoor house, belonged to this village. In 
KL. there is a glowing tribute given to these Bhattas. 

39. Mukkola. There is a famous Durga temple here and KL. men- 
tions the place (77), BR. also mentions, this (80). This has been and con- 
tinues to be one of the most important temples in Malabar. Once this was 
a great intellectual centre. Many a well-known author of ancient Malabar 
belonged to this place. 

40. Netranarayaijia’s country. This is the famous portion of 
Malabar known as Vanned country, which belonged to the Talappili Rajas. 



305 


SOME SANDE§A KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 

Uddaixla says that this is the most famous portion of Malabar (75). Netra- 
narSyana is the name of Azhavancheri Thamprakkal, who performs the coro- 
nation ceremony of the Malabar kings. KK. also mentions this family of 
preceptors (29). KL. mentions the family in 76. 

41. Chamravattam. This is a Siva temple in the Ponani river (known 
in literature as Nila river). It is a frail building ; yet in the fiercest flood 
of the river, even a tile on the shrine is not shaken. (KL. 74). 

42. Tirunavay. This is on the banks of the same river, a little higher 
up. There is a stone mark near the Visnu temple here ; if the water rises to 
that mark, the temple in Chamravattam would be under flood. There is both 
a Siva and a Vi$nu temple on the left bank of the river and a Visnu temple 
on the right bank. This latter is the famous temple of Tirunavay. In this 
place a great national festival called Mamankam (Mahamakham) used to be 
celebrated in ancient times. The Zamorins presided over the ceremony. It is 
the greatest honour for a Malabar king to be able to preside over this festival 
The platform where the presiding king stood was attacked by other kings in 
order to take possession of it and to preside over the festival, and this gave 
occasion for great feats of valour. There' are many tales of heroism connected 
with this festival, current in Malabar. All the poems speak of this festival 
and the Zamorin who presided over it. (KL. 71 and 72; KK. 19 to 24; 
BK. 82 to 88). 

43. NitJL This is the Ponani river. This is one of the most famous 
rivers in Malabar. The Mamankam festival was celebrated on its sandy 
banks. This was supposed to have some connection with the installation of 
the. Perumals. But there is no historical evidence of any connection between 
this place and the Perumals. 

44. Triprangot. This is another famous Siva temple. It is supposed 

that Siva killed Yama at this place. Even now there is a banyan tree on the 
northern side, which is supposed to have parted itself at the bottom portion 
of its tmnk to give way to Markandeya when he was running towards the 
Deity for protection from Yama who was chasing him. The banyan tree is 
even now in that position ; the trunk is split, each half being on either side of 
the path and both parts joining together up, looking like an archway. There 
is a tank in the temple in which the water is reddish supposed to be due to 
the blood of Yama when Siva washed his trident after killing him. Another 
tank is called Vellot tank. The temple is in the Vettathunad country (Pra- 
kasa kingdom). The place is mentioned in (KL. 69 and 70). This is the 
starting point in KK. * 

45. Calicut. This city is mentioned by Uddaotfa (KL. 63 to 68). 
The greatness of the Zamorin Raja, the trade and the ships in the harbour, 
the handsome ladies and their sports in the city — all these things are described. 
But there is no mention of the Academy of learned men, Which is famous in 
Malabar history of the later days. 

21 



306 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


After item 33 above, the route in KK and JBR. comprehend some im- 
portant places not mentioned in KL., whose route is different. Guruvayoor 
temple is mentioned in KK (34 to 37) and. BR. (76 to 78) and the latter 
speaks of the rheumatic patients who get cured by worshipping in the temple. 

KK. speaks of the mid-day worship where handsome ladies participate. 

KK. (33) also mentions a great Kali temple to the north of this place, 

called Kavlttil, which is a well-known temple even now. Then there is the 
village called Vailattur (33) further to the north, the residence of the third 
Raja of Talappilli whose fame spreads there like the scent of flowers (31 and 
22) and the Govindapuram temple more to the north (30), where the wor- 
shippers immediately reach heaven. 

To the east of the house of Netraniirayana (Item 40) there is the house 
of Tirumalasscri, a Brahmin belonging to the Panniypur village who was far 
famed for his martial feats, and also there is the temple of Vivardhanapura 
(KK. 25 to 27). 

After Tirunavay, BR. speaks of the temple of Trikkandiyur to the west 
(89) where there is the great astronomer Aehuta, who is known as the 
teacher of NarayanabhaUa. Then there is the temple of Chandanakkavu 
(patravatji) where there is the great poet NarayanabhaUa and his brother 
Matrdatta (91 and ’92). Further on (92) there is the country of the 
Vallabha kings (Valluvanad) and the city called Svetadurga which is the 
destination in BR. This city may be identified with the modern Kottakal, 
the residence of one of the branches of the Zamorin family. On further in- 
quiry I find that the place may as well be Nirankaitakotta further to the east 
of this place. Near this place there is a house called Ceriyakkam (Balayaksri 
of the Sande&a) to which house belonged the heroine. 

46. Kolattirt. This is one of the most important of the ancient king- 
doms in Malabar. It is the western hal f of the part of Malabar to the north 
of Calicut. (KL. 60). The place is mentioned as famous for cardamom. 

The great poet Sankara is mentioned as living there. The kings of the 
place were great patrons of learned men. 

47. Triccabara. This is a great Vi$nu temple (KL. 60). 

48. Talipparamba- This is another of the ancient Malabar villages 
where there is a Grama temple, dedicated to Siva. It is supposed to be just 
like Trichur. KL. (49 to 55) speaks of the great Brahmin? who perform 
worship in that temple. Though the route is a little longer, yet the messenger 
is asked to go to the place and see its greatness. 

49. Kottayam. This is the seat of the royal family called Purall. 

KL. speaks of an ancient king named HariScandra. The kings were patrons 
of the Kumarila school. There is mention of the princess Svati. This king- 
dom is on the eastern side of North Malabar. The last king was defeated by 
the English. The place is described in KL. (43 to 47). 



SOME SANDESa KAVYAS AND MALABAR GEOGRAPHY 307 

50. Vanmayl This is a river to the eastern side of Kottayam. There 
is a temple on the banks. Only during the annual festival is the temple open. 
The Deity is supposed to be so very ferocious that no worshipper goes there 
except during that annual festival. 

51. Tirunelli. This is the first place mentioned by Uddanda in KL. 
(40). It is a famous place even now ; people go there to perform their 
graddha. 

In this short survey we have traced the important places in Malabar. 
It will be found that nearly all important places lay along a line from north 
to south. If there were other important places, some poet should have men- 
tioned them. The poets had no special personal affinity to these places. 
They described the places because they were important. The poems dealt 
with in this Paper help one in understanding the topography of Malabar, 
the important cities and temples, the impoitant kingdoms and also about the 
general nature of life in some of the places. The history and political divi- 
sion of ancient Malabar are now based mostly on tradition and later literary 
works, which are unreliable. Most of them were written to glorify a certain 
king and to trace his descent to the ancient Pcrumals. It is such works as I 
have dealt with that reveal the real history and political division of Malabar 
in an authentic way. A. more detailed study, based on more works, will 
revolutionise the current notions of ancient Malabar history and political 
divisions. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUDAPADA 

By 

Dr. T. M. P. MAIIADEVAN, M.A., ph.d., 

University of Madras. 

Gaudapada, whom tradition regards as Sankara's parama-guru (pre- 
ceptor’s preceptor), is the earliest known systematic exponent of Advaita. 
His Kiirikd, which is more than a verse-commentary on the Mandukya Upa- 
nhad, contains the quintessence of the teaching of Vedanta. 1 The work con- 
sists of 215 couplets arranged in four chapters. Following the Upani§ad, the 
first chapter. Agama-prakarana, analyses the three avasthas, waking, dream, 
and deep sleep, and finds that the Self which is referred to as the Turiya 
underlies and transcends these changing states. The second chapter, Vai- 
tathya-prakarana, seeks to establish the illusoriness of the world of plurality, 
on the analogy of dreams, and through a criticism of creationistic hypotheses. 
The third chapter, Advaita-prakarapa, sets forth the arguments for the truth 
of non-dualism, gives citations from scripture in support thereof, and dis- 
cusses the path to the realisation of non-duality, called Asparsa-yoga. The 
last chapter, AlataSanti-prakarana, repeats some of the arguments of the 
earlier chapters, shows the unintelligibility of the concept of causality 
through dialectic, explains the illusoriness of the phenomenal world, compar- 
ing it to the non-real designs produced by a fire-brand (alata) and pressing 
into service modes of Bauddha reasoning, and establishes the supreme truth 
of non-duality which is unoriginated, eternal, self-luminous bliss. 

I 

The central theme of Gaudapada’s philosophy is that nothing is ever 
born (ajati), not because ‘nothing* is the ultimate truth, as in iSunya-vada, 
but because the Self is the only reality. * No jlva is bom ; there is no cause 
for such birth ; this is the supreme truth, nothing whatever is bom.’ 2 From 
the standpoint of the Absolute there is no duality, there is nothing finite or 
non-eternal. The Absolute alone is ; all else ia appearance, i’lusory and non- 
real. They are deluded who take the pluralistic universe to be real. Empi- 
rical distinctions of knower and object known, mind and matter, are the result 
of M5ya. One cannot explain how they arise. But on enquiry they will be 

f ■ The commentator on the Karika says : vedantartha-sara-sangraha-bhutam. 

2. Ill, 48 ; IV, 71. 

na kaSdj-jayate jivalj sambhavo *sya na vidyate, 
etat-tad-uttamaip satyarp yatra kiiicin-na jayate. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUpAPADA 


309 


found to be void of reality. If one sees them, it is like seeing the foot-prints 
of birds in the sky . 3 The Self is unborn ; there is nothing else to be bom. 
Duality is mere illusion ; non-duality is the supreme truth . 1 

II 

Gaudapada expounds his philosophy of non-origination or non-birth in 
several ways and through many an argument. The reality of the non-dual 
self he first establishes through an enquiry into the purport of the Mdndukya 
Upanisad . Though extremely brief, the Mdndukya contains the essentials of 
Vedanta. For the liberation of those who desire release, says the Mukti - 
kopanisad , the Mdndukya alone is enough.' The Mdndukya Upanisad begins 
with the equation * Om-alP -Brahman” self * and proceeds to describe the 
three states of the self, waking, dream and sleep, as well as the fourth (Turiya) 
which is not a state alongside the others but the transcendent nature of the 
self -the non-dual peace, the self per $e. Gaudapada makes this declaration 
of the Upanisad the basis of his metaphysical quest and seeks to show through 
reasoning that non-origination is the final truth. 

Visva, Taijasa. and Prajna are the names by which the self is known 
in the three states, waking, dream, and sleep. Visva is conscious of the 
external world, enjoys what is gross and is satisfied therewith. Taijasa is 
conscious of what is within / 5 enjoys what is subtle and finds satisfaction there. 
Prajna is a consciousness-mass without the distinctions of seer and seen ; its 
enjoyment and satisfaction is bliss. The three, Visva, Taijasa, and Prajfia, 
are not distinct selves. It is one and the same self that appears as three . 7 
To show that all the three aspects are present in waking, Gaudapada assigns 
localities to them. Visva has its seat in the right eye ; Taijasa in the mind ; 
and Prajna in the ether of the hearts And the three should also be thought 
of as identical with the three cosmic forms of the self, Viral, Iliranyagarbha, 
and Avyakfta or Isvara. It is to indicate this identity that the Ma^dukya 
Upanisad describes the Prajna- self as the lord of all, the knower of all, the 
controller of all, the source of all, the origin and end of beings . 9 The recogni- 
tion of ViSva, Taijasa, and Prajna in the waking state, and the identification 
of the three individual forms of the self with the three cosmic forms, are for 
the purpose of realising non-duality. 

The non-dual reality is the Turiya. It has no distinguishing name ; 

3. IV, 28. 

4. I. 17, maya-imtram idam dvaitam advaitarji paramarthatah. 

5. Muktika, I, 26. 

6. The distinctions of 1 within ' and 4 without \ it must be remembered, are 
from the standpoint of waking experience ; for it is in this state that inquiry is 
possible. 

7. I, i. eka eva tridha smrtah. 

8. I, 2. See commentary. 

9. Ma#4ukya, 6. 



310 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


hence it is called 4 the fourth ’ (turiya 10 ). It is the self-luminous self, change- 
less, non-dual, one without a second. The states that change and pass, with 
their worlds and enjoyments, are illusory, products of Mayct. Maya is two- 
fold in its functioning ; it veils the one and projects the many. Non-appre- 
hension of the real (tattva-’pratibodha) and the apprehension of it otherwise 
(anyatha-grahajna). For the Prajna in the state of sleep there is non-appre- 
hension alone, and not misapprehension. It knows neither the self in its real 
nature nor the not-self. The Turiya is free from both the aspects of Maya. 
It is consciousness per se, without even a trace of ignorance. It is unfailing 
light, omniscient sight . 11 The metaphysical implication of sleep is that it 
hides the true, and of dream that it projects the untrue. Visva and Taijasa 
are associated with dream and sleep ; Prajna is associated with dreamless 
sleep ; for the Turiya there is neither dream nor sleep. Real awakening 
comes with the realisation of the Turiya, with the transcendence of May a in 
its double role of veiling the real and showing up the non-real. When the 
jiva wakes from the beginningless sleep of illusion, it knows its true nature 
as unborn, as that in which there is neither sleep nor dream nor duality . 12 

In the Alatasanti-prakarana . 13 Gaudapada teaches the same theory of 
the three avasthas, employing Bauddha terminology. Waking, dream, and 
sleep are there called laukika, suddha-laukika, and lokottara respectively. 
The difference between the first two is that while in the former there are 
external objects (savastu), in the latter there is none (avastu) ; but in both 
there is consciousness of duality (sopalambha). In the lokottara there is 
neither the external world of things nor the internal world of ideas, and con- 
sequently there is no apprehension of duality ; ignorance, however, persists. 
It is only he who knows these three as non-real states that knows the truth. 
For him there is no duality, nor ignorance, the seed of duality. When the 
real is known, there is not the world of duality . 14 

Ill 

As a result of the inquiry into the avasthas it must be evident that the 
pluralistic world is illusory, as the self alone is real. That the world which 
we take to be real in waking is illusory, Gaudapada seeks to establish in the 
Vaitathya-prakararia on the analogy of the dream-world. Judged by the 
standards of waking, it will be readily seen that the world of dreams is unreal. 
A person may dream of elephants and chariots ; but on waking he realises 
that all of them must have been illusory because they appeared within him, 
within the small space of his body . 15 The dream-contents do not form part 

10. Here again it must be noted that the real is called * the fourth ’ from the 
empirical standpoint ; in truth, the category of number is inapplicable to it. 

11. I, 12. turiyah sarvadrk sada. 

12. I, 13-16. 13. IV, 87, 88. 

14. I, 18. jndte dvaitaip na vidyate. 15. II, i ; IV, 33. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUpAPADA 


311 


of the external world which we take to be real in waking ; and so they, are 
illusory. Nor do they conform to the laws of space and time which govern 
the waking world. In a trice of waking time one may travel far and wide 
in dream. There is no real going to the place of dream, for on waking one 
does not find oneself there. Nor are the objects experienced in dream real, 
for when the dream-spell is broken one does not see them. 1 * Because chariot, 
etc., seen in dream are non-existent, they are illusory. 17 

The world of waking is in many respects similar to that of dream. The 
objects of waking are perceived as the dream-objects are ; and they are eva- 
nescent as well, like the contents of dream. What is non-existent in the, 
beginning and at the end. is so even in the present. 111 That is real which is not 
conditioned by time. Per contra that which is conditioned by time cannot 
be real. Just as the dream-objects are experienced in dream alone neither 
before nor after, even so the objects of waking are experienced in the state of 
waking alone. A difference between the two states cannot be made out on the 
ground that, while the objects experienced in waking are practically efficient, 
those seen in dream are not ; for even the objects of waking experience are 
fruitful in practice only in that state and not in dream ; and the dream-objects 
are useful in their own way in the state of dream. It is true that the dream- 
water cannot quench actual thirst. But it is equally true that the so-called 
actual water cannot quench the dream-thirst either. 1 * It may be argued that 
the contents of dream are unreal because, unlike the objects of waking, they are 
strange and abnormal. But when and to whom do they appear abnormal ? To 
him who has returned to waking after a dream. In the dream state itself the 
contents are not realised to be strange. With perfect equanimity the dreamer 
may watch even the dismemberment of his own head. We are told that the 
denizens of heaven have their own peculiarities which to us are all abnormal. 
Similarly, from the side of waking the dream-contents may seem abnormal ; 
but in themselves they are quite normal.-' 1 That there is an essential simi- 
larity between the contents of dream and the objects of waking may be shown 
by a closer scrutiny of the two states. In the state of dream, the dreamer 
imagines certain ideas within himself and sees certain things outside ; and 
he believes that, while the former are unreal, the latter are real. But as soon 


16. IT, 2. 17. II, 3 ; sc* Brhadarcmxaka, IV, iii, 10. 

18. II, 6 ; IV, 31. 

adav-ante ca yan-nasti vartaman ’pi tat tatha. 

19. ri, 7 ; IV, 32. 

20. II, 8. See J. A. C. Murray? B.D. : An Introduction to a Christian Psy- 
cho-Therapy (T. & T. Clark), p. 252 ; Waking consciousness is, after all, a limited 
affair, narrowed by the immediacies of the five senses, and concentrated at every 
moment on but one moving point. In dreams, we seem to enter a wider kingdom, 
freed from the fears and restraints of normal life, a field where earthly forces and 
laws arc set at naught, and where the whole immensity of the sub-conscious can have 
freer speech, and like a rising tide, submerge the petty logics of our daily life. 



312 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


as he wakes from the dream, he realises the unreality of even the things which 
he saw in dream as if outside. Similarly in waking, we have our fancies which 
we know to be unreal, and we experience facts which we take to be real. But 
when the delusion of duality is dispelled, the so-called facts of the external 
world will turn out to be illusory appearance . 21 Therefore it is that the wise 
characterise waking as a dream . 22 Just as the dream-soul arises and perishes, 
the souls of waking come into being and pass away . 22 It is the self that posits 
the dream-contents as well as the external world. The things created in the 
mind within and those posited in the world without— -both these are the illu- 
sory imaginations of the Atman. The difference between the two sets of 
things is that while the dream-contents last only till the mind of the dreamer 
imagines them (cittakalab) and are peculiar thereto, the objects of the exter- 
nal world are perceived by other subjects '-- 1 as well ( dvayakalah ) , and are cog- 
nised through the sense-organs. Illusoriness (vaitathya), however, is com- 
mon to both . 25 In dream as well as in waking it is the mind that moves im- 
pelled by Maya, and creates the appearance of plurality. As identical with 
the self the mind is non-dual ; but owing to nescience duality is figured and 
there is the consequent sarnsara.- 0 . 

Illustrations for illusoriness are to be found even in the state of waking. 
Just as in the dark a rope which is not determinately known is imagined to 
be a snake or a streak of water, the self is imagined to be the world through 
nescience. And as when the. rope is known as rope the posited snake, etc... 
vanish, so also when the self is known as non-dual, the pluralistic world dis- 
appears . 27 Like the Palace city of Fairy Morgana (gandharva-nagara), the 
universe is seen but is not real. 2 * The things of the world arc believed to exist 
because they are perceived (upalarpbhat) and because they answer to certain 
practical needs (samacarat). But these two reasons cannot make them real ; 
for even the objects like the elephant conjured up by the necromancer are ob- 
served and are practically efficient but are not real. 2 * One more illustration 
Gau'dapada gives in the fourth chapter, viz. the alata or fire-brand. When 
a fire-brand is moved, it appears to be straight, or crooked, and so on ; and 
when the movement stops, the appearances vanish. They do not really come 
from the fire-brand in motion, nor do they enter into it when it comes to rest. 
The patterns of fire that appear with the movement of the fire-brand are 
illusory ; they have no substance whatsoever. Similarly, consciousness appears 
in manifold forms due to Maya. These do not come out of it in reality, nor 

21. If, 9 & 10; IV, 63-66. 

22. II, 5. svapna-jagarite sthSnc by eKam ahur marusmah. An ancient Chi- 
nese sage said : “ Last, night I dreamt that I was a butterfly and now I do not 
know whether I am a man dreaming that he is a butterfly or a butterfly dreaming 
that he is a man.” 

23. IV, 68. 21. Who arc also positions of the supreme Self. 

25. II. 11-15. 26. Ill, 29, 30 ; IV, 61, 62. 27. II, 17, 18. 

28. II, 31. 29. IV, 44. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUpAPADA 313 

do they return to it ; for they are naught . 30 There is no dissolution, no ori- 
gination ; no one in bondage, no one who desire's release, no one who is re- 
leased — this is the supreme truth . 31 


IV 

The establishment of the non-reality of the world by Gaudnpada does not 
mean that the great teacher subscribes to the view of ontological unreality 
(sunyavada). Wc have already seen how in the Agama-prakararia he ex- 
pounds the meaning of the Mdndukya V panisad and shows through an inquiry 
into the nature of the three avasthas that the Self (turiya) is the sole reality. 
That this is so Gaudapada argues through reasoning in the Advaita-prakaraija, 
and cites in support the evidence of passages from other scriptural texts as 
well. 

The self is unlimited like ether, undivided and the same throughout. The 
jivas are apparent distinctions therein, as pots, etc., produce in ether divisions 
as it were. We speak of a plurality of souls and a multiplicity of material 
objects, even as we speak of pot-ether, pitcher-ether, and so on. The one 
Atman appears as the many jlvas, as the same ether seems divided, enclosed 
in the different things. When the tilings are destroyed, the distinctions in ether 
too vanish ; so also when the jTvas are realised to be illusory manifestations 
due to Maya, the self alone remains. There is no contingence of the defects 
of one jiva being occasioned in the other jivas or the defects of the jivas de- 
filing the purity of the self. It must be noted that Gaudapada’s theory is not 
eka-jiva-vada but eka-’tma-vada. Since the empirical plurality of jivas is 
recognised, there is not the contingence of the defects of one jiva being 
occasioned in the others or the experiences of one being confused with those of 
the rest. And by the defilements of the jivas the self is not affected, as dust, 
smoke, etc., present in the pots or pitchers do not make ether foul. Forms, 
functions, and names differ from object to object : but there is no difference 
in ether. Similarly, the jivas vary in their physical make-up, menial and 
moral endowment, in station and status ; but the self is unvarying, formless, 
functionless, and nameless. Just as children attribute wrongly dirt etc., to the 
sky, the ignorant superpose on the unsullied self defects like birth and death, 
pleasure and pain. But these are changes that are not real and do not touch 
the self. The birth of the jivas and their death, their coming and going, do 
not alter the Atman. They are not products of the self, nor are they parts 
thereof. The non-dual reality is partless ; it neither causes anything, nor is 
caused by anything . 32 , 

30. IV, 47-52. 

31. II, 32. 

na nirodho na cotpattir na baddho na ca sSdhakah, 
na mumukgur na vai mukta ity e$a paramarthata. 

32. Ill, 3-9. 



314 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Scripture in many places proclaims the non-duality of the self and de- 
precates the delusion of duality. Through an inquiry into the five sheaths 
(kosas) that cover the soul, the Taiimya Upani§ad s 3 exhibits the self as the 
non-dual bliss, not to be confused with the mutable coverings. In the ‘ Honey 
section ' of the Brhadaranyaka 34 the principle behind the cosmic elements is 
identified with the self which is the substrate of the body and its functions. 
What is without is within as well. The same 4 honey ’ pervades all beings. It 
is immortal, the self, Brahman, the all. As the spokes are fixed in the nave 
of a wheel, so are all beings centred in the self. Thus scripture declares the 
non difference of the jlva from the self and denounces plurality. Difference 
is illusory ; the one appears as many through Maya. “ There is no plurality 
here.” 35 44 Indra through mdyas assumes diverse forms.” 30 “ Though unborn 
he appears variously born. ’ ;i7 The Havftsya s * denies birth of the self, and 
the Brhadaranyaka asks, 4i Who indeed could produce him ? ” ;iU Of what is 
real birth is incomprehensible ; and what is unreal cannot even he born . 10 

It is true that in some contexts scripture speaks of creation. Through 
the illustrations of clay, metal, sparks, etc., creation of the many from the 
one is described. But this is only to enable those who arc dull -w ft ted and 
middlings to understand the fundamental unity of reality. ;$ruti declares crea- 
tion in some places, and non-creation in others. The two sets of passages can- 
not have equal validity. That teaching should be taken as the purport of 
scripture which is ascertained through inquiry (niscitam) and is reasonable 
(yukti-yuktam). If birth is predicated of the real, it must be in the sense 
of an illusion, and not in the primary sense. The self is unborn, sleepless and 
dreamless, nameless and formless, self-luminous and all-knowing. M 

V 

That the self is unborn and that nothing else there is which is born, 
Gaudapcida seeks to demonstrate through a dialectical criticism of the causal 
category in the fourth chapter. Causation, like all other relations, falls within 
the realm of nescience, because on analysis it turns out to be unintelligible. 
There are two rival views on causation which are totally opposed to each 
other. The Sankhya theory is that the effect is pre-existent in the cause and 
is not produced de novo . The Nyaya-Vaisesika view is that the effect is non- 
existent prior to its production. On either of these hypotheses there will not 
result causation. If the effect is already existent, there is v.o need for any 
causal operation ; it is meaningless to say that what is existent is torn. If 
the effect is non-existent, it can never be, produced ; what is non-existent like 


33. 

Second valli. 


34. II, v. 


35. 

Brh. Up., 

IV, 

iv, 19 ; 

Katfia Up. IV, 11. 


36. 

Jjtg Veda, 

VI. 

47, 18 ; 

Brh. Up., II. v, 19. 


37. 

Tait. Ar. 

.Ill, 

13, 1. 

38. I6a. 12. 

39. Ill, 9, 28. 

40. 

GK, III, 

11-13, 24-26. 

41. Ill, 14-16, 

23, 36. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUDAPADA 


315 


the barren woman’s son is not at any time seen to take birth . 42 Even without 
their knowing the two rival schools, satkarya-vada and asatkarya-vada, are 
thus seen to support the view of non-creation or non-origination . 43 

Of what is really unborn the disputants predicate birth. But this is a 
flagrant violation of the laws of contradiction. How can that which is un- 
born and therefore immortal become mortal ? The immortal cannot become 
mortal, nor the mortal immortal ; for it is impossible for a thing to change 
its nature. If what is by nature immortal were to become mortal, then it 
would cease to be changeless, and attain artificiality, illusoriness. But this 
is impossible for what is immortal by nature. The .Sankhya thinks that the 
unborn and beginningless Prnkrti evolves itself into the manifold evolutes that, 
constitute the universe. But this view cannot be justified by any canon of 
logic. If Prakrti becomes the world, it cannot be unborn (aja) and eternal 
(nitya). Even to admit that there is a first cause is to confess the failure of 
causation as a principle of explanation. To add to the confusion the Sankhya 
says that the effect is non-different from the cause. Now, is the effect bom 
or unborn? If it is born, it cannot be non-different from the cause which is 
unborn. If it is unborn, then it cannot be called ‘effect’, as the effect is that 
which is produced. And if the effect is produced and is non-different from 
the cause, the cause cannot be permanent or unchanging. There is no illus- 
tration that could be instanced to prove the production of the effect from the 
unborn cause. If to avoid this difficulty it be said that the cause too is born, 
then there should be a cause for that cause, a still further cause for that other 
cause, find so on ad infinitum , 4 ‘ 

The Mlmamsakas maintain that the cause and the effect are reciprocally 
dependent. Merit and demerit arc responsible for producing the body ; and 
the body occasions merit and demerit. The chain of causes and effects is with- 
out beginning, each alternating with the other, like the seed and the sprout. 
Here again we meet with insuperable difficulties. If the antecedent of a cause 
is its effect and the antecedent of an effect is its cause, then both cause and 
effect are begun. How can they be beginningless ? Moreover, there is a para- 
dox in the very thesis that is proposed. To say that the antecedent of the 
cause is its effect is like saying that the son begets his father . 15 There must 
be some definite sequence recognised as between cause and effect. It is no 
use believing that the two are reciprocally dependent. If the cause and the 
effect can be indifferently antecedent or consequent, there would be no dis- 
tinction whatever between them, and to call one a cause and the other an 
effect would be entirely arbitrary and void of meaning. Now, there are three 
possible ways of stating the sequence. It may be said that first there is the 
cause and subsequently the effect takes place (purva-krama) ; or it may be 


42. IV ; 4. bhutaip na jayate kincid abhutaip naiva jayate. 

43. IV, 3-5. 44. IV, 6-8, 11-13. 

45. IV, 15, putiSj janma pitur yatha. 



316 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


held that the effect is followed by the cause (apara-krama); or it may be 
thought that the cause and the effect are simultaneous (saha-krama). None 
of these alternatives is intelligible. That the cause cannot produce the effect 
we have shown already. If the cause is unborn, it cannot change and there- 
fore cannot produce ; if it is born there is infinite regress. The reverse order 
too is impossible ; for, as we said, it is just like making the son antecedent to 
the father. The effect by definition is that which is produced by the cause ; 
and if the cause is not there before the effect, how can the effect be produced ? 
And from the unproduced effect how can the cause come into being ? The 
third alternative also is untenable. If what are simultaneous be causally re- 
lated, there must be such a relation between the two horns of an animal. 
But as a matter of experience it is well known that the two horns are not so 
related. This, then, is the crux of the problem. Without settling the se- 
quence, the distinction of cause and effect would be unintelligible. And it is 
impossible to settle the sequence. In despair, appeal might be made to the 
illustration of seed and sprout. But a little thought w'ould reveal that these 
— seed and sprout — cannot serve as illustration. It is only when the causal 
sequence has been settled that the relation between seed and sprout would 
become intelligible. Since the latter is a particular falling under the wider 
relation of cause and effect, it cannot be used as an illustration. It is, in short, 
sndhya-sama, still to be proved . 16 

A thing is not produced either from itself or from another. A pot is 
not produced from the self-same pot, nor from another pot. It may be urged 
that pot is produced from clay. But how is pot related to clay ? Is it non- 
different, different, or both different and non-different from it? If pot is 
nan-different from clay, it cannot be produced, since clay is already existent. 
If it is different, there is no reason why it should not be produced from an- 
other pot or a piece of cloth which are also different. And it cannot be both 
different and non-different, because of contradiction. Similarly, neither the 
existent nor the non-existent nor what is existent and non-existent 
can be produced. It is meaningless to say that what exists is produced. The 
non-existent cannot be produced even because of its non-existence. The third 
alternative involves us in contradiction . 117 

It is true that empirical distinctions are observed between knower and 
known, pain and the source of pain, etc. From the standpoint of reasoning 
based on relative experience (yukti-darsanat), there is difference as also causal 
relation governing the differents. But from the standpoint of the Absolute 
(bhuta-dar^anat) there is no difference and the concept of cause is unintelli- 
gible . 48 


46. IV. 14-18, 20. 47. IV, 22. 

48. IV, 24, 25. 



317 


THE AJATIVADA OF GAUpApADA 

VI 

Gau<lapada admits creation in the sphere of the empirical. But crea- 
tion, according to him, is neither de novo nor transformation of an original 
stuff. It is of the nature of Maya, illusory manifestation or transfiguration. 
The world is not related to the self either as a piece of cloth to the threads 
or as curds to milk. In fact, no relation is intelligible. The one reality some- 
how appears as the pluralistic universe through its own Maya (atma-maya). 
The complexes that constitute the world are projections, like the dream- 
contents, effected by the illusion of the Atman. 49 Things arc said to be bom 
only from the standpoint of empirical truth (samvrti-satya) ; they have 
therefore no permanence. Just as an illusive sprout shoots from air illusive 
seed, all things arise from Maya. 30 

There are several theories of creation. Some philosophers favour mate- 
rialistic origins for the world. For example, there are thinkers who attribute 
the origination of the universe to Time. Theists, however, regard God as the 
first cause of things. Some of them ascribe to llim efficient causality alone, 
others both eflicient and material causality. The former say that creation is 
the mere volition of the Lord, while, the latter hold that it is His expansion. 
Some maintain that God creates for the sake of Ilis enjoyment. Others urge 
that creation is I lis sport. But how can desire be in God who is apta-kama 
and has no end to achieve? In our ignorance we must content ourselves 
with saying that creation is His nature or maya. Like dream and magic it is 
illusory. 51 'The non-dual is imagined to be the manifold world. The latter is 
neither different from the self nor identical therewith. Hence it is declared 
to be indeterminable. ■' s 

The philosophers of the different schools characterise the real in differ- 
ent ways and give their own schemes of categories. Each emphasises one 
particular aspect of reality and holds on to it as if it were the whole. The 
self has been variously conceived as life, elements, constituents of Primal 
Nature, things, worlds, Vedas, sacrifice, what is subtle, what is gross, what 
has form, what has no form, and so on. According to the Sankhyas, there 
are twenty-five tattvas or principles. To these, the followers of the Yoga 
system add one more, viz. God. In the view of the Pasupatas there are twenty- 
one categories. There are others who make the categories endless in num- 
ber. All these theories are but the imaginations of their respective advo- 
cates. 88 There is only one self which appears as many through self-delusion 
as it were. 84 First the jlvas are imagined and then the various things, exter- 

49. Ill, 10. sagghatSb svapnavat sarve atma-mayS-visarjitab. 

50. IV, 57-59. 51. I, 7-9. 

52. II, 33, 34. 

53. II, 20-29. For details see The Agamasastra of Gowfapada, edited by Vidu- 
shekhara Bhattacharya, pp. 30-37. 

54. II, 19. mSyai?a tasya devasya yayiyam mohitab svayam. 



313 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


nal and internal. The world of souls and things is an appearance superposed 
on the self, as the snake-form is imposed on the rope-substance in the dark. 55 

The teaching of creation has no final purport. As has been shown already, 
what is real cannot be really born. If it is said to be bom, it must be in the 
sense of an illusory appearance. 56 Ordinarily it is stated that saipsara which 
has no beginning comes to an end when release is attained. But this is figu- 
rative language. If saipsara had no beginning, it could not have an end. If 
release is attained, it is liable to be lost again. 57 If the universe really existed, 
it would be destroyed. As we have observed, duality is maya-matra, mere 
illusion. Removal of saipsara and attainment of moksa are figurative. These 
liave to lie taught in language which needs must relate to duality. When the 
real is known, there is no duality whatever. 55 

VII 

True to its character as an upadesa-sdstra, the Gaudapdda-kdrikd contains 
practical teaching at the end of each chapter. The purpose of a saslra is to 
enable the aspirant to cross the sea of satfisara and reach the shore of blessed- 
ness which is the highest human goal (parama-puruiSartha). The vicious 
circle of empirical life dependent on the law of cause and effect is evil 
(anartha). This, however, as has been shown above, is a product of avidya 
or Maya. As long as there is an obstinate faith in causality which is illusory 
(avidyaka), the chain of birth and death will not cease. When that false 
belief is destroyed through knowledge, saipsara is removed. 50 The cause of 
birth and death is ignorance as regards the ultimate tiuth which is causeless. 
When this is realised, there is no further cause for metempsychosis, and we 
attain release which is freedom from sorrow, desire, and fear. Attachment 
to the non-real is responsible for the illusory wanderings in the wilderness of 
saipsara. When one becomes non-attached through knowledge, one turns back 
from the false pursuit of the non -real, and reaches the non-dual reality which 
is homogeneous and unborn. 60 

The real bliss is veiled and the non-real sorrow is projected on account 
of the perception of illusory plurality. Enshrouded by the darkness of igno- 
rance, those of immature knowledge (halisah) dispute about what they con- 
sider to be the nature of reality. Some say, it is ; some., it is not ; others, it 
is and is not ; yet others, it neither is nor is not. 01 All these are kjpapas. 
narrow-minded, who see fear in the fearless, 68 and follow the way of differ- 
ence, getting themselves engrossed therein. Opposed to these are the great 

55. H, 16, 17. 

56. Ill, 27. sato hi mayaya janma yujyate na tu tattvatah. 

57. IV, 30. 58. I, 18. 

59. IV. 56. 60. IV, 78-80. 

61. IV, 82-84. 

62. Ill, 39. abhaye bhaya darsinab. 



THE AJATIVADA OF GAUpAPADA 319 

knowers (mahajnanalj) who are settled in their wisdom about the unborn, 
unchanging reality. 6 ’- 

The knowledge which saves is not that which remains a mere theoreti- 
cal comprehension, but that which has become a direct experience. Study of 
scripture, ethical discipline, detachment from objects of sense and intense long- 
ing for release — these are essential for realising the self. The aspirant should 
learn the purport of the Veda and acquire freedom from passions like attach- 
ment, fear, and anger (vlta-raga-bhaya-krodhah); and he should fix his 
thoughts on the non-dual reality. 04 Gaudapada teaches two methods of con- 
centrating the mind on the non-dual, Pranava-yoga in the first chapter and 
Asparsa-yoga in the third. These are to serve as auxiliaries to the knowledge 
of the Absolute methods to loosen the cords of ignorance. 

Asparsa-yoga is the yoga of transcendence, whereby one realises the 
supra-relational reality. Sahkalpa is the root of activity and bondage. The 
mind contemplates objects and gets distracted and shattered with the result 
that there is no peace or happiness. Acceptance and desistance arc motivat- 
ed by the centrifugal tendency of thought-processes. The out-going mind 
should be called back and controlled. Controlling the mind is difficult, indeed, 
as difficult as emptying the ocean drop by drop by the tip of a ktts a grass. 
But it is not an impossible task : only it requires relentless effort. If! the 
mind is restrained through discrimination, the end will certainly be reached. 
One must remember first that all is misery and tum back from desires and 
enjoyments. The mind that moves out must be brought to unity. But in 
this process care must be taken that it does not fall into sleep. When the 
mind goes to sleep, it must be awakened ; when it tries to go out, it must be 
calmed. When the stormy mind is stilled, there is the thrill of quietitude. 
But one should not revel even in this yogic trance. Anything that is enjoyed 
must belong to duality : it cannot be unlimited or lasting happiness. The 
mind must become non-mind (amanlbhava); the relations of subject and 
object, enjoyer and enjoyment must be transcended. This will come only 
through the knowledge of the non-dual self. Knowledge and the self are not 
different. Knowledge is the self or Brahman. Hence it is said that through 
the unborn (knowledge) the unborn (Brahman) is known. as Self-established, 
the unborn knowledge attains its natural equanimity or sameness. This is 
called asparsa-yoga, the yoga which is pleasing and good to all beings, and 
which is beyond dispute and contradiction. 69 

The game end may be reached through meditation on OM (pranjava- 
yoga). ‘Om ’ is the term indicative pf the Brahman^self. It consists of three 
matras, a, u, m, and a soundless fourth which is amatra. A stands for Vi4va, 
u for Taijasa, and m for PiSjfla. Meditation on the significance of the three 

64. II, 35, 36. 

66. III. 31-46, IV, 2. 


63. IV, 94.95. 

65. Ill, 33. ajena-’jaip vibudhyate. 



820 B. C. LA W VOLUME 

{sounds respectively will lead to the realisation of the three aspects of the self. 
The sound ‘ om ’ proceeds from and is resolved in the soundless amatra. 
Similarly,-: the Turlya is the absolute which is unchanging and non-dual, but 
which appears as many and changing. When the meaning of the soundless 
culmination of Om is realised, there is no leading to or attainment of 
anything ; for the Turiya is no other than the real and only self. Thus the 
Prapava is to be meditated upon and known. It is the beginning, middle and 
end of all things. It is the lord established in the hearts of all beings. There 
is nothing before it nor anything after it, nothing outside it nor anything 
other than it. Understanding the Prapava in this manner, one attains the 
supreme. 67 

Moksa or release is not a post-mortem state ; it can be realised even here 
(iha), while in embodiment. 68 To speak of it as an attainment or realisation 
is but figurative. It is the eternal and inalienable nature of the self. He who 
knows this is released, he is a jivan-mukta. Because he has attained full 
omniscience and is free from the delusion of duality, there is nothing for him 
which he can desire. 6 ” lie is not elated by praise nor depressed by blame. 
He does not offer obeisance to any, nor does he perform any rite. He has no 
fixed home, and subsists on what comes his way. He lies like a non-cnnscious 
being, and lives as he likes. 70 Though he has no obligations, his conduct can 
never be immoral. Virtues like humility, equanimity, calmness, and self- 
control are natural to him. 71 His is the immortal state which is difficult to be 
seen, very deep, unborn, ever the same, and fearless. 72 He sees the truth 
everywhere. He delights in the truth and does not swerve from it. He is the 
truth; 76 


VIII 

From the account of Gaudapdda’s philosophy given above it will be 
clear that this great teacher was an Advaitin the earliest known to us — who 
in hi srKarika laid the foundations of a system which was to become a glori- 
ous edifice through the immortal work of Sankara. While making use of 
logical reasoning and the dialectical method, he does not deviate from the 
teaching of the Upanfeads. Even where he employs Bauddha terminology, he 
takes care to point out that his system should not be confused with Bud- 
dhism. While denying absolute reality to the world, he is firm in proclaim- 
ing that the non-dual Brahman-self is the supreme truth. He has no quarrel 
with any system of philosophy because, in his view, all systems if properly 
understood are pointers to non-duality. While the dualists oppose one another, 
the doctrine of non-duality does not conflict with them. 74 Ajati or the unborn 
reality is the final goal of all metaphysical quest. 

68- IV, 89. 69. IV, 85. 

71. IV. 86. 72. IV, 100. 


67. I, 19-29. 
70. II, 36, 37. 
73. II, 38. ' 


74. Ill, 17. 



PROPERTY— HOW IT IS ACQUIRED AND MANAGED 

By 

Dr. MD. HUSAYN NAINAR, M.A., ix.b. (Aligarh), ph.d. (Lon.) 

University of Madras. 

One may acquire property by earning, inheritance, or gift. Earning can 
be either lawful or unlawful. The Islamic teachings condemn all methods 
of acquiring property by unlawful means, such as gambling, theft, and the 
like. The Quran says : “ They ask thee concerning wine and gambling /' 1 
Say : " In them is great sin, and some profit for men ; but the sin is greater 
than the profit ." 2 The principle on which the objection is based, is, that a 
gambler gets the profit easily without any effort. lie gains what he has not 
earned or loses a mere chance . 3 4 

" O ye who believe ! Intoxicants and gambling, dedication of stones, and 
divination by arrows are an abomination, of Satan's handiwork. Eschew 
tlum that you may prosper. Satan's plan is to excite enmity and hatred 
between you with intoxicants and gambling, and hinder you from the remem- 
brance of God. and from prayer. Will you not then abstain ? 

Intoxicants and gambling are mentioned together and the main reason 
for their prohibition is that they are the source of enmity and hatred among 
men. 

“As to the thief" the Quran says, "male, or female, cut. off his or her 
hands. A punishment by way of example, from God, for their crime. And 
God is exalted in power/ 1 * 

The canon law jurists are not unanimous as to the value of the property 
Molcn which would involve the penalty of the cutting off of the hand. The 
majority are of opinion that petty thefts arc exempt from this penalty. 

The general principles of inheritance is laid down in the following verse 
of the Quran : 

“ From what is left by parents and those nearest related there is share 

1. In India there are various forms of gambling. In Arabia the form most 
familiar to the Arabs was gambling by casting lots by means of arrows on the 
principle of lottery. The arrows which were marked, served the purpose of a 
modern lottery ticket. The marked arrowy together with the blank ones were drawn 
from a bag. Those who drew the blank arrows got nothing. The marked arrows 
indicated prized, big or small. 

2. Ch. 2, 219. 

3. Dice and wagering are held to be within the definition of gambling. But 
insurance is not gambling when conducted on business lines. 

4. Ch. 5, 93-94. 5. Ch. 5, 41. 



322 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or large, a 
determinate share."® 

The Quran states the law of inheritance as follows : 

“ God directs you as regards your children’s inheritance : to the male, a 
portion equal to that of two females : if only daughters, two or more, their 
share is two thirds of the inheritance ; if only one her share is a half.” 

“ For parents, a sixth share of the inheritance to each, if the deceased 
left children ; if no children, and tire parents arc the only heirs, the mother 
has a third ; if the deceased left brothers (or sisters) the mother has a sixth. 
The distribution in all cases is after the payment of legacies and debts. You 
know not whether your parents or your children are nearest to you in benefit. 
These are settled portions ordained by God. And God is All-knowing, All - 
wise." 


“ In what your wives leave, your share is a half, if they leave no child. 
But if they leave a child you gel a fourth after payment of legacies and debts. 
In what you leave their share is a fourth, if you leave no child. But if you 
leave a child they get an eighth, after payment of legacies and debts.” 

“ If the man or woman whose inheritance is in question has left neither 
ascendants nor descendants but has left a brother or a sister, each one of the 
two gets a sixth. But if more than two, they share in a third after payment 
of legacies and debts so that no loss is caused to any one. Thus is it ordained 
by God. And God is All-knowing. Most forbearing.” 7 

The broad principles to be gathered from the text of the Quran as inter- 
preted by the jurists arc : The power to bestow the property by wiil or deed 
extends over only one third of the property, the remaining two thirds aie 
inherited by the heirs as per law. 

All distribution of the property takes place after the legacies ar.d debts 
including funeral expenses have been paid. 

legacies cannot be left to any one of the heirs entitled for a share, as 
this will upset the shares. 

The male takes generally a share double that of a female in his own 
category. 


I he shares are allotted to children, parents, husband or wife of the 
deceased, and collaterals. 

I he child! en s shares are fixed but their amount will depend upon what 
goes to tile parents. If both parents are living, and them are also children, 
both father and mother take a sixth each. If only one parent is living, he 
or she fakes his or her sixth, and the rest goes to the children. Tf the parents 
are living, and there is no child or other heir, the mother gets a third and the 
father the remaining two thirds ; if there are no children, but there are bro- 


6. Cn. 4, 7i 


7. Ch. 4, 11-12. 



PROPERTY— HOW IT IS ACQUIRED AND MANAGED 323 

there or sisters, the mother has a sixth and the father the residue as he ex- 
cludes collaterals. 

The husband takes a half of his deceased wife’s property if she leaves 
no child, the rest going to residuaries ; if she leaves a child the husband gets 
only a fourth. As the female share is generally half the male share, the widow 
gets a fourth of her deceased husband’s property if he leaves no children, 
and an eighth if he leaves children. If there are more widows than one, their 
collective share is a fourth or an eighth as the case may be ; they divide it 
equally among themselves.* 

An owner of property can bequeath his property for a charitable purpose 
01 to any one who is not a legal heir to the property bequeathed. The Quran 
says : “ It is prescribed when death approaches any of you, if he leaves any 
goods, that he makes a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to 
reasonable usage. This is due from the God-fen ring.”'* 

But the right to testamentary disposition is prescribed only to very rich 
people, and it is subject to certain limitations. Not more than one third of 
the property can lx- bequeathed and no legal heir be the beneficiary. The 
reason for limiting the bequtst to one third is learnt from the saying of tire 
Prophet that one should leave the heirs free from want. There are also rules 
for the disposal of the intestate property. 

One can acquire property by getting it as gift from another person. The 
term hiba in Islamic law means a transfer of property made immediately and 
without exchange. The hiba becomes complete when the donee accepted it 
and took possession of it. The donor cannot revoke the hiba when it has 
been accepted by the donee. 

A hiba is allowed in favour of a son but it is recommended that similar 
gifts should be made in favour of other sons. The husband can make a gift 
of property to his wife and the wife to husband and others. Gifts from 
Muslims to Non-Muslims and vice versa are also allowed. 

The jurists allow a gift for a consideration and also a gift made on the 
condition that the donee should give the donor some thing definite in return 
for the gift. 

While the property can be disposed by will or deed to the extent of one 
third only there is no such limitation for the distribution by gift, for, the 
owner divests himself of the property immediately. 

There is no limit to the extent one can possess property. The Quran 
says that a man who has heaps of gold, may give away any amount of it to 
a woman as dowry but should not take it back. The Quran says : 

8. As space will not permit, the shares of collaterals and the rules about 
residuaries are not discussed here. 

9. Ch. 2, 180. 



324 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


“ But if you decide to take one wife in place of another, even if you had 
given the latter a whole treasure for dower, take not the least bit of it back.” 

Muslims are advised not to waste property but increase it by traffic and 
trade : 

“ O ye who believe ! Eat not up your property among yourselves in 
vanities. But let there be amongst you traffic and trade by mutual good 
will. Nor kill yourselves, for verily God hath been to you most merciful . ” u 

Property carries with it its own responsibilities, and people are asked 
not to be greedy. 

“And do not eat up your property among yourselves for vanities, nor 
use it as bait for the judges, with intent that you may eat up wrongfully and 
knowingly a little of other people’s property. 1 * 

Two kinds of greed are mentioned in the above verse. A man may use 
his property for corrupting others like judges or those in authority, with a 
view to obtain some gain under the protection of the law. Another form is 
that one may put his property to frivolous uses. How to spend money is 
related in the fallowing verses : 

“ Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not niggardly, 
but hold a just balance between those extremes.” 13 

One may not be so lavish as to make oneself destitute and incur the cen- 
sure of wise men, not* is it becoming to keep back one’s resources from the 
just needs of those who have a right to expect help. This idea is expressed 
thus : 

“ Make not thy hand tied to thy neck, nor stretch it forth to its utmost 
reach, so that thou become blameworthy and destitute.’ 14 

But one must keep a just measure between one’s capacity and the needs 
of other peoples, is emphasised by tire Quran thus : 

“ And render to the kindred their due rights as also to those in want and 
to the wayfarer. But squander not in the manner of a spendthrift .” 11 

Apart from these general instructions, the Quran empowers the society or 
the state to interfere when money is wasted by men of weak understanding. 

“ To those of weak understanding make not over your property which 
God hath made a means of support for you, but feed and clothe them there- 
with and speak to them words of kindness and justice .” 16 

It is dear from the. above verse that* the owner may not do just what he 
likes absolutely. His right is limited by the good of the community of which 


10. Ch. 4, 20. 

13. Ch. 25, 67. 
16 . Ch. 4, 5. ‘ 


11. Ch. 4, 29. 

14. Ch. X7, 29. 


12. Ch. 2, 168. 

15. Ch. 17, 26. 



PROPERTY— HOW IT IS ACQUIRED AND MANAGED 325 

he is a member and if he is not able to understand it, his control should be 
taken away ; because the Islamic conception is that all property belongs to 
the community and a particular individual holds it in trust. If he is in- 
capable, he is put aside but gently and with kindness. While his incapacity 
remains the duties and responsibilities devolve on his guardian even more 
strictly than in the case of the original owner. 

'*.... Let the trustee faithfully discharge his trust and let him fear his 
Lord . . . . ” Says the Quran 17 . The principles underlying it are those of the 
Court of Wards in Indian Law. 

In regard to the discharge of the trust and the remuneration for the 
trustee the Quran says : 

“ Make trial of orphans until they reach the age of marriage. If, then, 
you find sound judgment in them, release their ptoperty to them. But con- 
sume it not wastefully, nor in haste against their growing up. If the guar- 
dian is well off, let him claim no remuneration, but if he is poor, let him have 
for himself what is just and reasonable. ” ,s 

The guardian is enjoined to be just to orphans. He must nor postjxme 
restoring the property of his ward when the time comes. The property, house- 
hold and accounts of the orphans must be kept separate, lest them should 
be any temptation to get a personal advantage to the guardian by mixing them 
with his own property, household or accounts. 

The Quran says : 

“ To orphans restore their property, nor substitute your worthless things 
for their good ones, and devour not their substance by mixing it up your 
own, for this is indeed a great sin .'' 19 

Thus in all matters concerning the management of the property equity 
and fair dealing should be observed so that no one’s interests are prejudiced. 


17. Ch. 2, 283. 


18. Ch. 4, 6. 


19. Ch. 4, 2. 



SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 

By 


Dr. C. ACIIYUTA MENON, b.a., ph.d. (London), 

University of Madras 

It was Swami Vivekananda who drew pointed attention to the “ distance 
pollution ” observed in Malabar by the unsavoury remark that “ Malabar is 
a lunatic asylum". The Swamiji was proceeding from Trivandrum towards 
North when he heard certain caste Hindus making a curious sound to indi- 
cate that the “ unapproachables " should be out of their way. No wonder 
that the sight shocked the Swamiji to whom all human beings were “ children 
of God”. Though more than a generation has passed, conditions are riot 
very much better now in the country in spite of the levelling tendency of the 
Railways, public conveyances and democratic institutions. Malabar is one 
of the few spots of India where most up- to date and antiquated things exist 
side by side and ample material awaits the antiquarian. The following sketch 
of a few tribes selected at random will give the reader an idea of the racial 
problem that stands in need of urgent solution. This article is a tilting tribute 
to Dr. B. C. Law whose studies on numerous races and tribes of India arc 
too well-known. 

Society in Malabar is a heterogeneous one and its component parts 
constitute a number of irreconcilable units which function without hitch but 
hardly admit of fusion. On the topmost rung of the ladder are the Nambu 
diris and Nayars who once shared between themselves the religious and 
political administration of the country. The various communities or sections 
that represent a comparatively low level of culture may be classed under 
two main divisions ‘Untouchables’ and ‘ Unapproachably \ In the former 
fall the Barber, Washerman, the Weaver, Snake-charmers etc. The last cate 
gory comprises of a good number of tribes in respect of whom ‘ distance pol- 
lution * is observed. The distance they have to keep between them and the 
higher classes varies with each tribe and the degree of its status. At the other 
end there are even a few tribes that can be called ‘ unsecaoles \ We shall 
now proceed to describe them in order of their distance proportion. 

Cerum/.n. 

The term can be taken to be a corruption of Cepivan— a small man — 
not in point of size or physical stature, but in view of the place he occupies 
in the social hierarchy. He is veritably a slave and a field labourer. Once 
this tribe had the monopoly of agricultural labour. The plough and the 
spade are his inseparable companions. When the field work is over he goes 



SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 


327 


to the garden occupying himself all the year round. His position was once 
that of a slave attached to a master who looked after him whether he had 
work or no. He was also entitled to annual presents of cloths during the 
onam Festival. 1 2 3 His services could also be lent either temporarily or perman- 
ently for a consideration which was akin to rent. In recent times he had his 
emancipation but that has not improved his economic position. Plantations 
m Wynad (North Malabar) and other hilly stations absorbed a large number 
of them within the last 30 years and they are scarcely to be seen in villages 
now. They arc called ‘Pulayars’- in Travancore. The change of name indi- 
cates no difference in status or material prosperity. There is a tradition 
<hat once they owned lands themselves and the Aikarayajamanan, a North 
Travancore Chieftain, is still considered to be the latest descendant of a 
Pulaya king. Pulayanar Kolia Hill, literally, the fortress of Pulayans, in 
Trivandrum seems to support this tradition. The annual festival at Sri 
Padmanabha Swamy Temple at Trivandrum usually begins with a fire brought 
by a Pulayan/’ There is another interesting feature about their association 
with temples and higher castes. One day during festival time particularly in 
Kali temples they can enter its sacred precincts, and worship the deity instead 
of doing it at a distance from the temples which is the usual practice in other 
parts of the year. Temple festivals in West Coast usually follow the harvest 
season when Ceruman is free from work in the paddy field. He enjoys his 
holiday by presenting himself in the vicinity of the temple with his family 
-•lancing and singing all the time and drinking toddy at intervals. In fact 
during that period toddy constitutes the main item of his food. Neither his 
master nor his neighbour interferes with his conduct and behaviour at this 
time. Cejuma tribe has a number of sub divisions of which Kanakkan 4 is the 
most important. 


His Religion. 

Nothing special needs be mentioned about the Cerurnan’s religion as 
there is no deity which he exclusively worships. Ka]i temples are his favourite 
resorts and he entertains great regard for his ancestors. Once in a year he 
gives his dead ancestors a feast of toddy, rice, etc., ‘ Kulti Gatlan ’ and 
'Karim Kutty \ supposed to be spirits of deceased heroes, are propitiated 
by him. Expenses in connection with all these ceremonies arc to be met 
by his master. 


1. The great National Festival of the Malayalees' lasting for five days in 

Chingam (August-September). f 

2. The word is derived from 1 Pula * meaning pollution. 

3. L. K. Anantakrishna Ayyar, quoted by E. Thurston : Castes and Tribes 
°l South India . , Vol. II, pp. 47-48. 

4. The. present form looks like a derivative from Kajjakku — Accounts. It must 
have something to do with ‘ Kao 1 — to see or watch. The long vowel might have 
been dropped later. 



328 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


His death ceremonies are not very elaborate either. If a member of a 
Ceruman’s family dies, his master is immediately informed. He sends all the 
requisites for the burial — the dead body is always buried and not burnt — such 
as oil to besmear his body, spade to dig the grave, etc. To the accompani- 
ment of the drum called “ Para ’’ the dead body is taken to the river bank 
or a hilly track for burial, all assembled there touching the dead body. His 
belongings also in certain cases are buried with him. After the burial a 
mound is raised over the grave and a stone fixed at the head. His people fast 
for that day and the next day there is a feast for all the castemen. If the 
death takes place during the season when Ceruman is busy in the field the 
after-ceremonies and pollution are dispensed with. A mud vessel containing 
rice, etc., will be kept closed in which the spirit of the deceased is supposed 
to rest till summer when he is comparatively free. The usual ceremonies and 
the pollution lasting for fifteen days will then be observed giving due intima- 
tion to his master and the chief of the caste. 5 

Marriage Ceremonies. 

The bridegroom’s sister takes the leading part in their marriages. They 
generally marry outside their clan or group. The intention to marry must be 
communicated to the bride’s parents. With their permission the couple can 
associate with each other and even produce children. Oniy the bride should 
not go to the bridegroom’s house before the formal ceremony of marriage in 
which tying of the Tali at the auspicious moment is an important item. The 
bridegroom only makes the knot while his sister gives the finishing touch. 
There is the usual feast for castemen. The master of the Ceruman meets all 
the expenses of the marriage. He must also be duly informed when the choice 
of the bride, is made. Divorce is permitted after giving formal intimation to 
the parents concerned and the master. As a labourer Ceruman has hardly an 
equal and he is not attracted by the monetary gain accruing from his work 
although modem conditions have converted him into a cooly who likes to 
make the liest of his labour. Unlike other aboriginal tribes of Malabar 
Ceruman is a stranger to Black Magic. 

Pulluvan — The Snake Expert. 

Tlie name is derived from the word, Pullu, a small bird, which is sup- 
posed to have some evil influence over children. PuIJuvan is the healer for 
any such malady. There are different legends relating to their origin. One 
makes them tlie descendants of Kadru, the mythological mother of serpents. 
The other takes us to the story of the burning of the Khandava forest by the 
God of Fire to exterminate, the snakes. One of them escaped from the devour- 
ing fire and was saved by a woman who allowed it to get into her close- 
necked mud vessel (pitcher). The snake blessed her for this kindness and 

5. For details of the death ceremony vide Thurston’s Castes and Tribes of 
South India, Vol.'ll, pp. 76, 82. 



SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 


329 


gave her magical power to euro all diseases arising out of snake-bite or curse.® 
These legends true or otherwise, however, reveal the fact that this tribe had 
unusual power over snakes which abound in Malabar where a regular cult 
has developed thereon. Almost every Hindu house in Malabar lias a snake 
shrine located in a coiner of the compound surrounding it where annual puja 
is ottered to propitiate snakes. In a region like that it is no wonder that one 
community specialised in the snake-cult and became famous in the rituals 
connected with them. It also looks strange at the same, time that Pujjuvan 
lias control only over the divine aspect of the snake and not its physical 
aspect. lie is never seen with a snake nor does he administer medicine to 
patients bitten by snake although occasionally we have stories of a snake of 
the benignant variety being saved by him in his pitcher from attack by hostile 
tribes. They do not also assume the role of snake-charmers like ‘kurnvas’ 
who catch the reptile by their music and carry them from house to house 
to be exhibited for the sake of * Alms \ But all the evil influences due to the 
curse of the snake, they are able to eradicate. Pulluvan is a friend of the 
snake, while * Kuruva 1 is its enemy. lie is superior to Cemman in respect 
of accessibility to the higher castes. 

RllL'AI.. 

The principal ritual performed by Pulluvan is ‘ Tubal ’ literally jumping 
ru quick movement. The figures of two snakes intertwined - probably one 
male and the othci female -is drawn on a spot rendered sacred by certain 

purificatory process. Two women —generally virgins will sit in that, facing 

l he hood of the serpents holding a bunch of the tender inflorescence of the 
nrocanut palm. Pulluvan with his female partner sits at a distance and 
chants his songs accompanied by his Veena and the Kutam 6 7 8 of his partner. 
After a time the girls get possessed, destroy the figure waving their heads 
on either side like a snake. When they become calm by the ministrations of 
ihc Pulluvan through some special notes on his Veena and Kutam they 
pronounce the pleasure of the snake. After that they proceed to the snake- 
shrine of the house and deposit their bunch of flowers there and come away. 
With this the ritual closes. 

This community is gradually dwindling in numbers and they arc not 
cf a strong build. The Pulluva woman is noted for her sweet voice and her 
songs are very much appreciated ail over. She is a specialist in the diseases 
of the children for whose relief she chants a special song called Naverupatt* 

6. Hindus! associate serpents witty divine power. Their curses more than 
their blessings are believed to be more effective. Leprosy is usually ascribed to 
make curse. 

7. A mud vessel covered with leather at one end to which a string is attached. 

8. The song sung to ren*>ve the evil effect of the ' tongue.’ Eyes, and ton- 
gues of evil minded persons' are supposed to be effective in causing certain diseases 
°f the children. 



330 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


In that curiously no mention of snake occurs. It describes only the birth 
of a child in a family and enumerates the various diseases of the children 
with a view to remove them prescribing remedies therefor. 

Custom allows a brother and sister among them to marry. It is seldom 
that they go about alone. This practice according to some is responsible for 
their weak stature and their lack of productive capacity. If this community 
becomes extinct, as their gradual diminution in numbers shows a tendency 
in that direction, Malabar society will lose much of its amusement and enter- 
tainment particularly in the rural areas. 

Pan an . 0 

Pagan's role in the general structuie of Malabar society is unique. From 
the point of distance he has to keep from the higher classes, he is 
below Puljuvan and Ceruman and he is an * unapproachable ' pure 
and simple. He is a friend and foe of the higher classes. He is a 
medical man. sorcerer, artist, industrial worker all rolled into one. 
There is a proverb in Malayalam. “ there is no medicine which Panan 
does not know \ although his knowledge of medicine is not the outcome of 
any conscious attempt at studying it. His sorcery which relies for effect on 
the use of various shrubs renders a knowledge of medicine absolutely neces- 
sary. llis artistic taste makes his cultural outlook very much wider than 
that of many an 4 unapproachable ’ that is classed with him. Professionally 
he is the umbrella-maker in Malabar and tailor in Travancore. His sendee 
in Kaji temple ranks him as a first rate artist. PankaU M ' is his distinctive 
contribution to the region of Art. 

Panan brings umbrellas made of palmyra leaves with long handles to 
every house in the village at the commencement of the rainy season. In 
Malabar there is heavy rain from the beginning of June to November. For 
all classes of people, agriculturists, artisans, labourers, and others his umbrella 
is a necessity. He gets a few measures of paddy 9 10 11 in return for this present. 
It is a customary obligation and not a commercial transaction which either 
party fulfils voluntarily. Whenever there is a feast in any aristocratic house 
it is the Panan who supplies the requisite number of plantain leaves on whicli 
rice is served. For this he is given a good meal and a very nominal amount 

9. Literally a singer from Pug--a melody (Tamil). 

10. A variety entertainment consisting of music, dance, and dramatic inter- 
ludes by which Parian caters to the aesthetic taste of his castemen and others ot 
similar status. For details vide author’s article on ,f The Histrionic Art of Kerala ” 

• the cultural background, Annals of the Oriental Research of the University of 
Madras . 

lb It depends upon the size and number of umbrellas. Though the modem 
umbrella made of dark cloth has replaced the palmyra leaf variety of it, in country 
parts during heavy rains Pagan’s production is of immense use to protect oneself 
from heavy rain. 



SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 


331 


as compensation. Ayurvedic physicians in Malabar usually depend on Pagans 
for the supply of medicinal shrubs. The people at large entrust him with 
the work of collecting the various medicines prescribed by a doctor. 

Black Magic. 

His Black Magic makes him a terror to society. His displeasure brings 
dreadful disease to his enemies and sometimes death. The only way to avoid 
them is to requisition his own services. He is also afraid of the caste Hindus 
like Nayars and their communal wrath which sometimes takes violent forms 
resulting in their total annihilation. There is a tyix' of Black Magic called 
‘ Ofi 1,8 by which the magician kills his enemy in the night meeting him on 
his way. (hr such occasions he appears in the lorm of an animal, a dog, or 
a bull and so on, catches the victim unawares and kills him by twisting the 
neck. In modern times instances of such practices are rarely heard, although 
there are evidences to show that they have not disappeared. One who is an 
(. xpert in this Black Art is also supposed to have power to let loose the demons 
iie worships on his enemies and give them untold miseries. In this field 
‘ Parayan ’ who is dealt with in the next section beats Panan hollow as the 
former often takes to it as a profession. 

Ills role, as an artist comes in full play during the summer when temples 
• if Malabar particularly, the Ka|i shrines have their annual festivals. He 
goes about wearing masks and dances. His partner will mark time on Tuti. 13 
They provide immense amusement to the village folk. He returns home in 
the evening with his bag full of paddy anrl a few clothes.’ 1 Mention has 
already been made of Pankafi in which there is an interesting interlude by 
a couple who conduct an amorous dialogue to the accompaniment of dance. 
It is a pity that writers like Thurston and Gopala Panikkar” have entirely 
ignored this aspect of Pagan's life. It is one of the puzzles of anthropology 
how an artistic community like that of Pagan that has a cultural background 
to its credit came to practise Black Magic and commit heinous crimes asso- 
ciated therewith. 

This tribe is obliged to play Tuti in the burial ground of Izuvas— a class 
much higher to his— to ward off evil spirits. 

Marriage and death ceremonies observed by Pagan are on a par with 
those of Ceruman. Only Pagan has no master to meet his expenses or give 
him directions. 

It is the Pagan's privilege to herald the beginning of the new year by 
going to every house in the village in the previous night and sing songs to 


12. Literally means to bend. 13. A small drum. 

14. A detailed description of Pagan’s role as an artist occurs in the author’s 
Kali Worship in Kerala, Vol. I. 

15. Author of Malabar and its Folk. 



332 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

that effect. This is done on the eve of the third day of the Opam festival in 
Malabar. 

Para y an. 

Among the aboriginal tribes that live in the plains Pajayan is taken to 
be the lowest. In fact it is doubtful whether he could be called strictly a 
denizen of the plains, lie is partly of the plains and partly of the hills. In 
any case he must have his hut far away from the scene of civilization and 
he is classed not as a mere ‘ unapproachable ’ but an ‘ unseeable \ 10 Even 
his sight is forbidden. He comes to villages with winnowing baskets and 
mats, of various size and patterns made of bamboo pieces. On such occasions 
he must stand far away from the houses of the village folk and must cry 
sufficiently loud to announce his arrival, lime-honoured custom makes it 
obligatory on his part to present these baskets as Paean does umbrellas, and 
the village folk who receive them give paddy in return. Considering the 
labour involved in the manufacture of these articles the remuneration is far 
too low. During these visits sometimes he gets the carcasses of cows or goats 
to which he seems to have earned a claim established for centuries. As a 
carcass-eater he is held in contempt and the word ‘ l’arayan ’ is often used as 
a term of abuse meaning a wretch. 

The tribal appellation is traced to ‘Para’ (a big drum). lie plays, on 
that when his castemen assemble within a convenient distance of K.a]i temples 
to witness festivals 17 there and indulge in a sort of weird dance wearing 
hideous masks and painting their facts. This make-up reminds us of the 
cannibals of African jungles. 

In stature he is neither tall or strong but his looks inspire terror. life 
eyes proclaim that he is a born hypnotist and represents a culture to which 
we are perfect strangers. 

Black Art Oft. 

Black Art is his mainstay in life. By the application of certain medi- 
cines it is said, that he can stand any amount of physical torture having 
thereby attained insensibility to pain. One of them according to an eye- 
witness, bore for three days a big stone which was placed on his back as a 
punishment. When the stone was removed after the third day he was none 
the worse for it and regained his normal posture without feeling the least 
discomfort. 

‘Oti’ is the chief item of his Bladk Art as already mentioned. Paijan 
is only a novice in the Art when compared to Parayan who is an adept in 
it. If any one has the misfortune to meet him in the night (dark) — moonlight 


16. His kinsmen in the Tamil area occupy a higher status. 

17. This is the only privilege he is allowed by the villagers. 




SOME ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF MALABAR 


333 


is a serious handicap to his method — the belief is, that death is inevitable. 
Not only that he appears in the form of animals but he can also imitate their 
sounds and cries — devices by which he misleads nocturnal travellers. They 
never go alone. On either side of the victim they will run in opposite direc- 
tions holding a long stick across their shoulders. The sticks strike against 
the neck of the unfortunate man who by their force will fall on the ground. 
He is robbed of his possessions and killed instantly. The victim sometimes 
lingers for a couple of days as a living corpse and then expires. 

A variation of this called Vclloti 18 is also practised by them to entice 
women, not necessarily for sexual relationship, but for the removal of the 
tender ‘ foetus ’ which they use for the preparation of a patent which helps 
tiiem to assume various disguises. When they want to do this they take 
their women with them as they arc expert mid wives. Parayan administers 
a charm over the woman victim when his wife intervenes to remove the foetus. 
The victim usually recovers without any injury. 

He has other ways of killing his enemies .’ a He generally buries his dead 
and occasionally burns them also. 

His marriage customs are also on a par with those of the Ceruman ex- 
cept in a few details. The uncle of the bride makes the first present to the 
couple. Unlike other aboriginal tribes they are very particular about the 
chastity of their women. Violation of that virtue meets with severe punish- 
ment. 

This tribe has however produced the great saint ‘ Pakkanar’ whose 
philosophy of service to humanity and equal opportunities to all reminds us 
tliat this tribe was once not so despicable and degraded as they are to-day. 
"i heir strength is going down every year. 

One interesting feature about these tribes whose characteristics are des- 
cribed above, is that they follow the patriarchal system of inheritance while 
the higher classes like the Nayars and a section among Nambudiris, Tiyyas 
and Mohammedans in Malabar reckon their descent through mother. The 
problem is for the anthropologist to solve and to tell us which system is more 
ancient. 


18. The ‘ white Ofi ’ probably has reference to the ' white ’ of the human 
embryo. 

19. For details vide Thurston’s Castes and Tribes of South India, Vol. VI, 
PP. 124, 126. 



ASPECTS OF PRE-PANINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 

* 

By 

Dr. BATAKRISHNA GHOSH, d. phil. (Munich), o.utt. (Paris). 

Grammar presupposes not only language but also linguistic analysis, 
but it is obvious that the earliest analysis of language could have been only 
formal, the mere measuring of word-forms of various lengths. But even 
this mechanical measuring of word-forms could have been hardly taken in 
hand by primitive grammarians without some special reason. In civilised 

si^eedi sentences which alone, in general, can truly reflect the whole of the 

idea in the mind of the speaker— are constructed more or less consciously 
by joining together independent units of expression or suggestion represented 
by word-symbols. But the mind of the primitive man is always engrossed 
with the whole of the sentence-idea, for the simple reason that the sentence- 
idea is the only real thing in language, though that idea may be suggested 
also by a single word, even by a single gesture sometimes. In primitive 
speech, therefore, a single word may stand for a whole sentence, and a v-Ik-Iv 
sentence may lx* treated as a single word (holophrasis). Words and 
sentences, in short, are not distinguished in primitive speech. It is obvious 
that in such a state of tilings even the simple measuring of word-length is 
out of the question, for the word as such, as a separate and independent unit, 
doesn't exist as yet. 1 

But the situation is radically altered as soon as primitive man takes to 
making verse. And it is an established fact that primitive man makes verse 
before Ire makes prose consciously. If his verses are of the kind that we find 
in the Rgveda, the Avesta, and in Homer, i.e., if his verses are always of fixed 
length and his verse-feet consist of fixed numbers of syllables, then the deli- 
miting of words becomes a peremptory necessity. The foot of such a verse 
offers at all times a definite unit of speech-material, all the more if, as we 
find in the Rgveda, the end of every foot coincides with the end of a word. 
Every Rgvedie verse-foot is moreover an independent unit not only metri- 
cally but also in meaning : euphonic combination between pdddnta and 
padadi, though found in the accepted text of the Rgveda. has almost always 
to be dissolved in recitation. Needless to say, this metrical convention, which 
is one of the most striking characteristics of Rgvedie verse, must have been 
inherited from much earlier times, — from times when, apparently, it was 
considered too hazardous to try to operate with ideas which cannot be ex- 
pressed in one single verse-foot. To think that the Rgvedie seers themselves, 

1. For this article I have freely used Liebich’s Einfuhrung II. 



ASPECTS OF PRE-PANINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 335 

who had developed a highly complex ritual system and created poetry of no 
mean order, were afraid of sentence- ideas longer than a verse-foot would be 
to wholly misunderstand Rgvedic civilisation. We have to conclude, there- 
fore, that words must liave been fully and consciously isolated from sentence- 
complexes before the first Rgvedic verse could be constructed, i.e., centuries 
before the Rgvedic hymns were composed. 

But it is not out of these theoretical considerations only that we have to 
conclude that in India — and perhaps also in other countries -the conscious 
delimiting and isolating of single word - symbols from out of the only real 
sentence-complexes should have started with the construction of verses : I say, 
conscious delimiting, for the unconscious and enforced delimiting, as when a 
single word suffices to fully convey the speaker’s intention, can lx; hardly 
regarded as a grammatical achievement of any account In fact the earliest 
grammatical strivings of the ancient Indians are for the most part directly 
connected with metrical observations. 

The existence of even a single metre, as among the Creeks of the Homeric 
age, would enforce the necessity of limiting off verse-units and thus render 
formal linguistic analysis almost inevitable. But this process of delimiting 
•■■‘lid isolating words and consequently word-elements would be greatly 
accelerated if several different metres are in operation in one arid the same 
period as among the Rgvedic Indians. The Rgvedic poets, who had con- 
stantly to deal, inter alia, with Tristubh and Jagatl padas, must have noticed 
at an early date that the difference between them is due to the presence or 
absence of something that was different from the. only speech-elements they 
were as yet conscious of, viz. the. vcise-fnot and the word. This differentiat- 
b:': element, the syllable, they decided to call aksara, i.e. “ it reducible-’’ 
The term is highly significant, for ii shows that to the Rgvedic poets not the 
'-f und (v arm) but the syllable was the irreducible speech-element. But 
why should the aksara . which need not consist of one sound only, should be 
regarded as the irreducible speech-clement ? The answer is clear : the 
Rgvedic poets were thinking only of their metres in which a solitary conso- 
nant without any duration is of no account ; they were not thinking of 
ordinary prose sjieech in which along with the vowel-syllable also tire conso- 
nant would have to lx; regarded as irreducible speech-element. The word 
aksara therefore clearly suggests that the incentive to speech-analysis should 
have come to the Vedic Indians primarily from a comparison of the various 
metres. 

This is indirectly supported by the further consideration that in the 
older literature the metres are constantly spoken of as constituted by aksaras, 
but nothing is said about the fixed quantity of certain syllables of certain 
metres 2 which could not have escaped the eye of the Vedic writers if they 


2. Cf. Rkpratisakyha VIII, 36-39. 



336 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


had objectively studied every metre individually. Moreover, if the discovery 
of the ak?ara had been due to the analysis of ordinary prose speech its use 
in the oldest literature could never have been confined, as it is, solely to 
metrical observations/ 1 But the fact is that in the three passages of the 
Rgveda 1 in which the word ak$ara with the meaning “ syllable ” occurs, the 
allusion is always to metres. In the first of these three passages it is even 
dearly stated that the “seven” speechis are measured by the ak$ara (aksd- 
rei.ia mimate spata vdvVjt). That “ saptd vdt.uk " of this passage refers to 
the seven metres of the Caturuttara-series [sapta cchandawsi caliiruttannii), 
mentioned already in the Rgveda, but in due order for the first, time in the 
Vajasaneyi -Sarphita/* admits of no reasonable doubt. In Rgveda X. 130. 
4-5. we have a list of seven metres which is practically identical with this 
traditional Caturuttara-series, the only difference being that Viraj here takes 
the place of Pankti ; but it is significant that also in this passage, when it is 
paraphrased in the Aitareya Brahmana VI 1 1.2.2, Pankti appears for Viraj. 
All this and much more that the. Vedic literature contains by way of metrical 
observations clearly show that to compare various metres with each other 
and to try to arrange them in a rational order was a favourite occupation 
with the Vedic seers. And that this activity should in due course have ltd 
to the discovery of the “ syllable ” — which is in fact the earliest grammatical 
discovery made in India has been already shown above. 

Just as the syllable ( aksara ) is the smallest sound-unit (so far as metres 
are concerned) so is the word ( pada ) the smallest sense-unit. But it is curi- 
ous to note that in the Rgveda, 3 4 5 6 the word “ pada ” has not been used in the 
sense of a word, but in the sense of a verse-foot, i.e., a Pada ! Does it show 
that speech, at least sacred speech, was measured originally by whole lumps 
constituting verse- feet and not by individual words? If it does, then we 
shall have to admit a curious thing : we shall have to admit that in Indian 
grammatical thought the word received recognition after the syllable and the 
verse-foot. But that is as it should have been if, as shown above, the earliest 
linguistic speculations had been concerned more with metres than with the 
language. 

Why was the term pada used originally in the sense of “verse-foot” 
and how did it later come to assume the meaning “ word ” ? After what 
has been said above, the answer to these questions cannot remain doubtful. 
The true meaning of the word pada in the Rgveda is “ step ” and not “ foot.” 


3. I am of course leaving out of consideration those passages in which the 
word aksara does not mean “ syllable.” 

4. I. 164. 24 ; 39; X. 13.3. 

5. XXI. 12-18 : Gayatri, Uijjjih, Anu$tubh, Brhati, Pankti, Trigpibh and 
Jagatl. 

6. I. 164. 23. A 



337 


ASPECTS OP PRE-PA^INEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 

As Liebich 7 * has ingeniously suggested, the recitation of Vedic hymns was 
conceived in the lively imagination of the Ifeis as accompanied by the rhyth- 
mic steps of Vac, and thus every metrical unit (i.e., the verse-foot) came to 
be regarded as a 44 step ” of the goddeSvS dancing along in perfect harmony 
with the sacred speech. So far as the sacred speech was metrical, the 41 step ” 
could not but be the verse-foot, which is the natural unit of metres. But 
where the sacred speech was prose, there the 44 step ” could mean nothing 
but the natural unit of prose, i.e. the word. When in this way pada came 
to mean 44 word ”, a new term, but not too different, namely pada ” foot ”, 
was seized upon to denote the verse- foot by, perhaps on the analogy of four- 
footed animals, since the metres are indeed mostly four-footed 7 ' — Thus wc see 
that not only 44 aksara ” but also the terms ” pada ” and 41 pada ” should have 
been recruited into the grammatical vocabulary of the Vedic age mainly 
through metrical considerations. 

The earliest grammatical discoveries were thus painfully slow and the 
iicondary - almost accidental - result ot studies which by no means were 
truly grammatical. But with the isolation and comprehension of both the 
sound-unit ( aksara ) and the sense-unit {pada) the foundation was laid to 
proper grammatical analysis of the language, and henceforward the progress 
of grammatical thought was extraordinarily rapid, culminating at last in that 
matchless work of scientific perfection, — the A$fiidhy;lyl of Paiiini. 

In the period of the Brahmanas grammatical thought was mainly concem- 
4(1 with the relation between sound and sense, i.e. etymology. The etymo- 
logies of the Brahmana-texts are of course mostly puerile, and it is quite prob- 
able that the Brahmana-authors themselves were not quite serious about them 
as Roth aptly remarked. The fact is that the Brahmana-authors, though 
operating with both sense and sound, were wholly dominated by the sense- 
element, so that if there is any similarity in meaning between two words 
they would not hesitate to connect them etymologically even though in form 
they may have only a single consonant common by chance. Yet in the 
Brahmanas may be found many correct etymologies, some of them of really 
difficult words, such as nyagrodha, which has been correctly analysed in the 
Aitareya Brfihmaina VII, 5.4 as nyah rohati 44 that which grows downward.” 
Also in other fields of grammar, as wc shall see below, much real progress 
was made during the Brahmana-period, but the favourite occupation of the 
naive grammarians of this age was, apparently, this nirukta 44 etymology.” 
The etymologies of the Brahmana-authors were later collected and classified 
by Yaska in his Nirukta. 

7. Einfuhtung , II, p. 5. 

7a. Pada in the sense of "clause” of prose mantra may be regarded as an 

intermediate step between pada — verse-foot and pada — word. Thus the twelve 
clauses of the Nivid such as agnir deve 9 ddha, agnir manv iddha etc. are called the 
twelve padas of the Nivid ; cf. AB. II. 5. 1 : dvddcdapadd vd e$a nivit. 

23 



333 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The word nirukta in its original sense had however nothing to do with 
etymology. The verses in which the gods to whom they are addressed are 
not mentioned by name are called anirukta in the Brahmaajas, s and, vice 
versa , when in a verse the god addressed to is actually mentioned it is said : 
devoid nirucyate .» It is clear, therefore that the word nirukta in its original 
sense signified only that kind of theological enquiry, so dear to the hearts of 
the Brahmatja-authors, which strove to ascertain the relation between the 
gods and the verses addressed to them. No enquiry was necessary in the 
case of a verse with the name of the god addressed to actually mentioned in 
it. But the intended divinity could not be ascertained without enquiry and 
deliberation on the text concerned in the case of a verse in which no god is 
mentioned by name. The term for this enquiry was nirukta, but it had its 
meaning gradually extended into *’ etymology ” ; and in view of the character 
of the enquiry originally signified by the term it is but natural that it should 
thereafter be always associated only with that kind of etymology which 
stresses the meaning more than the form. 

The main grammatical activity during the Brahmana-period was, as 
shown above, in the field of etymology. But this period was not altogether 
barren of phonological enquiry. The term vartia “sound” occurs for tin- 
first time in the Aitareya -Brahma pa 10 as also svara “accent”; 11 in the sense 
of “ vowel ” however, the latter term does not appear before the Aitarcya 
Aranyaka (III. 2.5). — With the discovery of the vartia it became now pos- 
sible also to analyse tire aksara. Thus it was stated that the sacred syllable 
consists of the three sounds a, u and »i. 12 Even the technical term riphi'a 
occurs in the Aitarcya Brahmana, 13 but exactly in what sense it is difficult 
to say. The earliest attempt to scientifically arrange the sound-system of 
Sanskrit is to be found in the Aitareya-Aranyaka (III. 2.5) and the 
Chrindogya Upanisad 1 ' 1 where the sparse, the Usman and the svara (vowel) 

8. Cf. Aitarcya Hr. 111. 3.6 ; 3. 10, etc. In explanation of the word anirult ■ 
in AB. III. 3. 6 Sayaiia says : nibse$eno 'klo devo niruktas, ladrso yayor dhayyayoi 
nd ’sti if. unirukte. Still more clearly he says ad AB. III. 3. 10 : sa ”py rg annul: 1 * 
■ritdravdcakripwlabhavad aspasfadevatdkd. 

9. Aitarcya Br. IV. 5. 3. 

10. V. 6.7. This meaning of the word vtnna should have been developed 
first in the Brahmapas of the Samaveda in which we constantly come across locu 
tions like rathantaravarna re “ verse which gets the colour oi itathantara-saman in 
chant.” In these passages the word varna is visibly changing its meaning from 
" colour ” to “ sound ” of melody. Then gradually the “ sound of melody ” became 
“ sound in general.” 

11. III. 2. 13. Keith translates svaravatya vded as “with sonorous voice”, but 
according to Sayana svaravatya means svavayuktayd. 

12. Aitarcya Br. V. 5.7. 

13. id-riphita. AB. V. 1. 4 — Sayana 's comment is not very helpful :—viri - 
phitam iiVunkharupena visesaklesena 'ccdritatn. 

14. II. 22.3-5. 



339 


ASPECTS OF PRE-PANINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 

are separately mentioned, but the antastha (for antalfsthd) is mentioned for 
the first time in the ftkpratiSakhya (I. 9). Simultaneously with these 
phonetical discoveries purely grammatical categories too were being gradu- 
ally isolated in the age of the Brahmanas. The animate genders are called 
vfsan and yosd respectively in the Aitareya-Brahmapa ; 15 the terms eka- 
vacana and bahuvacana occur already in the Satapatha-Bnahmana (XIII. 
5.1.18), but dvwacana for the first time only in the Atharva-Pratisakhya 
(I. 75; II. 47), though dvivacas occurs earlier in the Rkpnrtisakhya (I. 
71); the dmredila is still naively called punaravrltam punaminrttam in the 
Brahmaiia?, 10 

Much more important than these individual discoveries are the gram- 
matical groupings of nominal and verbal forms. The order of the seven 
cases was determined obviously with a view to having all the possible identi- 
cal forms in contiguous positions. It was therefore only after a certain 
period of trial and error that the order of the seven cases could be fixed as 
already in Yaska'" who. it should be noted, uses the term vibhakti only in 
the sense of nominal case-form. The eighth case vocative is mentioned for 
the first time in the Brhaddevata. ,s The different grammatical persons too 
were clearly distinguished by Yaska when he declared in his peculiar language 
(loc. cit.) that the Mantras are paroksckrla (i.e., in the third person) and 
connected with verb-forms of the third person (prathamapuru$ais cd ‘ khyu- 
lasya), or pratyaksakrta (i.e., in the second person), or adhyatmiki (i.e., in 
the first person ) . The three tenses future, present and past (called karisyat, 
kurval and krlam respectively), have been mentioned already in the Aitareya- 
Brahmaija. 1 '’ But, as Liebich 20 pointed out, the distinction made between 
the tenses was as yet more logical than grammatical, for although the exam- 
ples for present and past are in their proper tenses, those for the future are 
mostly imperative-forms such as d yahi etc. 

In connection with various ritual acts the Brahmanas often recommend 
the use of forms containing word-elements corresponding in some way or 
other to those acts. This is of more than passing interest for the history of 
Sanskrit grammar, for these recommendations could be laid down and acted 
up to only by those who had learnt not only to separate the suffix and the 
ending from the stem but also to isolate the root-element from among a 
bewildering mass of congeneric forms. Thus when the Aitareya-Brahmapa 21 
declares a verse containing the word pitrbhili to be pitrmot, it is quite clear 
that the author of this Brahmapa had isolated, consciously or otherwise, the 

15. VI. 1. 3 : vr$a va r sab ho yo$d subrahamanya —We have pumnainnyah slr't- 
mmnyah napumsakandmnyah in Sat. Br. X. 5. 1. 2. 

16. K.g., Aitareya Brahmapa V. 1.1. 

17. VII. 2. 18. I. 43. 

19. IV. 5.1; IV. 5.3; V. 1.1. 20. Einfiihmng, II, p. 13. 

21. III. 3.8. 



340 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


stem pitr- both from the suffix -mat and the ending -bhiff. But such cases, 
of which there are hundreds in the Brahmaoa-Hterature, are quite a simple 
affair compared with the analysis of composite verb forms indirectly sug- 
gested by Brahmaria-authors. Only after a long period of intelligent gram- 
matical study and observation could it have been possible to recognise such 
dissimilar forms as ajijanat (Ait. Br. V. 3.2) and janu$a (Ait Br. V. 
1.5) to be jatavat, i.e., containing the root jan~. Similarly in the Ait. Br. 
aganma (V. 4.1) and jagmus (V. 4. 2) are called gataval, asavi (VI. 
3.1) is called sutaval, etc. 

These examples clearly show that although the actual root had not been 
fully abstracted by the later-Vedic writers, they had nevertheless rightly 
guessed the existence of a common element which they were at a loss to know 
how to express. It was quite natural that in order to express or suggest it 
they should have utilised only such forms as actually occurred in the langu- 
age, and if of such actual forms they particularly fixed upon the form in past 
participle passive to suggest that elusive common element by, it was obviously 
because this was the only form of a verb which almost never failed to actually 
occur. Yet the form in past participle passive was not the only form utilised 
for this purpose, various purely nominal forms too were used, — as. for 
instance, the verb-form naya is called netrmat. 22 Sometimes both verbal 
and nominal forms are brought under the same head in this way ; thus in the 
Aitereya BrShmaina vr$asva (IV. 5. 3), vrpiyfmi (IV. 5. 4), vrsanam (VI. 
3. 1) etc. are called vrsanvant. This was a further step in advance, for the 
elusive common clement was in these cases clearly perceived to be reducible 
to both verbal and nominal ideas. The idea of the abstract grammatical 
nxit was therefore already there, but the root was yet to be actually abstract- 
ed. Liebich points out one case in which it may be claimed that even this 
last step had been actually taken by the author of the Aitaneya-Brahmana, 
for here the forms madayantam, mamadan etc. are declared to be madvat. 
But, as Liebich 2 - 1 himself has argued, it is more probable than not that here 
too mad- is no real abstraction at all, but is derived mechanically from com- 
pounds like soma-mad. 

Hardly beyond the pale of Vedic literature stand the traditional Nighap- 
tus — the earliest work of a lexicographical nature in the Sanskrit literature — 
and Y&ska's Nirukta thereon. For our purpose it will be sufficient to note 
about the Nighaujtus that they are probably older than Sakalya’s P&dapatha 
of the Rgveda, for hikam, nukam and other particles are treated as single 
words in the Nighaijtu 24 , though they are divided in the Rkpadapatha as 


22. Aitareya Brahmana, I. 2. 4. Similarly in AB. ajani is jatavat (I. 3. 5), 
apydyasva is apinavat (1.3.6), arurucat is rucitavat (1.4.4), janghanal is jagk- 
r.ivat (1.4.8), etc. 

23. Einfiikrung, II, p. 17. 


24. III. 12. 



341 


ASPECTS OF PRE-PAIJIINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 

whose author Yaska 85 himself mentions Sakalya. In dealing with the words 
nutsakjt and vayali YSska 26 ' definitely rejects the views of Sakalya, though 
however without mentioning his name. Sakalya’s Padapatha is the earliest 
purely grammatical work in the Sanskrit literature. On it is based Saunaka’s 
Rkpratisakhya which is quoted by Panini. 

What iSakalya 27 actually did was merely to give every word of the 
Rksarphita, in most cases modified through Sandhi with the preceding and 
the following word, in its pure and independent form. Simple as this task 
may appear to be it could not be carried out without a good deal of gram- 
matical analysis, the Visarga alone being, capable of assuming eight different 
forms in Sandhi. Moreover the consonantal endings in nominal flexion, a9 
also secondary suffixes, have been regularly., though not always, separated 
from the stem in the Padapatha by Avagraha ; components of compounds 
too have been separated in the same way, though however two Avagitahas 
have never been used in the Pada-form of the same compound. The forms 
considered to be pragrhya are marked by the word iti by Sakalya, but it is 
still a mystery what precisely was the special characteristic which decided the 
pragrAyo-character of a form.** Some words are repeated in the Padapatha 
after the indicatory iti under circumstances which it is not possible to discuss 
in this place ; they are pmgjhya. It is important to note that avagraha, 
pragraha and pari gr aha are all purely grammatical terms. All this may seem 
to be mere mechanical work, requiring no grammatical acumen. But there 
art; many indications which clearly prove that Sakalya actually did try to 
understand grammatically the words he was dealing with. Thus the enclitic 
pronominal form i is represented by him as im in the Padapatha, evidently 
because the nasalless form had completely gone out of use in his time. In a 
large number of cases Samhita-words which are perfectly justifiable in them- 
selves have been replaced by the later forms of those words in Sakalya's Pada- 
patha (e.g., Samh. daksi but P. dhaksi, Samh. minak but P. aritiak etc.) 
All this shows that iSakalya’s Padapatha is a purely grammatical work, — the 
first Indian purely grammatical work in fact, though the scope of grammar 
could not but be extremely narrow in it. 

The function, though not the form, of the Padapafhas of the other Saip- 
hitas is more or less the same, evidently because they were all modelled after 
Sikalya’s Padapatha, and they are thus all later than it. But Gargya’s Pada- 
Patha of the Samaveda seems to be older than Yaska, for in commenting on 
the difiicult word mehana the latter says 2 * that it may after all be three words, 

25- VI. 28 . 26. V. 21 ; VI. 28. 

27. Date “not later than 600 B.C.” according to Keith, A it are y a- A ratty aka, 
Introd., p. 73. 

28. On this problem cf.: JHQ., X, pp. 665-70; IC„ TV, pp. 387-99; NT A . , 
II, pp. 59-61 ; D. R. Bhandarkm Volume (1940), pp. 21-24 : IC., VIII, pp. 397-8. 

29. IV. 4. 



342 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and it can hardly be a case of fortuitous coincidence that in the Padap&tha of 
the Samaveda this form is actually treated as three words as Yaska’s com- 
mentators Durga and Skandasvamin have pointed out. 

Gargya in his Padapatha has shown much greater grammatical acumen 
than Sakalya, and in his word-analysis he in some cases forestalled even the 
latest achievements of the science of linguistics. For example, Gargya cor- 
rectly divides the words sam-udram. candra-masah, srat-dhd ( sraddha ) none 
of which has been analysed by Sakalya. Yaska in dealing with these words 
sides with Gargya against iSakalya as Professor Bhagvaddatta ;:0 has pointed 
out. In other cases, however. Gargya’s analysis is definitely wrong, e.g., an-ye, 
sa-khye, su-uryasya ( suryasya ) etc. In analysing the compounds Sakalya 
never separates a component member if it does not occur in the Rksarphitii 
also independently in the same sense which it assumes in the compound. 
Thus svasti has not been analysed by Sakalya. because asti does not occur 
as a noun. Gargya however ignored this convention and analysed svasii 
also. — The other Padapathas offer little new material of grammatical inte- 
rest. Atreya’s Padapatha 31 of the Taittirlya-Samhita is so crude in com- 
parison with the Padapathas of Sakalya and Gargya that Keith is inclined 
to date him even earlier than Sakalya. 3 * 

The great etymologist Yaska is to be placed somewhere after Sakalya 
and Gargya whom he quotes, but before Saunaka’s Rkpratisakhya which in 
its turn is quoted by Panini. Yaska’s priority to the Rkpratisakhya is to be 
inferred, however, only from circumstantial evidence. There is no direct evi- 
dence to prove Saunaka’s -or even Panini’s - posteriority to Yaska. 
The words padaprakrlih satfihitu occurring both in the Nirukta 33 and 
(in the reverse order) in the Rkpratisakhya” can of course prove 
nothing as to their relative chronology, though Max Muller 35 asserted 
that Yaska was here simply quoting the Pratisakhya. Similarly, the Sutra 
parah saryinikarsah sarphitn occurring both in Panini and the Nirukta is value- 
less for chronological purposes. Yaska indeed presupposes the science of 
grammar when he says that etymology should not be taught to non-gramma- 
rians ; 36 but that cannot prove his posteriority to PSnini, for both the works 
of Yaska and Panini are the final results of pre-existing traditions. Yaska 
might have had in view the grammars or the grammatical science of the pre- 
Paninean era. Nor does Panini’s teaching the formation of *he name Yaska 31 
prove his posteriority to Yaska the etymologist. Yet, in pursuing the history 
of Indian grammatical thought one is forced to admit Yaskafs priority not 


30. A History of Vedic Literature (Hindi), Vol. I, Pt. II, p. 154. 

31. Padakara Atreya is mentioned already in Baudh. Gr. S. Ill, 9.7. 


32. 

TS. — translation, Introd., p. 30. 

33. 

I. 17. 

34. 

II. 1. 

35. 

Introd. to IJkpratiSakhya, p. 4. 

36. 

II. 3. 

37. 

PS 13 . IV. 1 . 102. 



ASPECTS OF PRE-PAlvJINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 343 

only to Paijini but also to the Ijtkprati&akhya. Chronologically it is import- 
ant to note that Sakalya must have been already dead when Yaska wrote, 
for he uses the perfect form cakara when referring to Sakalya. 

Yaska clearly distinguishes the four parts of speech — noun, verb, Upa- 
sarga and Nipata . 33 The verb (akhyata) in his opinion chiefly conveys the 
idea of becoming {bhavapradhana) . All the twenty Upasargas of the Sans- 
krit language are given by Yaska , 39 and he divides the Nipatas into four 
groups, giving examples of each.*" Krt 41 and Taddhita 49 suffixes are men- 
tioned and illustrated by examples. The treatment of comiwinds by Yaska 
is however wholly inadequate. The different kinds of compounds had evi- 
dently not yet been differentiated in his time, so that he contents himself merely 
with the statement that they may be ekaparvati or anckupnrvan (i.e. of two 
or more components) . It is extremely difficult to believe that anyone coming 
after Paijini, though not dealing with grammar proper in the strictest sense 
of the word, could have confined himself to such broad generalities. And it 
is hardly possible that Yaska intentionally refrained from mentioning Panin i 
but referred to Gargya and other Vaiyakaranas in the famous passage in which 
lie contrasts the views of the etymologists with those of the grammarians . 43 
In the absence of any compelling reason the benefit of doubt should there - 1 
fore be given on the side of Yaska’s priority to Panini. 

But compared with the preceding age Yaska surely marks a long step in 
advance. The technical terms lopa, upadhd, vdkya, navddesa, sarvanaman 
and samkhya (naman) are. used by him already in the Paninean sense. The 
masculine and feminine are now called pitman and stri as in Panini. The 
causative, dcsiderative and intensive are called kdrita. cikmita and carkarlta 
foreshadowing Paajinean nomenclature. As proof of Yaska’s linguistic insight 
may be mentioned that he had perceived that the first t in praltam is the 
fragment of a root. 

Saunaka, the author of the Rkpratteakhya (and Book V of the Aitareya 
Arsriyaka) should have been one of the last pre-Papinean writers on gram- 
mar. and his is certainly the earliest Pratisakhya. It has to be borne in mind, 
however, that almost the sole object of the Pratisakhyas is to explain or ex- 
plain away the apparent or real differences between the Padapafha and the 
Sanihita-text, and in this they start with the assumption that the Padapatha 
is the original ( prakjti ) of which the Saiphita is a modified form ( vikrli ). 
The Pratisakhyas are not interested in anything that does not directly or 
indirectly serve to explain the difference between the Saiphita-text and the 
Padapatha. Thus they have a gdod deal to say about Sandhi, accent and 
metre, but that is about all in them that can be reasonably included in a 


38. I. l. 
41. I. 14. 


39. I. 3. 
42. II. 2. 


40. I. 4. 

43. Nir. I. 12-14. 



344 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


purely grammatical work. Particularly for the Rkpratisakhya it is import- 
ant to note that its last eight Patalas are certainly later than the first ten. 

Saunaka's chronological position is determined by the fact that although 
both Yaska and Pan ini quote the views of Sakalya, the quotations in Paijini 
are however such that they could not have been taken directly from Sakalya’s 
Padapafha but only from the Pratisakhya which presents in a systematic 
form the substance of Sakalya’s Padapatha.“ Goldstiicker 45 tried to prove 
that Pariirii’s Astadhyayl is older than the Rkprtisakhyya, mainly on the 
ground that Vyadi, also called DfikSjayapa, who, according to Patanjali, wrote 
his Samgraha on tlie Sutras of PSiiini, is mentioned in the Rkpratisakhya. 
But Max Muller 40 rightly pointed out that the Vyadi mentioned in the Pra- 
tisakhya need not have been the author of the Sarpgraha. 47 Limited as was 
the scope of Saunaka’s Rkpratisakhya, the advance in grammatical thought 
since Yaska as reflected in his work is truly enormous, though still far be- 
hind Planini excepting in things purely phonetical. Over a hundred technical 
terms occur here for the first time according to Liebich, 4 * most of them na- 
turally pertaining to phonetics. The word vyahjana, which in Yaska 49 means 
vish^coia, appeare here in the sense of “ consonant ” as in later literature. 
Yaska uses the term upajana in the sense of PSinini’s agama : it is significant 
that in the Rkpratisakhya agama occurs four times in this sense, but upajana 
only once. The author once 50 refers to Yaska, but only as a metrical authority. 
There is no trace of Pratyaharas and Anubandhas in the Rkpratisakhya. 

As none of the other Pratisakhya s can be proved to be older than 
Panini M they need not be discussed here. A word, however, needs to be 
said about the Brhaddevata which, as Macdonell has convincingly demon- 
strated, 12 though later than Saunaka’s Rkpratisakhya, is probably older than 
Papini. The author categorically declares 51 : ndkarmako ’sti bhdvo hi, na 
namd 'sli nirarlhakam, na 'nyatra bhavdn ndmdnx, tasmat sarvmii karmatah. 
This shows that tire author of the Brhaddevata as a grammarian belonged 
to the school of Sakatayana, who would derive every word from a verbal 
root. Like the previous writers he uses the term vibhakli in the sense of 
finite verb-form and nominal case-form (niimakhyatovibhaktisu) , 54 but in 


44. See Indian Culture, Vol. IV, pp. 387-399. 

45. Pdnini : His Place in Sanskrit Literature, London 18i»l. 

46. Introduction to his edition (1869) of the Rkpratisakhya, pp. 20-21. 

47. Cf. also Weber, Indische Studien, V, pp. 106 ff. 

48. Einjuhrung, II, p. 30. , 

49. VII. 13. 50. XVII. 42. 

51. Suryakanta however makes the strange assertion that " in all the Sutras, 
that are found parallel in Rktantra and Patjini, the latter may owe a debt to the 
fanner.” (Introd. to Rktantram, Lahore 1933, p. 40). 

52. Brhaddevata, Harvard Oriental Series, Vol. V, p. xxii. 

53. 1. 31. 54. II. 94. 



ASPECTS OF PRE-PANINEAN SANSKRIT GRAMMAR 


345 


Patjini it signifies merely endings, verbal and nominal. He defines that, to 
be a noun which takes the eight Vibhaktis varying according to number and 
gender, 5 "* and is the first to mention™ all the types of compounds known to 
Panini. The number of Upasargas is given as twenty in the Brhaddevata,” 
and it is added that Sakafayana urges the inclusion of three more, viz. accha, 
srad and an tar. Of the Nipatas it is said significantly that nobody can say 
“ there are so many ” of them. 38 The grammar of the Brhaddevata is 
therefore in every way more advanced than anything that was known before. 
Yet, compared with Panini’s A$tadhyay7, it looks crude enough to cam for 
its author the compensatory advantage of chronological priority— which can 
be granted him all the more easily since unlike the authors of the Pratisa- 
khyas the author of this text was not pinned down to an inexorable tradi- 
tion in deference to which he might have felt compelled to ignore the gram- 
matical discoveries of his age. 

Then comes Panini with his Astadhyayl which Bcnfey 5 '-’ described as 
“ the most comprehensive grammar of the richest language within the brief- 
est compass imaginable- or rather unimaginable.” Panini was bom in the 
Athenian age of Indian history, when our forefathers fearlessly questioned 
all tliat was held sacred and mysterious from the beginning of times. This 

fast life— fast in the noblest sense of the word need not and could not have 

been of long duration, for the spirit too, like flesh, is weak. It is therefore 
misreading human nature to assume from the perfect technique displayed 
by Panini that he must have been preceded by long generations of plodding 
grammarians. Pa|nini surely had predecessors, many of whom he himself 
mentions by name, but along with Patjini they all should have participated 
in the brisk intellectual life of more or less the same age which on account 
of its very brilliance could not have lasted very long. All things considered, 
Panini should be placed about 400 B.c. 


55. I. 43. 56. II. 105. 

57. II. 94. 58. II. 93. 

59. Geschichte der Sprachwissensckaft, p. 76. 



BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 


By 

Mr. V. R. RAMACHANDRA DIKSHITAR, M,v, 

University of Madras. 

Dr. Bimala Churn Law is one of our distinguished orientalists, and is 
pre-eminently a Buddhist scholar. This article on Buddhism in Andhradesa 
is a tribute paid by its author to his versatility and scholarship. Buddhism, 
like Jainism was an all-India movement in the centuries preceding and sue 
ceeding the Christian era. There has been some dispute whether Buddhism 
was the. earlier movement or Jainism in Andhradesa. We need not discuss this 
point here. Suffice it to say that Buddhism in Andhradesa may be traced av- 
far back as the third century b.c. if not earlier. Though we have several anti 
ricli remains of Buddhist monuments in the sha[>e of Stupas and Caityr.s 
throughout the Andhra country, still a good number of them are to be found 
in the districts of Guntur and Krsna. The earliest of these Buddhist monu 
nients in these districts is a stupa discovered at Bhattiproju with the inscrip- 
tions (edited by G. Biihler in Ep. Ind. II, pp. 323-29). Apart from the fact 
that these inscriptions take the history of Buddhism in Andhradesa to thf 
Asokan times, — because the characters of these* documents resemble those cl 
Asoka’s inscriptions, they are of value to prove that during the third century 
b.c. several varieties of the Southern Mauryan alphabet existed. As Dr. Biil? 
ler very ably points out the Bhattiproju inscriptions show a system of writing 
which helps us to believe that the art of writing was practised in India for 
many centuries before the age of the Mauryas. 

Bhattiproju has been identified with Pratipalapura, about six miles from 
Repalle in the Guntur district. It is said that the stupa here enshrined a 
genuine relic (dhatu) of the Buddha. One of the inscriptions here refers to 
a king Kuberaka. The first inscription refers to the preparation of a casket 
and a box of crystal to deposit some relics of the Buddha. In some inscrip' 
tions (III, V, VI, VIII) reference is made to village committees and guilds 
(nigama) who have presented caskets, boxes of crystal and of stone. The 
tenth inscription in the stupa states that even women from Nandapura parti- 
cipated in the gift in memory of the Buddha. These documents at Bhattf 
proju are an unquestionable testimony of the flourishing condition of the 
Buddhism in Guntur district in the third century b.c. Perhaps they may he 
dated earlieT also. The religion of the Buddha had become popular and the 
public were anxious to contribute their mite to perpetuate the memory of the 
Bhagavan Buddha. The king, villagers, merchants, sramaftas and women 



BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 


347 


all joined together in the common effort of erecting the stupa and enshrining 
the relics of the Buddha in boxes of crystal and stone. The antiquities of 
Bliattiproju are preserved in the Government Museum, Madras, except the 
casket which has been presented to the Maha Bodhi Society. (See B. V. 
Krishna Rao : Early Dynasties of the Andhra Desa, p. 124, n.). 

The next set of Buddhist monuments come from Amaravati and Jag- 
gayyapeta. The Maha-Caityas in these places contain inscriptions with 
Mauryan letters. Burgess following Fcrgusson's Tree and Serpent Worship 
has elaborately studied the remains in these two places and published the 
results of his study in the Archaeological Survey of South India, Vol. I. 
Amaravati or the ancient. Dlianyakataka about 18 miles west from Bczwada 
is a well known Buddhist centre in Andhradesa. It had a huge stupa — (a 
stupa is only a large caitya)- with four gates, and dates probably from the 
second century b.c. Except the fragments some of which are now in the 

British Museum, Forgusson writes that not a vestige remains in situ of the 

central stupa at Amaravati. But it is inferred from the fragments that the 

dome must have been considerably big, the base being about 162-1 feet in dia- 

meter, and 40 to 50 feet in height. The stupa 1 was embellished and repaired 
whenever necessary. It is believed that the outer rail was erected in the second 
century a.d. while the sculptures in the inner rail would be put down to the 
third century. 

A peculiar characteristic of these dagabas is the existence of five pillars 
<.n each of the faces of the stupa. These are called Ayaka-Kambas. The 
enter rail, quite an artistic monument, was formed of upright slabs about ten 
feet in height above tire level of the inner paved path with a number of cross- 
bars carved with discs on both sides. The inner rail which was about 6 feet 
in length was richer in its carving. ( Burgess : Op. cit., pp. 24-5). If we 
examine the sculptures of the outer rail, we have carvings of elephants and 
makaras generally. There are scenes of a king and his attendants, the queen 
Holding her husband by the left arm, then a lion throne and behind it the 
bodhi tree. The men are seen wearing turbans and heavy earrings. Repre 
mentations of Nagas and Naga chiefs, of chauri -bearers are common. What 
is very interesting is the flaming TriSula to which worship is offered. In front 
of the altar is the Paduka or the sacred feet of the Buddha. In one place 
there is a bodhi tree rising from behind the T risula pillar. Men and women 
worship together, and the men invariably have a high head dress. Next to 
Svastika the trident symbol oft occurs on Buddhist sculptures. This symbol 
is the counterpart of Jyotir-linga in which form &iva is worshipped. In this, 
as in several other things, like the Dharmacakra and Caitya, the Buddhists 
copied the existing Hindu models apparently to catch the popular imagination. 


1. The Arya-manjusri-mulatantra ( VAI . p. 88) mentions that the stupa was 
raised over a relic of the Enlightened One. 



348 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Such things alone would appeal to the masses. Worship to the Paduka seems 
to be counterpart of the prayer offered to Vi§i?u-pada. 

Among other representations is the representation of the Bodhisattva or 
future Buddha coming from the heaven of Tugita gods to be born of Maya, 
the wife of sSuddhodana. There are some elegant sculptures depicting a battle 
scene, where elephants, horsemen and infantry men are seen. In some scenes, 
women are seen wearing heavy anklets and scanty clothing. Before we close 
it may be remarked that the architecture is distinctly wooden, though the 
use of brick in buildings is also seen. 

In the inner rail, the most remarkable are the Chakra or wheel pillars 
At the base of each is a chair with two round cushions and the footprints on 
the footstool. Over the wheel Gandharvas and other gods are seen. Below 
a Chaitya pillar occurs an inscription (Burgess : Op. cit., p. 86): -a chaitya 
pillar with a relic, at the south entrance --the gift of the merchant Kuta with 
his wife, with his sons, with his daughters, with his grandsons. A number of 
Amaravati inscriptions are full of such gifts especially of private donors. 
These documents point out how not only institutions but even private fami- 
lies vied with one another in making gifts and enriching and embellishing the 
great stupa out of reverence for the Lord Buddha. 

In a slab from the central stupa we meet with objects of Buddhist wor 
ship. The dhamma cakra is prominent in what is called the central compart- 
ment. In front of the clagaba is the five-hooded snake. Below the dliamma- 
cakra is seen the Bodhi druma which is considered a symbol of Buddha’s vic- 
tory over Mara and his evil followers. On the footstool arc found the foot 
prints of the Buddha. This panel reminds one of the Buddhist triad— 
Buddha, Dhamma and Sahgha. (Burgess, p. 89). 

These sculptures, generally speaking, are of varied interest. They depict 
scenes from the life of the Buddha and promote the legendary history of the 
Buddha. Among the images discovered were those which bear close resem- 
blance to the Mahiayana school. The figures, whether it be of men or animals 
bear marks of a distinct individuality and are realistic. We get some idea of 
the ornaments and dress worn in those early times and also a hint as to the 
domestic life of the people at large. There is no doubt that the fair sex 
enjoyed complete freedom and most of the gifts were made by the members 
of that sex, independent of the male members of the family. The Amaravati 
school of Buddhism continued to flourish for more than five centuries toge- 
ther and has left indelible marks of its prosperity. 

• 

The Jaggayyapeta stupa has the same tale to tell. It is at Betavolu. 
about 30 miles north-west from Amaravati. The remains of the stupa and 
the fragments of sculpture arc allied to those which we deem as old as at 
Amaravati. The characters of the inscriptions on this stupa are of the 
Mauryan type and the stupa may possibly be dated to the second century 



BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 


249 

p.c. Only dabs surrounding the base of the stupa were found. Not a frag- 
ment of the rail can be discovered. We do not meet also with elaborate 
carving though we see a makara here or two winged animals there. Burgess 
remarks that even these are in very low relief and of archaic type. Among 
them may be mentioned a drawing of a shrine with four pillars in front. 
The 4ripada is seen inside over which is found a chhatra or umbrella with 
two garlands hanging from it. There were the Ayaka pillars some of which 
were found lying bearing some inscriptions. One of them tells us about the 
erection of five Ayaka-pillars at the eastern gate of the Chaitya in the 20th 
year of King PurusadaUa of the Iksvaku line. Another inscription refers 
to an image of the Buddha done by Gmdraprabha, a disciple of Jayaprabha- 
dirya who was, in his turn, a pupil of Nagarjuna. While the former may 
be dated to 4th century A.D., the latter may be dated to about 600 a.d. 
We cannot fully agree with these dates. Thus this monument had also the 
patronage of the state and of the public for several centuries together. (See 
Ind. Ant. XI, pp. 256-59). 

SRiPARVATA AND NAGARJUNIKONpA. 

Fa-hian (5th century A.D.). and following him Hiuen Tsiang refers 
to a sarighariima on a mountain in the Andhradesa. The Tibetan books 
refer to the activities of Nagarjuna and his death at. Sriparvata mountain. 
The Puranas like the Matsya Puriuia refer to Sri Parvatlya Andhras. Sri- 
parvata has been identified with Sri-sailam by early scholars like Burgess. 
But the explorations at Nagarjunikopda and the Prakrit inscriptions there- 
from show that sriparvata may be identified with Na ga r j u n ikopd a . No less 
tlian seventeen specimens of ayaka-pillars, all of which are inscribed, have 
been discovered at this place and these documents have considerably increased 
our knowledge of Buddhism in Andhradesa. It is still a mystery why these 
pillars, which had nothing to do with the main structure, have been given 
so much importance. The term ayaka-Kambha, has not been properly inter- 
preted. We are familiar to-day with ayakkal in Tamil which are forked 
wooden thick sticks used as a support when a procession of god is taken out 
on the shoulders of people. At resting places these pillar-like sticks are used 
to relieve the bearers for the time being. I suppose this ayakkal is a remnant 
of the old ayaka pillars which adorned the main entrances of the ancient 
Buddhist stupa. 

At Nagarjunikapda there was a maha chaitya. On its east, north and 
the. north-west the excavations brought to light a number of monuments and 
the remains of other monuments like the chaitya, stupa, stone pillars which 
all indicate that once many buildings existed all round the main chaitya. 
Apart from the monuments of value, the inscriptions have shed new light. 
They refer to an Ik§vaku dynasty which ruled in south India. To this 
dynasty belonged Madhariputa Siri-Virapurisadata. It was in his reign that 



350 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the various monuments in the locality were raised. His father was Vasithi- 
puta Siri Chantamula (see Ep. Ind. XX pp. 1-37) who is credited to have 
done a number of Vcdic sacrifices including the ASvamedha.. His son Siri 
Virapuiisadata was also a follower of Brahmanical religion but he was tolerant 
enough to allow his queens and other ladies to follow the Buddhist faith. 
In those days it is rather difficult to say that one was a Buddhist or Hindu 
in faith. Toleration was the order of the day. In a family one member may 
follow a particular faith and another member another faith and a third mem- 
ber a third faith. This is very well seen from the pages of the Silappadi- 
kuram, the Tamil classic. 

It is therefore not surprising that a princess like Chamtisiri who is called 
the uterine sister of Siri-Chamtamula and the paternal aunt of Siri Vira- 
purisadata and who was the wife of Mahatalavara Vasithiputa Kamdasiri of 
the Pukiya family, a mahasenapat i --on this account Charntasiri holds the title 
of Mahatalavari — was a Buddhist. The epigraphical records show that the 
great chaitya of the great Vihara at Nagarjunikotida was founded by this 
lady in the 6th year of Siri Virapurisadata’s reign. She was also responsible 
for other edifices like a Chaitya grha and a stone mandapa together with 
a cloister. The last building was intended for the use of the acharyas of the 
Apara Mahavinaseliya sect, and erected in the eighteenth year of Siri Vira- 
purisadata. By this time the reigning king had become the son-in-law of 
Chamtisiri. 

In these pious foundations Chamtisiri was helped by other noble ladies. 
One was a daughter of Siri-Chamtamula and the sister of the reigning king. 
She was also a mahatalavari. The second was the wife of Mahasenapati 
Mahatalavara Vasithiputa Khamdachalikiremmanaka of the Hirapyakas. 
She was the donor of the fourth pillar. The third lady who had dedicated 
the fifth pillar was also a Mahatalavari. Yet another lady by name Maba- 
devi Bhafidcva, who is called the daughter-in-law of Siri-Chamtamula, is 
credited with the foundation of a vihara. Apparently she was a consort ot 
the Siri-Virapurisadata. Another vihara was founded by the daughter of 
Siri Virapurisadata as the inscribed pillar of Kotfampaluga would point out. 
She is said to be a consort of the Maharaja of Vanavasa, the ancient name 
for North Kanara. This is dated in the eleventh regnal year of Siri Ehuvula 
Chamtamula, the son and successor of Siri Virapurisadata. The informa- 
tion yielded by the inscriptions has enabled us to reconstruct a history of the 
Ik$vakus in Andhradesa. 

Among the pious foundations enumerated in these documents, special 
mention may be made of two monasteries — Kulaha-vihara and SIhaJa vihara. 
The donor of the fourth pillar calls herself as a daughter of the Kulahakas. 
evidently a royal family of considerable importance. Kulaha-vihara, as has 
been surmised by Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, was the foundation chiefly dedicated to 



BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 


261 


the Kulahakas. In the same way SThaja-vihara would be a convent founded 
by or for the Singhalese. This convent had a shrine and also a Bodhi-trce. 
There had been at this time frequent intercourse between Ceylon and South 
India, and hence we see more of Ceylonese Buddhist influence here. Such 
flourishing edifices were found in ruins when Hiuan Tsiang came to India 
and wrote about them. Buddhism had definitely decreased in the Andhra 
country in the days of Hieun Tsiang. The reasons arc not far to seek. 
Dr. Vogel happily summarises them for us. (1) The decline of South 
India’s trade ivith Rome which flooded the Peninsula with the Roman gold 
(2) the conquest of South India by the great ruler Samudragupta (?>) the 
t of Pallavas devoted to Brahminical religion (4) the rise of Chalukyas 
in the West of the same religious persuasion. One other cause may he the 
rise of a number of sects within the Buddhist community which must have 
considerably weakened the harmony and coherence of the community. (Ep. 
hid. Opt. cit. ) 

Even in the inscriptions of Nagarjunikonda there are a number of sects 
mentioned. Reference has already been made to the sect of AparamaM- 
vinaseliyas. One scholar associated it with Mahavana Sala at Vaisali. The 
Mahfivathsu (V, 12) and Dipavaihsa (V, 51) refer to the Pubbaselikas and 
AparaSclikas, as the: two subdivisions of Ihe Mahasariighikas. It is said tl-ar 
tl 10 Apara-selikas may be an abbreviation for Apara Mahavinaseliyas of the 
inscriptions. Or it may be that the Pali chronicles of Ceylon record the two 
: ects of Pubbasela and AparaSda, which, according to 1 linen Tsiang existed 
on the hills to the east and west of the then capital of the Andhradesa. 

lliuen Tsiang says : “ to the east of the city, bordering on a mountain, is 
a convent called the Fo-lo-pho-shi-lo or PurvasiJa. To the west of the city, 
leaning against a mountain is a convent called ’O-fa-lo-shi-lo or Avarasila. 
These were built by an early king in honour of the Buddha. He hollbwed 
the valley, made a road, opened the mountain crags, constructed pavilions 
and long galleries, while chambers supported the heights and connected the 

caverns There have been no priests for the last hundred years.” (Beal, 

Bud. Records of Western World II, pp. 221-23). Earlier the Chinese travel- 
ler tells us that in his days there were about twenty convents w'ith a thousand 
priests or so. The Aparasila is the western-rock monastery and the Purva- 
sila is the eastern-rock monastery. Those who made the former as their 
residence were known as Aparasailas and those who made the latter were 
known as Purvasailas. The Purvasailas, according to Burnouf, are followers 
of Mahadcva, an early teacher (Int. a’ 1’ Hist. Du Bud. Ind. 2nd edition 
P- 398) . They were also known as Chaityikas. The Purvasailas and Ava- 
mSailas were two of the five sects of the Mahasamghika school. 

Very early the Buddhist Church came to be divided into two schools— 
the Mahasariighikas or the school of the great Congregation and Mahastha- 
viras or the school of the great President. The Buddhist community in the 



352 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Andhradesa were followers of the Mahasaihghika school. The three remain- 
ing sects of this school were the Haimavatas, the Lokottaravadins, and the 
Prajfiaptivadins. A definition of all these sects cannot be attempted. 
Suffice it to say that most of them were local. There were several other sects 
also. The inscriptions at Nagarjunikonda mention a sect Bahusutiya (Pali 
Bahusuttlya ; Sanskrit Bahusrutlya), besides Ayira-hamgha (Skt. Arya- 
sangha), and Mahisasaka (Skt. Mahisasaka). Thus the collapse of Bud- 
dhism after seven or eight centuries of existence is due more to the split in 
the church leading to sects and subsects than any extraneous causes, which 
also contributed to its fall. 

The inscriptions give some more details of the Buddhism as prevalent 
in the Andhra country. It occurs in an additional passage that in the com- 
pletion of the great Chaitya, service was rendered by one Ananda who knew 
Dighanikdya and the M a jjhima-nikay a by heart. It is further stated that 
Ananda was a follower of the Ary a sahgha sect whose scripture is seen to be 
the Digha and the Majjhima nikayas and the five Matukas. 

Again the erection of ayaka pillars and stone pillars was considered very 
holy and ladies of royal family were invariably the donors. They did these 
for the attainment of nirvana mainly and also for material prosperity e.g. 
Chamtisiri wishes for the longevity and victory of her son-in-law Siri Vira- 
purisadata. From an inscription in an apsidal temple it is seen that one 
Bodhisiri caused a number of foundations for the welfare of her family mem- 
bers. This document shows the wide activities of the Ceylonese monks who 
carried the message of the Buddha to Kashmir, Gandhara, China, Chilata 
(Assam?), Tosali, Aparanta, Vanga, Vanavasi, Yavana, Damila, P51ura, 
and the Isle of Ceylon. It is particularly to be noted that Buddhism was 
prevalent all over India about this time which may be roughly third century 
a.d. This proves further that not only royal ladies but ordinary female 
members who could afford to erect pious foundations associated themselves 
with the worship of the Buddha. Add to this the two inscriptions incised on 
sculptures at Nagarjunikcnida. It is the donation of a footprint slab by 
Budhi, the sister of a Saka Moda. If Saka is Scythian as is usually inter- 
preted by western orientalists, then it is significant in the sense that even 
foreigners like the Scythians embraced the Indian cult (Ep. Ind. Op. cit. 
p. 37) . 

There is a strong tradition that Nagarjunikonda was the residence of 
Nagarjuna, the founder of the Mahayana school. As has been already said 
the Tibetan tradition says that he ended his life at this spot. Further the 
name of the locality itself is a strong testimony. But what is surprising is 
that the inscriptions from this place do not make any reference to Nagarjuna 
at all. The late lamented A. B. Keith would place this ‘ mysterious ’ 
Nagarjuna in the latter part of the 2nd century a.d. His chief works are 
Madhyamakarikas and Suhrllekha, where the Buddhist doctrine is summarised. 



BUDDHISM IN ANDHRADESA 363 

(/I History of Sanskrit Literature pp. 71-2)' Hiuen Tsiang further tells us that 
Bodhisattva Bliavavivcka lived in a monastery on a hill at Vijayapuri. The 
identification of Vijayapuri has not yet been satisfactorily done. According 
to the Chinese traveller it was not far from the capital. Vijayapuri is only 
once mentioned in a record at Amaravati. According to the document of 
Bodhisiri, to its west lay the Sriparvata. In this place lived Bhavaviveka 
(Watters on Yuan Ckwang, Vol. II, p. 215). 

A. II. Longhurst who conducted further excavations at Nagarjunikopda 
was able to recover many lead coins, gold and silver reliquaries, pottery, 
statues and over four hundred bas-relief sculptures as magnificent as those 
from Amaravati. (Ind. Ant. Vol. LXI pp. 186f) . The ruined buildings 
are the remains of Stupas, monasteries, apsidal temples and a palace. These 
were built, of large bricks measuring 20" X 10" X 3". The sculptures and 
statues were executed in grey limestone which resembles marble. On plan 
and in construction, it is said, that the Andhra stupas bear marked differences 
from those of the north. They are built in the form of a wheel with hub, 
spokes and tire, all in brickwork with a dome over the structure. The dome 
was made to rest on a circular platform from 2 to 5 feet, in height according 
to the size of the monument. Another sjxcial feature of these monuments 
is a platform on each of the four sides of the dome resembling an altar, 
f-irge monuments were provided with pillars. Five pillars varying from 
10 to 30 feet in height adorned every quarter and the total number was 
twenty. These are the ayaka-pillars to which a reference has already been 
made. (Ibid). 

In the sculptures two kinds of stupa are depicted and decorated partly 
with stone slabs and partly with plaster ornamentation. In decoration they 
resemble the stupas of Gandhara and this shows mutual influence between 
South India and Gandhara. The chief scenes in the sculptures portray the 
five miracles in the life of the Buddha. These are the Nativity, Renunci- 
ation, Sambodhi, First Sermon and Death. 

The diameter of the great stupa at Nagarjunikojjda is 106 feet and its 
total height excluding the tee about 80 feet. The Ayaka plaforms are 
22 x 5 feet. The stupa was surrounded by a procession path 13 feet wide 
and enclosed by a wooden railing resting on brick foundations. The stupa 
consisted of 40 chambers. Originally a plain structure, additions were made 
later on. Perhaps the Ayaka pillars were added in the second century aj>. The 
monument was a dhatugarbha or a shrine containing a relic, and not a 
memorial stupa. Hence the name Mahacaitya. (Ibid.) 

■9 

It may be concluded that with the decline of the Tk$vakus, Buddhism 
began to decline in the Andhra country. By the time when the Vi$oukupdins 
rose to power about the beginning of the fifth century a.d., it has ceased to be 
an active religion, though some monks continued to live and preach in some 
monasteries for a century or two more. 

24 



THE HOME OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 


By 

Dr. BENOYTOSH 3H ATTACH ARYYA. M.A., pii.d. (Baroda). 

Wlien Mm. Haraprasad Shastri published his Discovery of Living Bud- 
dhism in Bengal in the year 1897 he was ridiculed, and in scholarly parlance 
it was long known as 4 Shastri’ s lad \ Later, however, Buddhistic studies 
in Bengal progressed satisfactorily, and several scholars took up the study 
of Buddhism - both living and dead in right earnest, and made much 
valuable contribution which revealed the political, cultural and linguistic 
history of Bengal with a great wealth of detail. The name of the late Sara t 
Chandra .JDa^L Jiowever, stands pre-eminent amongst scholars of Buddhism 
in Bengal. 

The results of these Buddhistic studies have been admirably sum- 
marised in the recent History of Bengal Voi. I published by Dr. R. O. 
Majumdar. To-day, thanks to his efforts, we know a great deal regarding 
Buddhism in Bengal. We know, for instance, that there were celebrated 
Buddhist scholars whose fame spread beyond India, that there were Bengali 
mystics, Tantrics, Siddhas and magicians who made a name outside Bengal 
and that gifted composers of mystic poetry preached and popularised the 
esoteric doctrines of Vajrayana, and great Yogis followed complicated 
Yaugic practices. We further know that Bengal produced in mediaeval 
times hundreds of Buddhist sculptures, which have been discovered, studied 
and identified. In fact, it now gradually becomes evident that there was an 
independent school of art and sculpture, which produced a large number of 
Buddhist images of wonderful workmanship besides thousands of the most 
exquisite specimens of Brahmanical ones with a sprinkling of Jain icons. 

Dr. Majumdar's History gives also a survey of the origin and develop- 
ment of the vernacular songs of the early Buddhist composers of Bengal. 
The Buddha Gan O Doha revealed a large number of Dohas, or Bengali songs 
of the earliest times, although there is still some controversy concerning the 
date of their composition. 1 There are weighty reasons to show that these 


1. With apologies to the learned linguist I entirely disagree with the findings 
of Dr. Suniti Kumar Chatter ji and his associates regarding the dates of the authors 
of the Carydpadas. Linguistic evidence is not by itself sufficient to combat histori- 
cal evidence. £antarak§ita’s date is certain ; since he did not refer to Sankaracarya 
but to the earlier school of the Aupani$adas, his date as given by me in the Tat- 
tvasangraha is to be taken as settled. The date is 705-762 A.D. §antarak$ita is 
again connected with Padmasambhava, and incidentally, with his father Indca- 



THE HOME OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 


355 


songs, composed by poets flourishing at different times, cover a period from 
the 7th to the 12th centuries A.D., but linguistic experts would place them, 
all in the 10th, 11th and the 12th centuries, or to be exact, 960-1200 a.d. 
These songs are no doubt Buddhist, and belong obviously to the Vajrayana 
and Sahajayiana forms of Buddhism, and are accompanied with a commentary 
in Sanskrit. 

The Buddha Gun 0 Doha was published in the year 1916 by Mm. Shas- 
tri. and this stimulated subsequently a great deal of research in Bengali 
linguistics. The fact is worth repeating lest Mm. Shastri’s important dis- 
covery be altogether forgotten under the pressure of re-editions, improved or 
critical editions, and reprints of the same book undertaken by the present 
generation of scholars. 

Besides these, the Sadhana literature of the Buddhists provided research 
scholars with ample material for the identification of Buddhist images dis- 
covered in Bengal. The Sadhanamdla published in the Gaekwad's Oriental 
Series in the years 1925 and 1928 contained no less than 312 Sadhanas for 
ttie worship of Buddhist deities, and these not only provided material for the 
reconstruction of the Buddhist religious history of Bengal, but also gave al- 
most. a complete account of the state of the Buddhist Tiintric literature in 
Sanskrit, and details of numerous Tantric authors who were connected with 
Bengal, and practised the. Vajrayana form of Buddhism. 

When the Sddhanamuld was published, I remember to have been faced 
with a volley of criticism on its editing methods and other shortcomings, in 
leading journals. As a rule, I never waste my time in replying to critics, as 
it rarely, if ever, contributes to human knowledge. The rage of criticism is 
now over, but I cannot state without a feeling of disappointment that the 

bhuti, all of whom must therefore be contemporaries. In the second volume of the 
Tangyur Catalogue of P. Cordier is given a succession of Gurus and disciples in the 
following order : — 

(1) Padmavajra, a. of Guhyasiddhi 

(2) His disdple Anahgavajra, a. Prajfiopayaviniscayasiddhi, 

(3) His disciple Indrabhuti, a. Jiianasiddhi, 

(4) His disciple Bhagavati Laksmi or Laksminkara, a. Advayasiddhi, 

(5) Her disdple Lilavajra, a. Vy ak la bhavasi d dhd , 

(6) His disciple Darika, a. Oddiyanavinirgata Mahaguhyalattvopadesa 

(7) His disciple Sahajayogini Cinta, a. Vyaktabhavanugata-tattvasiddhi 

(8) Lilavajra’ s disdple Pombl Heruka, a. Sahajasiddhi 

This list has neither been prepared nor concocted by me. It is there in the Tang- 
yur Catalogue for all to see, and has to be taken as a historical fact. No amount 
°f verbal jugglery can unsettle this fact. That this parampara of Gurus and dis- 
ciples is correct is proved by- the composition of the manuscript No. 13124 as pre- 
served in the Baroda Oriental Institute. In this collection the original works men- 
tioned in the Tangyur Catalogue against these authors are induded in their logical 
sequence. The whole succession should cover the latter part of the 7th and the 
whole of the 8th century- There seems to be no escape from this position. 



356 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Tibetan-knowing critics have not yet turned their attention to the construc- 
tive work of tracing in the Tangyur numerous Sanskrit Sadhanas extant only 
in Tibetan translations, and thus add to our knowledge. 

To resume the authors of the Sadhanas were also the authors of the 
Caryapadas, and many of them were connected with Bengal. Dr. Majum- 
dar’s History of Bengal, Vol. I, has taken all these factors into account, al- 
though in matters of detail there may be room for controversy. 

Now it may be asked : Can we proceed a step further ? I think at this 
stage it will be possible for us to take a more synthetic view. 

First of all, let us see where the Buddhist images of the Vajrayana type 
were discovered. By this I mean only those images for the identification 
of which, a satisfactory Dhyana can be cited from the Sadhanarrala, or other 
equally trustworthy evidence can be adduced. Then let us find out where 
these images were most prolific, that is to say where they first originated in 
order to find out how and where they migrated later. 

This type of investigation has been made possible by the admirable pro- 
duction of Dr. N. K. Bhattasali, entitled, ‘ Iconography of Buddhist and 
Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum ' published in 1929. His me- 
thods were followed by R. D. Banerji in his monumental work ‘ Eastern 
Indian School of Mediaeval Sculpture ’ published by the Archaeological Sur- 
vey of India in the year 1933. The original, scientific and accurate work of 
these two eminent Bengali scholars have opened up new lines of investigation, 
and the historians of this country have reasons to be grateful to them for 
their valuable contribution. 

On referring to these works in addition to Dr. Majumdars History of 
Bengal, Vol. I we find that Vajrayana images and paintings are found in 
Bengal, Assam, Bihar, Orissa, parts of U. P., one place in central India, 
Nepal and Tibet. Among these Assam, Bihar and Orissa can be regarded as 
coming within the cultural influence of Bengal in pre-Muhammadan times. 
Vajrayana images, however, are not found in other parts of India, such as 
Madras, Mahara§tra, Gujarat, Kathiawad, the Punjab, Kashmir or even Cen- 
tral Provinces or Rajputana. Is it all a matter of chance that Vajrayana ima- 
ges should be found round about Bengal, and in those places which, were 
known to have been deeply influenced by Bengal and Bihar ? 

Let us now examine more carefully the find spots of these sculptures. In 
Bengal proper, the following places and districts are known to have yielded 


2. For instance, Sadhanas for the following deities still exist in Tibetan : (1) 
Ratipriyii, (2) Yakjanatanatl, (3) Kilikila, (4) Hariti, (5) Nagi, (6) Manohari, 
(7) Subhaga, (8) Ratiraga, (9) Punjabhadra, (10) Bhutisundari, (11) Vimala- 
sundari, (12) KrwapiSaca, (13) Alaka, (14) Alagupta, (15) Kliaramukhi, (15) 
K?uksu$ri besides many others. Even a bare description of their forms may be 
of great help in recognising un-idcntified sculptures. 



THE HOME OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 357 

Vajrayana images which correspond mostly to the Dhyanas as given in the 
Sadhanamala. In this list, I do not think I have exhausted the place names, 
but it will certainly give a fair idea of the distribution of the Vajrayana scul- 
ptures throughout the country included to-day in the map of Bengal and 
Assam, which were together under the same administration until recently. 

In Bengal Vajrayana deities have been discovered in the district of Bir- 
bhum, Gauri (dt, Burdvvan), Sagardighi and Ghiyasabad in the district of 
Murshidabad, Sonarang and Vikrampur in the Dacca district, Tipperah, 
Bad-Kamta, Paharpur, Mahasthan, Rajshahi, Faridpur, Malda, Sylhet, Bari- 
sal, Tripura State and the Chittagong district. 

In Bihar, Vajrayana deities have been found in Nalanda. Bihar Sarif, 
Patna and Gaya districts. Bodh-Gaya, Kurkihar, Hazaribagh, Patharghata 
(Bhagalpur), and various other small places. A g<xrd collection of these can 
also be found in the Patna Museum. 

In the United Provinces, Sarnath is the only important place where a 
number of Vajrayana deities have been found. Besides these, at Mahoba in 
British Rundclkhand were found a few specimens of exquisite workmanship. 
These have been described by Mr. K. N. Dikshit in an excellent manner in 
a special Memoir of the Archaeological Survey of India. Mr. Dikshit places 
these images in the 11th — 12th century a.d. on reliable palacographieat 
grounds. 

Buddhism being a living religion in Nepal and Tibet, Vajrayana images 
of all varieties are found in large quantities in these countries. When I visit- 
ed some of the Nepal monasteries in 1922 they presented an appearance of 
veritable museums of Buddhist images of a bewildering variety. But I have 
not come across old images of the Tantric school, and the majority of metal 
and stone images were of recent origin, mostly post-Muhammadan. Thus 
Nepal and Tibet are left out, since they have little to do with the origin of 
Vajrayana, and because they were markedly influenced by the Vajrayana of 
Bengal and Bihar. When the monasteries in Bihar and Bengal were devastat- 
ed, burnt and looted at the time of the Muslim invasion of Bengal, the priests 
ran away to Nepal with their sacred texts, their Vajrayana practices, and the 
images of their favourite gods over the difficult Himalayan passes to Nepal. 
Thus on the Vajrayana of Nepal the stamp of Bengal is strongly marked. 
Most of the monasteries in Nepal according to their own traditions, originated 
in the 13th century A.D-, and the Nepal MSS library contains a large number 
of manuscripts written in Bengali characters of the pre-Muslim period. It is 
also not difficult to prove that in the matter of Tantric Buddhism Bengal 
exerted her great influence on Bihar. That influence is manifested not only 
by the Bengali scholars going over and teaching in Bihar monasteries, but also 
by the close resemblance existing between the art, sculpture and architecture 
of these two countries. Bengali Rajas often held sway over Bihar, and it is 



358 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

not improbable that during the Bala times the Tantric religion permeated 
through this country. 

In Bengal proper, Vajrayana deities of different types come in large num- 
bers from Vikrampur, Dacca, Tipperah, Faridpur, Rajashahi and to a certain 
extent from Birbhum. In other parts of Bengal only a sprinkling of such 
images is found. According to Dr. N. K. Bhattasali, Vahga and Samata'ta in 
Bengal were the two centres from which culture radiated to other parts of 
Bengal, in this particular case apparently through eminent Bengali authors, 
teachers, mystics and poets belonging to Vajrayana. In the opinion of Dr. 
Bhattasali, Vahga included in the early days the modem districts of Dacca, 
Faridpur, Backerganj, while Samatata included the whole of the present 
Chittagong division and the plains of Sylhet and portions of the present Dacca 
and Mymensing districts. Can we take this Vanga-Samatata tract as the 
Home of Vajrayana? 

The celebrated author santarak?ita belonged to Vahga, his birth-place 
being Za-hor (modern Sabhar in the Vikramapura Paragana.). 3 If this had 
not been correct, Dr. Majumdar would not have accepted him in Bengal 
history. Even so is the case with Santideva or Bhusuku. Padmasambhava, 
Dfpahkara-sri-jnana, and a host of other Siddhacaryyas, although Dr. Ma- 
jumdar will not accept them all in Bengal without a grudge. That many of 
them belonged to Vahga, Eastern India, Vikramapuri, Jagaddala, Pumiid- 
vardhana, Pandubhumi. Somapuri and such like places in Bengal, is to-day a 
matter of common knowledge. 

If that be so, can we not assert that Tantric Buddhism originated in Vahga 
and Samatata ? At least that should be the legitimate conclusion of the find- 
ings of Dr. Majumdar in his voluminous treatise. Tlie Tantric Buddhism or 
Vajrayana and its associations are so intimately connected with Bengal that 
we are tempted to hold this part of Bengal as the place of its origin. 

Vajrayana images are found in considerable quantities in the Vahga-Sama- 
tata area, Vajrayana authors arc connected with this country. Vajrayana 
paintings in Prajftaparmita manuscripts refer to Vajrayana temples existing in 
this country. Many of the Siddhas or masters of Vajrayana are connected 
with this country as also many of the Vajrayana songs and their composers. 
This tract abounds in ruins of old Buddhist monasteries and cities. Dr. 
Bhattasali has also pointed out names of villages and towns in Vahga and 
Samatata which even to-day are of distinctly Buddhist flavour. Names of 
places like VajrayoginI not only have Buddhist associations, since Vajrayogini 
is a Buddhist deity of wide celebrity* but also signifies its connection with 

3. Dr. Bhattasali has shown that Sabhar was a Buddhist centre of great anti- 
quity. He fixed : " 7th — 8th century a.d. as the age of the ruins of Sabhar Icono- 
graphy, op. dt., Intro, p. vii. 



THE HOME OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 359 

Vajrayana because the word ‘Vajra’ in Vajrayoginl means Sunya which is 
the Vajrayana term for the Ultimate Reality. 

While talking of Vajrayoginl, I am tempted to refer to aAther pfoblem 
connected with the identification of Uddiyana which was regarded as a place 
of great importance in Vajrayana Buddhism. In fact, the Tibetans consider 
this as the place where Tantric Buddhism originated. Thus the identification 
of this place becomes a paramount necessity. Mm. Haraprasad Shastri identi- 
fied UcJdiyiana with Orissa, and in my earlier days I used to take that identi- 
fication as correct. But later I found that the few details regarding Uddiyana 
obtained from various sources, such as the Tibetan authors, Sadhanas, paint- 
ings, etc. do not harmonize in case it is identified with Orissa. Moreover, 
Uiddiyftna being Pit ha should only be a small but wry important place and 
thus cannot be identified with a big country like Orissa. Although uncertain 
myself, I suggested that the identification of this place may have to be looked 
for in Assam because Uiddiyana ought to be near Sabhar in order to fit in 
with the story of Snnfarnksita and Padmasambhava. Moreover, Udfcliyana 
being the place of Imlrabhiiti. a celebrated Buddhist author of the Vajrayana 
school and the father of Padmasambhava, must be saturated with not merely 
Buddhist but Vajrayana atmosphere of the Sddhauomula, and also within 
reasonable proximity of the other old Pirhns like Kamakhya and Sirihatta in 
Assam. 

Uddiyana is often mentioned in Tantric 'literature, but it should parti- 
cularly be noted that it is mentioned along with Ivfimakhya, Sirihatta and 
Purnagiri in a group. In the Sadhanamala it is mentioned twice, in this man- 
ner. To all these four PIthas or sacred spots worship is made and flowers 
are offered in token of reverence. These four Pfihas are mentioned in con- 
nection with the worship of a violent Vajrayana deity, Vajrayoginl, who, as I 
have shown years ago, is the same as the Hindu deity Chinnamasia, one 
of the ten Malravidyas of the Hindu Tantra which borrowed it from Vajra- 
yana. 

Again, in Professor Foucher’s list of Prajnaparamita paintings Uddiyana 
falso spelt as Oddiyana and Odiyana) is further connected with Marici, an- 
other violent Vajrayana goddess. The Sadhanamala records that Oddiyana 
was also connected with the Sadhanas and worship of Kurukulla and Trailo- 
kyavasankara. These are manifestly Vajrayana deities. According to Sadha 
namala Sarahapa was connected with Uddiyana and Mm. Shastri informs 
us that he composed several Tantric poems and wrote extensively on Tantric 
subjects. In the Tibetan tradition/ Padmasambhava, Kambalapa, Luipa, 
Tailikapa and several others are connected with Uddiyana. But the most 
famous among them seems to be Indrabhuti, the king of Uddiyana, whose 
only extant work in Sanskrit * Jnmmiddhi ’ is styled in the colophon as ‘ §n- 
mad-Qdjyana-vinirgata ’. This work is already published in the Gaekwad’s 



360 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Oriental Series as one of the T wo Vajrayma Works, which breathes an at- 
mosphere of Vajrayana through and through. 

Under the circumstances the location of Uddiyana will have to be found 
in a purely Vajraj&na atmosphere, if not also in a Variga-Samatata atmos- 
phere, but certainly not in Swat, Kashmir, Kafiristan or Kashgarh or any 
other place on the slender ground of its inhabitants making ‘the acquaint- 
ance of magical formulas their occupation Simply because eminent Euro- 
I>ean scholars have committed a mistake in identifying the place, are we in 
duty bound to quote it and repeat it every now and then, or support it with 
all the ingenuity at our command to perpetuate that mistake ? It is exactly 
on such occasions that modern research becomes a source of danger to truth 
and science. 

Thus the location of Uddiyana is still to be searched for in Vahga and 
Samatata, which according to Dr. Bhattasali’s most well-considered opinion 
were the centres of culture in Bengal in pre-Muslim times. Although it has 
not been possible to identify Uddiyana in spite of the efforts of the historians 
of Bengal and Assam, the search should by no means be abandoned. Per 
haps the old name has lw;en entirely replaced by a new one, and in that case 
the place will never be recognised for certain in the future without further 
discovery of new and relevant material. But one thing is certain : Uddiyana 
was connected with Vajrayoginl, and who can say that the present village of 
Vajrayoginl in the Vikrampur area is not spreading a mystic veil on the iden- 
tity of the ancient Uddiyana of Tantric fame ? Certainly the name of the 
village is peculiar and demands an explanation. 

I cannot say whether this identification is certain, but I am inclined to 
suggest it as very probable. We have instances where the original place names 
have been obliterated and replaced by the name of the deity installed in the 
locality. In Nepal, for instance, we meet with a similar example, and strange- 
ly enough, connected with the same divinity Vajrayoginl. At Sahku on the 
top of a hill reached by a flight of more than a thousand stairs, there is a 
temple of Vajrayoginl. In 1922 the locality was still known by two names, 
Sahku and Vajrayoginl, although the first was rapidly going out of use. The 
hill where the Svayambliu Caitya was built is now known by the name Simbhu. 
In Bengal, the village where the TarakeSvara temple was built is forgotten, 
and to-day it is known by the name of the deity TarakeSvara. It is well 
known that the Ufliyas know Puri by the name of Jagaflanatha. Examples 
like these can be multiplied. The references in the SMhanamala make it evi- 
dent that tlie four Plfhas, KamakhyaJ Sirihatta, Punjagiri and Uddiya na 
were specially sacred to Vajrayoginl, and, very probably, at all these places 
the deity was installed in a temple. Uddiyana must have received the name 
of Vajrayoginl. because of this temple. At any rate, this small village of 
Vajrayoginl ought to receive careful attention of both historians and explorers. 



THE HOME OF TANTRIC BUDDHISM 


361 


Outside Bengal, people seem to have queer ideas about the Bengalis. 
People are heard to remark that the Bengalis are so very different from others. 
The name of Gaud-Vangta la still excites terror in the mind of the layman, and 
many still believe that all Bengalis are magicians. Further, it is believed 
that the witches of Kamakhya can turn men into small little animals. Docs 
the Tantric Buddhism account for these and make the Bengalis different ? 

Many scholars have remarked that the Vaidya caste is peculiar to Ben- 
gal. This caste is not met with anywhere else. Has it any connection with 
Vajrayana or Tantric Buddhism ? Is Vajrayana in any way responsible for 
the creation of a new caste ? The Yogis, now called Jugis, are indigenous to 
Bengal. To-day they call themselves Nathapanthis— a pantha akin to Vajra- 
yana. How does it happen that the old strongholds of Tantric Buddhism— 
Dacca. Faridpur, Tipperah, Chittagong— are still the strongholds of the mo- 
dern Vaidyas 

These and other problems are there for the clever scholar to investigate, 
but in my mind there is little doubt that Vajrayana originated in Vahga and 
Samatata, and thence travelled to the rest of India. Vajrayana in Bengal 
must have brought in its wake several new and perplexing problems to the 
Hindu society, and it will be most interesting to know how they were solved 
in mediaeval days until the Muslim sword got rid of many of the problems 
altogether including those concerning the distinction between the Buddhist 
and the Hindu. 

Vajrayana is great, but we should know more, and Dr. Majumdar has 
made it easy. 



HISTORICAL PORTRAITS IN BANA’S HARSACARITA* 

• • 

By 

Dr. U. N. GHOSHAL, m.a., ph.~d., f.r.a.s.b. 

* 

In the wide range of his portraits of historical personages Bana is un- 
rivalled by any of his compeers. We have in the Harsacarita living pictures 
of historical personages from bejewelled kings, queens and princes to bark- 
clad ascetics and from polished courtiers to wild foresters. To illustrate this 
point, we may begin with Bana’s charming pen-picture of the child-prince 
Hansa when 4 he could just manage five or six paces with the support of his 
nurse’s finger ’ and ' could just utter a child’s first indistinct cries.’ Illus- 
trative of the superstitions reigning even in high places at this time is the 
reference to the precautions taken to ward off from the precious child 4 the 
evil eye* and the evil spirits. The Prince wore upon his head a mustard 
amulet, his form was stained yellow with goracanu ( scilL a bright yellow 
pigment prepared from the excrements etc. of a cow), his neck was orna- 
mented with a row of tiger’s claws linked with gold. 1 Equally graphic is the 
picture of the boy Bharuji whom his father presented to court at this time for 
serving the little prince. The boy’s coiffure, his ornaments and his carriage 
equally bespoke his high birth. Side-locks of curly hair ( krikapaksaka ) in 
waving tufts ( sikhanda ) adorned his handsome head, lie wore one earring 
of sapphire and another of pearl. A diamond bracelet was bound around 
his forearm. Curved bits of coral were tied to his neck-string. 4 Though still 
a child he bore himself stiffly like a seed of the tree of valour.* 2 

Equally striking but more detailed is the picture of the two youthful 
Malwa princes Kumaragupta and Madhavagupta, as they appeared when 
king Prabhfikaravardhana introduced them to his two sons to serve as lords- 
m-waiting. The elder Prince who was aged about eighteen years had a strik- 
ing physique. He was neither very tall nor very short, and was gifted with a 
hard frame, with slim shanks, thick hard thighs, slender waist, broad chest 
and pendulous arms. Ilis decorations befitting his high rank consisted of a 

* In the above C and T stand for the Har$a-curita of Rapa, translated by E. 
B. Cowell and F. W. Thomas, London, 1897, while Kane stands for the Har$a-charita 
of Ba#abhntta f Uchchhvasas I-IV, edited with an Introduction and Notes by P. 
V. Kane, Bombay, 1st ed. 1918, and Gajendragadkar is an abbreviation for the 
Harshachanta of Banabbatfa, Uchchhvasas IV-VIII, edited with a Sanskrit com- 
mentary ( Bdlabodhim ) by S. D. Gajendragadkar and an Introduction, Notes (cri- 
tical and explanatory) and Appendices by A. B. Gajendragadkar, Poona 1919. 

1. C. and T. pp. 115-16 and Gajendragadkar, Notes, p, 86. 

2. Ibid., pp. 116-17. 



HISTORICAL PORTRAITS IN BAIBA’S IIAR§ACARITA 363 

jewelled bracelet on his left wrist and a jewelled ear-ornament. His bearing 
was marked by graceful motions, downcast eyes and princely nobility. The 
younger brother had his breast anointed with sandal-paste and adorned with 
a necklace. He was as remarkable as his brother for his decorum, prowess 
and other qualities . 3 

It was not, however, always amid such happy surroundings that Biitja 
had occasion to describe royalty. Here is, for instance, a pathetic picture of 
Queen Yasovafi as she issued forth from her apartments on the journey to. 
the funeral pyre. Sire was dressed in vestments of death. Her body was wet 
through recent bath. She was wearing two robes reddish brown with. saffron, 
along with her red veil. Her lower lip was tinged with the deep red of betel. 
A red neck-cord hung between her breasts. Her limbs were red with moist 
saffron paste. A garland of strung flowers hung round her neck and reached 
her feet. She was supported by aged women, attended by great, noblemen 
and followed by aged chamberlains. She was bidding farewell even to birds 
and beasts and embracing the very trees about the palace . 4 

Coming to the great officers of State, we may mention Barra’s striking 
description, drawn no doubt from life, of General Sirhhanada as he appeared 
when addressing Harsa in the Council-chamber about the coming campaign 
against the Gaudas. Stately and tall, stubborn in frame, with straight white 
locks and hanging eyebrow's, with terrible visage brightened by thick white 
moustache, with a long white beard hanging down to his navel, the. general 
bore the weight of his advanced years with ease. A veteran of many wars, 
he wore on his broad chest the scars of numerous wounds received in battle. 

‘ His very voice, deep as the booming of a drum, inspired the. warriors with 
thirst for battle .’ 5 

In the same context B;lna gives an equally vivid description of the ele- 
phant-commander Skandagupta (evidently of an inferior courtly rank) whom 
Harsa summoned to his presence for getting the elephants ready for the com- 
ing campaign. When the king's summons came, he was surrounded by various 
groups of people employed in the capture, tending and training of elephants. 
(Bana’s characterisation of these groups indicates actual experience of this 
arm of warfare. He mentions, besides elephant doctors, people carrying 
uplifted bamboos bedecked with peacock’s tails, elephant riders displaying 
green fodder, superintendents of decoys, rows of forest guards, crowds of 
mahouts displaying leathern figures for practising manoeuvres, messengers 
sent by rangers of elephant forests and so forth). With his stout arms hang- 
ing down to his knees, his full and pendulous lower lip, his long nose, his soft 
and large eyes, his full and broad forehead, his profuse curly dark hair, 
Skandagupta must have presented a striking appearance. Beneath an aspect 


3. C. and T. pp. 120-1. 

S. Ibid., pp. 180-82. 


4, Ibid., pp. 150-51. 



364 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

of indifference he enjoyed an air of command due as much to his own un- 
bending rigidity as to his master’s favour.® 

Another picture of a courtier in lower life is presented to us in the 
person of the chief door-keeper Pariyatra who introduced B&na into the king’s 
presence at the first audience. lie was a tall, fair, broad-chested narrtw- 
waisted man. He wore a white turban and a clean jacket. As the insignia 
of his office he grasped in his left hand a sword with the handle thickly 
studded with pearls and in the right hand his burnished golden staff of office. 
His waist was bound by a girdle ornamented with rubies, he carried on his 
breast a necklace of pearls, he had two jewelled ear-rings . 6 7 8 

In so far as Buna's pictures of ascetics and saints are concerned, we may 
begin with his remarkable sketch of Bhairavacarya as he looked when visit- 
ed by king Puspabhuti one early morning in his hermitage. Punctilious in 
his observance of the daily ritual, he had thus early bathed, presented his 
eightfold offering of flowers and attended to the sacrificial fire. His seat was 
ceremonially pure. He was seated on a tiger’s skin on ground smeared with 
cow-dung and bounded by a line of ashes. His appearance was sufficiently 
distinctive. He was just past fifty-five years and a few white hairs had ap- 
peared on his head. Ilis hair was tied upwards in a lump and was somewhat 
matted. The hair-line of his skull was giving way to baldness. A natural 
frown connected his eye-brows. He had very long eyes, a curved nose, nar- 
row cheeks, prominent teeth, hanging lips and tender-soled feet. His bosom 
was covered with very thick dark hair. Ilis dress and equipment correspond - 
ed to his sectarian ritual. He was wrapped in a dark woollen garment in 
keeping with the colour approved in the Sivite ritualistic works. Ilis broad 
forehead was marked with a line of white ashes. A pair of crystal earrings 
hung from his pendulous ears. He wore a bit of conch-shell on one forearm 
having an iron bracelet and bound with a charm-thread of various herbs. In 
his right hand he shook his rosary. Circling round him was an ascetic’s wrap 
of white hue. He had at his side a bamboo staff with a barb of iron inserted 
at the end.'* 

Equally based on a living type is Buna's striking picture of Bhairava- 
carya’s disciple Tifibha as he looked when first presented to the king with 
a message from his master. His physical appearance was sufficiently im- 
pressive. He was a tall fellow with arms reaching dowr to his knees. 
Though emaciated by living on alms, he appeared to be fat on account of 
the stoutness of his bones. His head was broad, his forehead undulating 
with deep wrinkles, his eyes were round and ruddy, his nose was slightly 
curved, one ear was very pendulous. The* rows of his teeth were prominent. 


6. C. and T„ pp. 189-91 with corr : by Gajendragadkar, Notes, pp. 268 ff. 

7. C. and T„, pp. 49-50 with corr : by Kane, Notes, p. 124. 

8. C. and T„ pp. 263-65. 



HISTORICAL PORTRAITS IN BAIjiA’S HAR$ACARITA 365 

X 

his lip was loose, his jaw elongated by a hanging chin. His dress and equip- 
ment were in keeping with his profession. A red ascetic's scarf hung from 
his shoulder, his upper robe consisted of a tattered rug knotted above his 
heart and stained with red chalk. His right hand grasped a bamboo stool, 
his left held a yokepole resting on his shoulder, to which were attached his 
dirt-scraper and sieve of bamboo bark, his loin-cloth, his alms-bowl, his 
waterpot, his slippers and a bundle of manuscripts.* 

In striking contrast with the description of Bhairavacarya given above 
is Bana’s sketch of the Buddhist: teacher Divakaramitra as seen by Harsa in 
his hermitage in the Vindhya forest. The contrast reflects the difference 
between the cold hard formalism of the Sivitc ritual and the Buddhist spirit 
of universal benevolence. Divakaramitra, as we learn from the context, had 
been a leading Brahmana teacher before he abandoned the Vedas for Bud- 
dhist teaching. The change of creed apparently lent a touch of greater 
earnestness and more cosmopolitan sympathy to the teachers personality 
and character. At the time of Harsa’s visit lie had around him disciples of 
various lands and of the most diverse persuasions. (The exhaustive list 
given by the author which may be consulted in the original, was evidently 
drawn up to emphasise the cosmopolitan character of the teacher’s pupils), 
tn words reflecting the intensely .scholastic atmosphere prevailing in the 
teachers hermitage. Bana tells us that all his disciples were ‘diligently fol- 
lowing their own tenets, pondering, urging objections, raising doubts, resolving 
them, giving etymologies, disputing, studying and explaining/ What is 
more, even the birds and beasts of the hermitage, says the author with fine 
poetical conceit, responded to the Buddhist teaching and religious practices. 
(The striking similarity of the above account with Hieun Tsang’s descrip- 
tion of his experiences at Nalanda further corroborates our view that Baija 
must have drawn his picture from contemporary life). Very characteristic 
of the quietist teaching of Buddhism was the pose of the saint at the time 
of the king’s visit. Upon him waited some tame tigers, near his seat sat 
undisturbed some lion-cubs, his feet were licked by some deer. On his left 
hand was perched a young dove eating wild rice. His right hand poured 
water on a peacock standing near or strewed grains of rice for the ants. The 
very dress and appearance of the saint betokened his humility. He was 
clad in a very soft red garment, his gentle bright eye was bent down in humi- 
lity. He was, as the author sums up in well-chosen words, one 4 whom 
Buddha himself might well approach with reverence, Duty herself might 
worship. Favour itself show favour to, Honour itself honour. Reverence it- 
self revere/ 10 * 

We may, lastly, refer to Baca’s account of the Sahara youth Nirghata 
(Sanscritised no doubt from the vernacular name) whom Harsa met in the 


9. Ibid., p. 86. 


10. C . and T„ pp. 236-37. 



366 


/ B. C. LAW VOLUME 

Vindhya forest, as illustrating the type of aboriginal hillmen inhabiting that 
region down to our own times. With a true eye to the aboriginal . rule of 
relationship through females, the author introduces the youth as the sister’s 
son of a general of the Sabaras. His physical features were distinctive of 
the well-known aboriginal type. His dark forehead was furrowed with an 
involuntary triple frown, his bleared eye with its scanty lashes had a natural 
red lustre, his nose was flat, his lower lip thick, his chin low. his jaws full, 
his forehead and cheek-bones projecting, his neck a little bent down while 
one-half of Iris shoulders stood up. He had of course enormous physical 
strength. His brawny chest, we. are told, was expanded by the constant 
exercise of bending the bow, his pair of arms was long, he had a thin belly 
but prominent navel, his brawny and fleshy thighs contrasted with his thin 
waist. He was of course a famous hunter. Though no mention is made 
of his dress which must have been of the scantiest, his personal get-up and 
ornamentation are described with minute accuracy and correctness in detail. 
His hair, we are told, was tied high above his forehead with a coil of dark 
creeper, he wore a tawny crystal earring which was coloured green with a 
parrot’s wing used for ornament. On his forearm he wore a tin armlet deco- 
rated with white beads; its back was covered with a bundle of roots (sup- 
posed to be an antidote against poisons) which were fastened with bristles 
of boars. Ilis formidable loins were guarded by a sword of which the end 
was anointed with quicksilver and the handle was made with polished horn ; 
its sheath was adorned with spotted skins of snakes. The quiver he wore on 
his back was made of bear's skin and contained arrows with crescent-shaped 
heads. It was wrapped round his body with a spotted leopard’s skin. On 
his left shoulder rested a formidable bow adorned with profuse pigment of 
peacock's gall, the sinews being fastened with tough roots of trees. From 
his stout arms was suspended a dead hare with its head hanging downwards. 
A freshly killed partridge was strung at the extremity of his bow. u The 
author’s acquaintance with the Vindhyan aboriginal type is again illustrated 
in his vivid picture of the Sahara General Matamgaka in the Kadambari . ia 

A keen observer of different contemporary types, Rapa could not but be 
impressed with the regional differences among his countrymen. In a remark- 
able passage prefacing a long list of kings who came to a tragic end through 
overconfidence or carelessness, we are told, ’Thus do notional types vary 
like the dress, features, food and pursuits of countries, village by village, 
town by town, district by district, continent by continent and clime by dime.’ 13 
A striking illustration of this statement is furnished by Rana’s reference to 
the different propitiatory ceremonies resorted to at the time of Prabhakara- 
vardhana’s illness. There we are told of a Dravidian who was preparing to 

11, C. and T., pp. 230-32. 12. Ed. P. L. Vaidya, pp. 29-3L 

13. C. and T„ p. 192. 



HISTORICAL PORTRAITS IN BACA’S HAR§ACARITA 367 

solicit the vampire with the offering of a skull, while an Andhra man was 
holding up his arms like a rampart (or according to another reading, was 
exhibiting the entrails of a sacrificed animal) to conciliate the dreaded 
goddess CandJ , 14 (For purpose of comparison reference may be made to 
the remarkable picture, or rather caricature, of the old Dravida ascetic at 
the temple of Candika in Sana's Kadambari 13 ). 


14. Ibid., p. 135. 

15. Ed. p. L. Vaidya, pp. 226-8. 


VEDIC CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND : A STUDY 
IN THE PRTHVf SUKTA OF THE ATHARVAVEDA 

By 

Dr. VASUDEVA S. AGRAWALA, m.a., ph.d. 

mar qfa: *%stt >3[fno?n: i 

Feelings of attachment and love for the place where one is bom are 
natural in man. This love develops as with the growth of years he begins 
consciously to realist; the importance of the land of his birth for his earthly 
existence. The love for the place may at first be confined to a single village, 
town or district, but by the gradual lapse of time this horizon extends to the 
whole territory which forms the cradle land of all men having a common 
past. 

Patriotism, as the feeling of love for one’s country is called, must have a 
physical material basis to love and work for. It cannot hang in the air on 
the peg of mere idealism and sentiment. 4 The possession of a common 
fatherland is preliminary to all national development, the growth of a com- 
mon language, a people’s literature, common traditions, common culture, 
which all put together have a marked distinctive individuality which should 
be preserved and independently developed as a valuable cultural unit. 1 In 
order that men may evolve a distinctive civilization, culture and religion, it is 
necessary that they should possess some common abode which they can call 
their own. That serves as a nucleus round which gather the formative forces 
which weld together the diverse elements and factors of life directed to one 
common goal. 

The Aryan forefathers were able to evolve a great civilization when they 
permanently settled down in the valleys of the Indus and the Ganges. Here 
they found a physical basis of settlement, a land which they could love and 
worship, and for which they sang immortal songs in praise and reverence. 
These noble utterances have been preserved to us in f he PrthvI Sukta, 
Ka&da XII, Sukta 1 of the Atharvaveda, which embodies some of the finest 
poetry that flowed from the heart of the Vedic singers. The patriotic 
effusions of the Vedic bard bear the characteristic stamp of Indian culture 
and are cast into the distinctive mould *of the Indian religious ideas. The 
motherland is loved not only for its material wealth comprising the botanical, 
zoological and mineral wealth that it contains but also for the moral and 


1. Fundamental Unity in India by Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji, M.A., PH.P. 




VEDIC CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND 369 

spiritual ideals enshrined in the hearts and lives of its noble sons. The poet 
has taken note of both the physical and the spiritual ties that bound the 
people to their land. 


Geographical Unity 

The ancient Sanskrit literature gives evidence to show that the early 
inhabitants of the country had a perception and a consciousness of the 
geographical unity of the land which they had made their own. Their 
geographical horizon unfolds and expands in ever wider circles till it com- 
prises the whole country. Starting from the limited extent of Brahmavarta, 
this consciousness finds expansion into Brahmarsidesa, Madhyadesa and 
Aryavarta between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas and lastly into the sub- 
continent of Bharatavarsa. This last appellation has reference to the 
supreme achievement of some kind of colonisation extending across the vast 
expanse and the entire stretch of the country which was looked upon not 
merely as a geographical unit, but also as a political unit under the sway of 
one king, be he Bharata, A§oka or someone else. As Dr. Mookerji has put 
it : ‘ The territorial synthesis had shown itself into political synthesis '. 
The geographical data furnished in the river-hymn of the Rgveda shows that 
the Aryans at one time knew the Indus with its five tributaries, the Ganges 
and the Jumna. With the occupation of more land the geographical horizon 
extended, and the later works like the Manu-Smrti, the Mahabharata, the 
Puranas, and the Artha-Sastra of Kautilya testify to this expanded consci- 
ousness in respect of the land. The spirit of the iiver-hymn echoed forth 
in the couplet of the Purana in which the poet includes even the names of the 
two southern rivers, the Godavari and the Kaveri. The subsequent location 
of the seven cities, the seven mountains, the twelve Sivapilhas, Devipithas 
and the Vispu-pTthas, affords proof that belief in the territorial unity of the 
country had asserted itself in the popular mind on quite a broad basis. The 
diverse elements appertaining to the land were gradually fusing and merging 
in one common bond, the basis of which was the common country. This 
feeling, though not always apparent, made itself manifest when questions 
involving the Indians and the non-Indian foreign tribes touched the society 
in some vital manner. 


Material Adoration 

The popular mind develops love for a thing in terms of material advant- 
age. The abstract notions of religion, philosophy or high moral principles 
do not go far in the mass mind. The Vedic poet expresses his love for the 
land by appreciating the value of it£ material contents. He builds on this 
solid basis and gradually rises higher into the domain of finer thoughts and 
the higher things which affect our religious and spritual being. Accordingly 
he feels inspired at the sight of the ‘health-giving dawn which brings new 
life and vigour with the rising sun 
25 



370 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

verse 15), the ever-flowing fountains of crystal water, high -peaked snow-dad 
mountains and broad plains, the botanical/ mineral, agricultural, and zoolo- 
gical wealth. He bursts forth into admiration for the beauty of the wonder- 
ful cycle of the six seasons with their regularly recurring days and - nights. 
The importance of good rivers is recognised as great for the material pros- 
perity of any country, much more so for an agricultural country like India. 
‘ In her the streams distribute themselves in all directions, flowing uniformly 
without pause or interruption. This land of plenteous streams, may she 
sprinkle her radiant lustre over us.* srsitnd » 

m » verse 9). 

The snow-peaked hills which act as reservoirs to feed these rivers and 
the forests which abound in innumerable plants and herbs are possessions 
of inestimable value in which the people of a country take just pride. The 
Land is worshipped as the mother of many herbs ( n ) 

andihe repository of numerous potent drugs (ifHFfcfl afasftqr fsR$, verse 2). 

Wealth in cattle is always considered a great asset and a veritable 
national wealth for any country. The poet rejoices to see the Land abound- 
ing in a variety of cattle useful for agriculture and dairy-farming, for sup- 
plying us with milk and serving as means of conveyance «PI*ra fagT, 

verse 5). 

The stock of animals in a country breeds on the soil in a very real 
sense like the race of human beings. The poet realises that the animals 
born in this land are marked by the characteristic ‘smell’ of the soil, and 
carry the stamp or the genus loci of the land of their birth ( 

31% *1%? gfefj, vf;rse 25 ). 

As for the domestic animals, so tlie poet has a thought for the wil'd 
beasts of the forests : although ferocious and dangerous they are none the 
less ‘ children of the soil.’ He prays : ‘ motherland, may you protect us 
from the man-eating lion and tlie tiger, the jackal and the wolf, the stinging 
scorpion and the creeping reptile.’ 

The sight of the wide-stretching ploughed fields producing com ( zp^n- 
verse 3). the increaser of vitality and giver of health 
(*4 fosRfaswd, verse 29), of paddy and barley in special forming the 
chief food of the people (q^nrrs? verse 42), profoundly touched the 

poet’s heart and moved him into a joyou3 song of love for the land. 

Again, his mind is lost in gratitude when he thinks of the enormous 
mineral wealth secreted in the bowels of his land, gold and jewels lying un- 
exposed in the coffers of Hiranya-Vaksa, the gold-breasted mother. Who 
is there, even the most materialistic of men, that will not be moved with 
affection for the mother-land that holds out such temptations for her sons? 

Religious Basis of Love for the Fatherland 

Although the temptations of material gain help in strengthening one’s 



VEDIC CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND 371 

love for his country, that love will not endure unless it be established on 
sound religious basis and actuated by higher principles of duty. Patriotism 
which is not enshrined on this noble pedestal of a universal moral order will 
only bring the Motherland down. None can afford to violate or depart 
from the moral law for any great length of time, either in an individual 
capacity or on a social scale. Our effort for the country’s prosperity must 
conform to moral laws. In the very first Mantra the poet has given expres- 
sion to this sentiment : * Truth, rigorous u ysal Law, dedicated Life, 
Penances, Knowledge and Sacrifice — these th ustain the Earth.’ 

flc* rPTt ST5PTH: Wlf'Ci I verse 1. 

Mere physical forms are dead, inert masses of matter. To inculcate a 
true bond of union with the spirit of the motherland we should practise in 
life and thought higher virtues and purer motives. Truth should there be 
in the hearts of all the sons of the mother and their actions should bear a 
clear stamp of truth. One cannot aggrandise the motherland by recourse 
to untruth, for truth is greater and must in the end reveal itself. The poet 
next thinks of the immutable Supreme Law that governs both matter and 
man and is the surest foundation to build upon as it will neither bend nor 
relax. Dlk$a, or consecrated action, is the third virtue that gives value to 
our lives in respect of the country. A fickle-minded person will fly from 
difficulties ; only one of determined thoughts will persevere to the end. 
Tapas or disciplined life and Brahma or true knowledge are surer founda- 
tions to uphold the country’ firmer than anything else. The Earth verily pros- 
pects with true knowledge. 

The idea of Yajfia represents the great law of sacrifice, both in the in- 
dividual and in the cosmos. It is a characteristically Indian conception 
involving a communion between gods and men, a synthesis of the human and 
divine worlds as affecting a particular action. It presumes that the visible 
and the invisible worlds, gods and men, work together for the prosperity of 
the Land. Kalidasa amplifies the same idea when he writes that the king 
taxed the land for performing Yajfias, and Indra poured rain so that com 
might grow ; in this way the two sustained the two worlds by the reciprocity 
of their resources : 

5^5 *ri h fan t i 126 > 

Tlie Gita also repeats the age-old Vedic idea : From food are bom the 

creatures, rain causes production of food, rain is the outcome of sacrifice, 
and sacrifice arises out of action (III. 14). Manu also supports this cyclic, 
law : ‘ The oblations thrown into the fire reach the sun, the sun causes rain, 
from rain grows food, and food sustains all beings.’ (III. 76). 

The idea of Yajiia dominates the ancient Vedic literature, implying the 
Aryan point of view that the material welfare of man depends upon making 
friends with the different forces of nature. This Cakra or eternal cycle of 



372 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


propitiating divine powers, and of in turn being propitiated by them, revolves 
on to mutual advantage and is an important factor in sustaining this Earth. 
The connecting link between gods and men is fire, Havyavah, as it carries 
the offerings of men to gods. This link is present everywhere, ready to 
receive the mite of our selfless offering at each place and time. It is in earth, 
in plants, in waters, in stones, in men, in cattle, and in the rays of the sun. 

( jtosfN Bwrcl 1 3nrrc?rT: 11 verse 19- 

Another Mantra expresses the idea that the gods forever protect the land, 
without sleep and without falter ( qi ^rr gfNfasw*., 

verse 18), and that great lord Indra made it free from enemies because 
he thought it to be his own ( qr verse 10). 

The poet then soars to a higher theme, a still finer and nobler 
conception of the motherland. She is the object of his love and worship, 
not only because she helps in his religious performances, but because above 
all she is the source of that immortal inspiration which has as its fountain- 
head the highest Being. Sons of the mother living thousands of years before 
were moved with the same divine spark of love for her as is exjierienced by 
the generations of today. Love of the land is an immortal virtue tliat does 
not grow less or fade with transitory objects. Men may come and men may 
go, yet the heart of the mother and the hearts of her sons remain fresh for 
ever, because the source from which each draws its inspiration exists etern- 
ally in the cosmic mind or in the highest heaven over us. The inspiration is 
felt alike in the midst of men and in wilderness. The vitality, unity and 
splendour in the Rostra originate from the heart of the motherland : 

2ft I 3^7! 

sfsnarr: l W tfSt ll verse 8. 

‘ She who was in the beginning submerged under the sea, whom the gods dis- 
covered with their prayers, whose heart, enveloped in truth and immortal, 
is established in the highest heaven, may that Earth bestow power and autho- 
rity on the Supreme Rashtra ’ (verse 8). 

The People and their relation to the Land 

The existence of a living race in a country attached to its mountains and 
rivers, sandy wastes and watered plains is a prerequisite of history. The 
people mingle with the earth the feelings of their heart as they find the 
bounties of nature spread out before them for unrestricted use and undis- 
puted enjoyment. So tire poet first viewed the Land as one exdusivdy 
meant for the Aryans, the Dasyus finding no place in her ( tpj 
verse: 37). She chose Indra of the Aryans in preference to Vftra of the 
Anaryans. The singer visualises before him the picture of an India in which 
Aryan gods are worshipped, Aryan rites and ceremonies performed, and 



VEDIC CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND 


373 


the Aryan culture predominates, — that is, a veritable Aryavarta both 
in letter and in spirit. He visualises the descendants of Manu settled 
on the Land without over-crowding ( apjqpj verse 2) 

and prays : ‘ The extent of the Land should be stretched far and 
wide for us’. 35 «T: verse 1). ‘May we continue 

to occupy a strong central position in the Land.’ ( rpaf gfafa qw qwf Hig 
qt vt verse 12). ‘ May we be established on unfaltering feet, and live 

unconquered, unwounded and unharmed.’ qqvqr qr sqf*P*?fe 

ajeji, verse 28 ; 3 T^rats«mi verse 11 >• Proudly does 

his heart, as that of a son of the motherland, pulsate at being conscious of the 
rare privilege of being one with the pioneers in the great and honourable 
process of the first land-taking or land-settlement : 

3T?UTfJT qm I spftqrsfar ftajiqif SlI^reRlf II 

‘Mighty am 1, superior on this motherland of mine. Conquering am 
I, all conquering, completely conquering in every direction.’ (verse 54) 
In this elevated consciousness does the great truth reveal itself to him : 

HRTI 3^1 sfqsqi: I (verse 12) 

‘ Earth is the Mother ; I am the son of the Motherland.’ 

India of the poet had been the cradle of the Aryan race who for count- 
less ages had been in possession of her. * She is the mistress of our past and 
future’ (ar qj i£l$q qsqpq qfift, verse 1). In the days of yore did 
our ancestors defeat the Asuras here aijd achieve most wonderful things ; 
( q^qf 33 qqsfqj q*qt '' erse 5 )- 11 ‘ s frankly 

admitted in this all-comprehensive hymn that the land is the home of diverse 
races, all enjoying equal liberties and rights, so that the diversity instead 
of proving to be a source of weakness only conduces to the might and soli- 
darity of the nation. The unifying influence of the potent vibrations that 
arise out of the motherland is enormous ( ^3^33%, verse 18) 
and all differences of colour and speech without being the cause of mutual 
discord and animosity lose themselves in the concert of these forces. ‘ The 
land bears upon her, people speaking different languages, following dif- 
ferent customs according to regional variations. She yields her produce to all 
without distinction in thousand-fold streams like an unfailing, unresisting milch 
cow : 

3isr qgqt faqratf qrar qqfa sfcqt qm^ 1 
Apt qrer 11 

This unity and equality is emphasized in a very real manner when the poet 
speaks of the roads and high-ways of traffic being intended for the use of both 
the good and the evil, in perfect safety and freedom from the haunts of high- 
waymen and thieves ^ % qanq f q$ql 3PTPRT q*3J3W<T 

q ft quftsWdHiq . u verse 47). These blessings of ordered, just and peaceful 



374 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


life evoked the grateful prayer from a heart overflowing with devotion : 
“ May my sight not fail me with advancing age, so that I could have a 
vision of you O Motherland for many more years to come with the sun as 
my friend.” 


The Eternal Mother. 

The Prithvl-Sukta puts before us the Vedic conception of the love of 
country. Patriotism according to it combines religion, philosophy, mora- 
lity and everything else that is based on high principles of the spirit. It is 
here presented as a spiritual necessity, a thing indispensable for the comple- 
tion of the law of the spirit. The Hindus lay equal emphasis on both matter 
and spirit, the outer and the inner man, the world celestial and the world 
human. He can view all things only in a spirit of friendliness with heaven 
that is in strict accordance with the laws of religion and morality. The 
Hindu mind is accustomed to think of earthly prosperity as bound by moral 
and religious laws. The poet while appreciating the beauty that is in the 
material splendour of the land, penetrates to the essential truth or Dharma 
that upholds her. ‘ She is supported by Dharma ( vpftari ^\ p verse 17). 
and fixed on the stable rock of Truth, Law, Discipline, Knowledge and 
Sacrifice: fSSTgat rret SRI iru sMf W 3 RT, 1 st mantra). 

Well established on this steady foundation ( 'JdT, verse 26), the 
Motherland lives for all times ( ypr ) .’ She was there before the Aryans 
came to be in possession of her, and she shall ever be there even if the 
whole race were to forget her. Prior to her discovery both in the moral 
and material spheres she was submerged beneath the waters of the ocean 
verse 8 ) as a big mass of dust ( a fagi q ; , verse ). 
But when the great Rsis concentrated upon her with their miraculous powers 
of thought, she assumed form and became manifest as a loving, inspiring 
mother : (Iqi wnfSff Wf verse 8 ; verse, 59). 

This form is revealed only to those who are Matrman, i.e. whose hearts are 
consecrated with the true devotion due to a mother. 

A living reality for those who realise her, she is otherwise a mere gyrat- 
ing orb devoid of the lustrous beauty which mind alone creates. The man 
who has obtained this wondrous vision of the motherland is her true son, 
worthy of the title Matrman. His own land as compared to the vast globe 
shdtered under the sea is very small, but she is for him the epitome of the 
world, the whole Pjthvi. He loves her without being exclusive, his heart 
opens out in wide embrace to welcome all living beings. 

Besides discerning the spiritual basis of patriotism, the beautiful outer 
form of the Motherland is a thing to be praised and adored for its own sake. 
The charm of the concrete form is in no way less fascinating to the poet He 
loves his country with a deep passionate love, singing the praises of her 
mountains ( 353 ; ) f rivers ( 533 ; plains ( uj, verse 2 ), forests, animals 



VEDIC CONCEPTION OF THE MOTHERLAND 


375 


and minerals. These things invest the Land with beauty and value. Fixed 
permanently in, their places, they provide us with contour lines for making 
immortal the traditions of our glorious past and for giving concrete touch 
to our historical associations. 

The poet next speaks of the Land as the supplier of all our wants. Our 
food, water and every other article of human necessity comes out of the land, 
and therefore she is the natural object of devotion, not only of those who 
can take a philosophic view of things, but also of those whom material temp- 
tations alone can coax into love. The motherland is worthy of our choicest 
epithets, she is fojipn and }«(ssjvnqq, the container and sustainer of all. 
Again the Land is thought of as the nursery of the race. It is the home of 
many tribes ( qsr HH3T: verse 15) speaking different tongues following 
different customs ( sr fW5rHtu§>JT fofRH qHfqiforr verse 45). 

but all enjoying equal right of debate in assemblies, gatherings and councils 
qr: H*lf arfSRjpnn \ % gfikfq&g =qf5 % I verse 56). The highways 
are spoken of as thoroughfares thrown open for public use, without 
restriction and distinction ( q % qrq-Rt q§qt 3fqRRp., ^ 

verse 47). Every son of the mother is equally dear to her; she has to be 
the last resting place, both of the good and the evil, ( fqsicfr 
faqq firing:, verse 48). 

This represents the essence and the highest ideal of tolerance prescribed 
for civic life. Its practice resulted in phenomenal amity between the diverse 
elements constituting the body-politic of the Hindu society. The different 
forces were welded together into a wide social system the members of which 
closed up their ranks in peace and in war and with one battle cry of beating 
drums they advanced, the descendants of Ila and the descendants of Manu, 
against a common foe. qwwiw^t TOlt |^T:, ver se 41.) 

The motherland is also considered worthy of adoration as the place 
where our religious performances are carried out, the seat of resplendent 
national altars and sacrificial stakes, the abode where the thread of worship 
is spun out : 

q?qt ^ qfczstfar yp qf q*qt q?r crr! frwrnr: i 

qwi *ftq^ gw anfpqr g^nq- 1 ar qf H.M'fqs&nqi n 

verse 13 

This is a picture of the characteristic Vedic society, a cross-section from an 
age when Yajfia was the nucleus of social, religious and intellectual expression. 

Finally we may say that the land is the mother of all beings, she is verily 
the great mother — Magna Mater ( yfjff qpq ) t the giver of all that is wanted 
for the mind, body and soul. Only those who cherish such worthy feelings 
can love the Land with upright consciousness of her true greatness. Pure 
devotion, selfless and true spirit of service are pre-requisites of affection 
due to a mother. Those who have them they alone can serve the mother- 



376 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


land. She made herself manifest for those who have this feeling. A true son 
wants that others also should render worship to his mother like him, and so a 
true patriot refrains from speaking or thinking ill of other countries. To those 
who have the eye of discernment the land is a spiritual entity ; to others it 
is a mere clod of earth, without inspiration, without charm, without life. As 
the poet puts it in his own inimitable way : 4 O Earth, thy smell permeates 
every man and woman, the youth and the maiden, the Gandharvas and the 
Apsaras : make me fragrant with that smell.’ (Verses 24, 25). 

We have seen how the Vedic poet starting from the appreciation of the 
natural scenery of the Land described her as the supplier of material wants, 
(he abode of his religion, the cradle of his race and finally the inspiring mo- 
ther of his countrymen. Love based on gross earthly things can disappear 
with the loss of those things. If any body were to love his country because 
it supplied him with wealth, that love would cease with his poverty. But 
patriotism rooted in the values of the spirit lasts much longer. Tagovc has 
said in a kindred strain : 

44 1 love India, not because I cultivate the idolatry of geography, not 
because I have had the chance of being born in her soil, but because she has 
saved through tumultuous ages the living words that have issued from the 
illumined consciousness of her great sons, Brahma is 

Truth, Brahma is Wisdom, Brahma is infinite.” 

When in moments of spiritual exaltation gross worldly possessions cease 
to interest us, and material values no longer have their attraction, then also 
love of the Land waxes deeper and gains inspiration from our innermost 
ennobling thoughts. That is the sign of the higher culture of the soul. We 
then feel : May our Land, herself prospering, make us also prosper : 

«t =fr #i$rog$*nsn ii 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 
By 

Mr. A. F. M. ABDUL ALI, m.a., k.r.a.s.b. 

One very striking fact about the history of paper making in Nepal is the 
high degree of technical excellence achieved in it by the country at a remark- 
ably early age. At a time when Euroi>e was raking her brain to iind out the 
secrets of cheap paper with a view to meeting the growing demand for it 
among the civilised nations, Nepal had already learnt the art of transforming 
wood-pulp into paper and was flooding the Gangetic valley with an extensive 
supply of a very cheap writing material. 

It is not easy to answer the question as to how and when the art of 
paper making was introduced in Nepal. Those in whose opinion the art 
was brought to India by the Mughals are inclined in favour of fixing a post 
Mughal date lor this event. But there are certain difficulties in the way of 
accepting this theory. The researches of Sir Aurel Stein have definitely esta- 
blished that the industry was in a flourishing state in China and Central Asia 
as early as the 2nd century u.c. 1 Keeping, as India did in very intimate 
contact with these places, it seems highly unlikely that she could be com- 
pletely ignorant of the art. There is one piece of positive evidence which 
shows that paper was in vogue in India long before the arrival of the Mughals. 
A 4 letter-writer * by king Bhoja of Dhara proves its use in the Malaya country 
at least as early as the 11th century.- The earliest Ms. found in India cannot 
be dated later than a.d. 1223-4.'* Even assuming the theory of ‘Mughal 
origin * as true it will be difficult to prove any direct connexion between the 
Nepal papier and the Mughal Court. The special process by which the 
Nepalese produced their paper seems to have borne so little affinity to that 
followed in Kashmir and the Punjab, the two places where imperial patro- 
nage bore fruit, that it will be more to the point to trace the source of the 
Nepalese technique elsewhere than in the Delhi Court. 

Is it not plausible that she derived her art directly from any outside 
people? We need only look at the peculiar ethnical, physiographical and 
political circumstances which determined the cause of her history and we 
shall cease to be struck by the suggestion. Ethnically and temperamentally 

L The oldest existing paper found by Stein is in the form of State-documents 
relating to the occurrences in the years 21-137 A.D. and apparently contemporary 
with the latest of these events. (Vide * Invention of Printing' by Carter, p. 96). 

2. R. L. Mitra’s Notes, Gough's papers 16. 

3. Buhler— Catalogue of MSS. from Gujarat etc. 1. 238 no. 147. 



376 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


her people bears a closer resemblance to the Chinese and the Central Asiatic 
races rather than Indians, and her religion and arts bear deep Chinese and 
Central Asiatic impresses. Poised on natural bastions of the Himalayas, 
entered only by a few tortuous mountain passes, Nepal remained untouched 
by the main current of events that shaped the general history of India. But 
forming the southern extremity of a natural thoroughfare that penetrates into 
the heart of China, she could not maintain her isolation from that country, 
and to the constant intercourse Iwith China must be attributed the general 
character of Nepalese arts and crafts. We have it from history that the 
establishment of Buddhism in China almost synchronised with its decline in 
India. It is rally natural that Buddhist Nepal turned to the celestial Empire 
for religious and aesthetic inspiration. The succeeding centuries tended still 
further to narrow the intercourse between the valley and the Hindustan, until 
finally in 1204 a.d. the disused doorway was hermetically sealed by the 
Muslim conquest of Bengal and Bihar. From this time, religiously and 
aesthetically Nepal ceased to have any sympathies with India and became 
more closely attached to China. Must we then wonder if it be suggested 
that it was from China that paper made its way into Nepal ? Strangely 
enough Mr. B. H. Hodgson whose writings on Nepal may be: regarded as 
authentic is inclined to favour this view. ‘ T conjecture,’ he says in his ac- 
count of the Nepalese paper, * that the art of paper-making was got by the 
Cis-Himalayan Bhoteahs via. Lhasa from China,* a paper of the very same 
sort being manufactured at Lhasa : and most of the useful arts of these re- 
gions having flowed upon them through Tibet front China : and not front 
Hindustan.’ 

The same writer is of the opinion that the industry was established in 
Nepal sometime during the 14th century. The reason which encouraged him 
to form this opinion may be summed up in his own words. Writing about 
1831, he remarks “the Nepalese say that any of their books now existent 
which is made of palmyra leaves, may be safely pronounced on that account 
to be 500 years old : whence we may, perhaps, infer that the paper manufac- 
ture was founded about that time.’’ 0 But the fallacy in Mr. Hodgson’s argu- 
ment consists in his failure to recognise the possibility of the vogue of both 
palmyra leaf and paper at one and the same time. It is a well-known fact 
that the introduction of paper did not necessitate the disappearance of the 
palm-leaf from the field of writing. So the existence of a palm leaf Ms. at 
a certain date does not preclude the possibility of paper remaining in use 
before that date Moreover, assuming the. theory of the Chinese origin of 
the Nepal paper to be true, it will be reasonable to place thei foundation of 
the art rather in a period in which points of contact between China and Nepal 


4. Pol. O. C. ^3 Jany. 1832 no. 19. 

5. Pol. O. C. See supra. 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 


379 


were many and intimate than the 14th century when intercourse between 
the two countries had lost all its intensity. In view of the above fact we 
shall be quite justified in assigning the introduction of the industry some- 
where between the 7th and the 9th centuries, the very period when Chinese 
influences impressed themselves most deeply on Nepalese culture and civi- 
lisation. 

We are however almost in the dark about the early history of the in- 
dustry. Dr. Campbell who resided in Nepal for considerable time asserts in 
one of his letters® written in 1837 that the local Pandits and other persons in 
tire habit of sacred writings assured him that “copies of books made on 
preserved Nepal paper, 400 years ago were still extant ; and that the materia] 
was in perfect preservation.” If any credence can be given to this, it must 
be admitted that thd industry of paper making was in a thriving condition 
in the 15th century. Even if we dismiss this piece of evidence as mere here- 
say account, we cannot possibly treat in the same way a testimony offered 
by Dr. Campbell himself. He refers to a Sanskrit work which he inspected, 
the date of transcription of which was Sambat 1744 corresponding to a.d. 
1687, and attests that it was in a perfect state of preservation, “ having all the 
time withstood the ravages of insects and the wear and tear of use.” 6 7 8 This 
proves conclusively that the Nepalese had attained a very high degree of 
excellence in the art of paper-making at least as early as the 17th century. On 
the condition of the industry in the 19th century, contemporary records of the 
Foreign and Political Department yield very interesting information. Writing 
in December 1831, Mr. B. H. Hodgson remarks “the paper of Nepal is very 
cheap and can be had in large quantities. As ordinarily prepared it is 
smooth enough to write on and it is from the uncommon toughness of the 
fibre of the plant which yields the material for making it, as well as from 
the little injury 1 done to the texture of the fibre in the process of manufac- 
ture, as firm and durable as parchment. The manufactured paper of Nepal 
is, for office records incomparably better than any Indian paper being as 
strong and durable as leather and almost quite smooth to write upon.”* Dr. 
Campbdl fully endorses Mr. Hodgson’s opinion in one of his letters to Mr. 
T. C. Scott, Deputy Secretary to Government (dated Nov. 15. 1837) . He 
says : “ the fibre of Nepal paper is so tough that a sheet doubled on itself can 
scarcely be torn with the fingers. The paper is so pliable, elastic and durable 
that it does not wear at the folds during twenty years ; whereas English 
paper, especially, when eight or ten sheets are folded into one packet, 
does not stand keeping in this state uninjured for more than four or five years. 
I have now before me some record^ of this office, kept on Nepal paper of 
1817 , as fresh at the folds, as even at the edges, and in every particular as 


6. Transaction of the Agri Horticultural Society, Vol. V. 

7. Transaction of Agri Horticultural Society, Vol. V. 

8. Pol. O. C See supra. 



380 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


undamaged as the newest sheet of papers to be had at Cathmandu. There 
are other records of the same date on English foolscap, which have been simi- 
larly lodged and looked after, the edges of which are completely worn through. 
A period of twenty years, however, is nothing to boast of in estimating the 
comparative durability of materials for public records, and far less is it worth 
mentioning in enumeration of the qualities of the Nepal paper. The natives 
of this country (Nepal) universally assert that the paper remains for 300 or 
400 years unscathed by time or the ravages of insects. 1 believe that the 
Nepal paper may be considered as a safe material for committing records to 
for at least 100 years ; and probably, for twice that time. . . As to the rela- 
tive fitness of the Nepal paper for all office and stationery purposes, as well 
as parcel packing, box papering and every other purpose requiring durability, 
hardness of fibre, and exemption from the attacks of insects, there cannot, l 
believe, be a moment’s doubt, that the Nepal paper is an incomparably 
superior article not only to Indian but to any other known paper." 9 Dr. Roylc 
expresses the opinion that tins paper was remarkable for both its toughness 
and smoothness. Some of it being sent to England in tho form of bricks of 
half-stuff previous to the year 1829 was made into paper by hand. An 
engraver to whom it was given for trial is said to have stated that ‘ it afforded 
finer impressions than any English made paper, and nearly as good as the 
fine Chinese paper which is employed for what are called Indian paper- 
proofs.* 10 

The paper was generally manufactured from the inner barks of the 
species of Daphne. The plant most evidently used was Daphne cannabina, 
but it appears that other members or species of the same genus like Daphne 
involucrata, Daphne mezereum, Daphne oleoides etc. were also in use. Dr. 
Gimlelte in his account of paper making names another plant named Edge- 
worthia gardneri Meissn. and is of the opinion that the paper made from that 
plant is superior to that from Daphne cannabina. The figures of analysis 
published by Messrs. Gross Beran and King regarding Edgeworthia seems 
to confirm this view in a remarkable manner. Their analysis is as follows • 
Moisture 13.6 p.c., ash. 3.9 ; loss by hydrolysis for 5 minutes in Soda 
alkali 21.6 ; for one hour 34.7 ; amount of cellulose 58.5 p.c.; mercerising 
16.5 p.c. increase of weight on nitration 126 ; loss by acid purification 8.3 ; 
amount of carbon 41.8 p.c. These chemists however do not supply us with 
a similar analysis of the Daphne plant though they place it at the bottom of 
the list of Indian plants, since it possesses in their opinion the lowest amount 
of cellulose namely 22.3 p.c. li But a discussion of the relative merits of 
the two plants is not possible since we h^ve the complete figures in one case. 

9. Transaction of Agri-Horticultural Society, Vol. V. 

10. The Fibrous Plants of India by Dr. J. Forbes Royle, M.D., F.R.S. (1855), 
p. 311. 

11. Dictionary of Economic Products, Vol. Ill, pp. 20-26. 



381 


THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 

It is however to be noted that practical experience is in direct opposition to 
the verdict of the chemists that percentage of cellulose is the only safe crite- 
rion of the merits of a fibre as being used as a paper-material. There seems 
to be little room for doubt that the Daphne species in many respects are the 
best of Indian paper-materials, and it will not be reasonable to disregard this 
fact simply because the cellulose theory encourages us to hold a contrary 
view. It is not moreover certain that the chemical process by which the 
properties of the Dalphne fibre was examined was highly satisfactory. It 
is not improbable that treatment in a strong boiling alkali and under high 
pressure removed from the fibre those very properties which were essential to 
its strength as paper-material. This surmise gains additional strength when 
we consider the fact that the process by which tlie liill-tribes manufacture 
their Daphne paper is characterised by the very slight amount of alkali 
necessary to produce the pulp. A crude alkaline ash, with the boiling con- 
ducted for only half an hour and in an open vessel is all that is necessary. 12 

An attempt has been made to explain this riddle by holding that past 
writers who ascribed the high merits of the Nepal paper to Daphne cannabina 
were all in error as to the material actually used for the paper. 12 It may 
not be improbable that Edgeworthic gardneri, about the merits of which 
there is no difference of opinion, was the plant which has always been used 
for the manufacture of this paper. But while admitting that the finest varie- 
ties of the Nepal paper may have been made from this plant, we fail to see 
how this plant which is of comparatively rare growth than Daphnes alone could 
have yielded the total quantity of paper needed by the Gangctic valley and 
the hill territories. This plant is found only in Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan and 
Manipur and only between the altitudes of 4,000 and 9,000 feet whereas the 
Daphne cannabina may be found everywhere on the Himalaya from the 
Indus to Bhutan and between altitudes of 3,000 to 10,000 feet, as well as on 
the Khasia and the Naga Hills. 11 

The contributor of the article on paper in the Encyclopaedia Britannica 
(11th Edition ) offers three tests as to the usefulness of a plant for good white 
paper viz : (I) the strength and elasticity of its fibres, (2) the proportion 
of cellular tissue contained in them, (3) the ease with which this can be 
freed from the encrusting and inter-cellular matters. There may be some 
doubt as to the successful application of the second test to the Daphne plant. 
But all ^ writers agree in expressing their complete satisfaction so far as the 
two other conditions are concerned. Dr. Clt ghom is of the opinion that the 
fibre is capable of being cleaned of woody integument and epidermis so easily 
that even women and boys can manage the manipulation. The same writer 

12. Dictionary of Economic Products Vol. 111. p. 23. 

13. Ibid. p. 24. 

14. Brandies — For. Floras pp. 386, 577. 

Gamble— Catalogue of trees, shrubs', and climbers of Darjeeling, p. 67. 



382 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

p ronounces the paper yielded by the fibre to be; not only * strong ’ but also 
‘ supple ’, which can be explained by the strength and suppleness of the fibre 
itself. 13 'It (the Daphne fibre) is of such tenacity ’ says he ‘that the paper 
can be made very thin and yet of surprising strength and durability.* 

But evidence of a more positive nature can be adduced in support of the 
view that Daphne was actually used as paper material. Dr. Campbell used 
this fibre in his experimental paper-factory at Darjeeling, and found it quite 
satisfactory. Dr. George Watt in his article on the Nepal Paper Plant 
states that some 40 miles north of Simla he came across a party ' carrying 
loads of Daphne bark and was told that it was being carried to the east 
where it was made into paper.' 16 The word ‘ East ’ evidently refers to Nepal. 
That the bark above mentioned was of the Daphne plant and not of Edge- 
tvorthia gardtteri may be easily inferred from the fact that the latter flora 
does not grow west of Nepal. The statement thus establishes beyond doubt 
the extensive use of the Daphne fibre for the manufacture of paper. If 
Mr. Baden Powell is to be believed, some samples of Daphne fibre were 
sent to Europe and a fine letter paper admirably suited for foreign post was 
prepared from them. 17 Writing in 1911 Dr. Daniel Wright and Major 
General Henry Wylie, C. S. I. observe that paper made of the inner bark of 
the Daphne plant was one of the principal manufactures of Nepal about that 
time. 18 

What exactly the original process of paper-making in Nepal was cannot 
be definitely known. But the letter of Mr. Hodgson already referred to 
contains a very interesting account of the method widely pursued in the 19th 
century which we may be permitted to reproduce below : — 

For the manufacture of the Nepalese paper, the following implements 
are necessary, but a very rude construction of them suffices for the end in 
view. 

1st. A stone mortar, of shallow and wide cavity, or a large Mock of 
stone, slightly, but smoothly excavated. 

2nd. A mallet or pestle of hard wood, such as oak, and size proportioned 
to the mortar, and to the quantity of boiled rind of the paper plant which 
it is desired to pound into pulp. 

3rd. A basket of close wicker work, to put the asbos in and through 
which water will pass, only drop by drop. 

4th. An earthern vessel or receiver, to receive the juice of the ashes 
after they have been watered. 


15. Handbook of the Manufactures and Arts of the Punjab, Vol. Ill, p. 80. 

16. Dictionary of the Fconomic Products of India, Vol. Ill, p. 22. 

17. Baderi-Powell, p. 82. 

18. Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th edition, p. 380. 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAI. 


383 


5th. A metallic open-mouthed pot, to boil the rind of the plant in. 
It may be of iron, or copper, or brass, indifferently ; an earthen one would 
hardly bear the requisite degree of fire. 

6th. A sieve, the reticulation of the bottom of which is wide and open, 
so as to let all the pulp pass through it, save only the lumpy parts of it. 

7th. A frame, with stout wooden-sides, so that it will float well in 
water, and with a bottom of cloth, only so porous, that the meshes of it will 
stay all the pulp, even when dilated and diffused in water ; but will let the water 
pass off, when the frame is raised out of the cistern ; the operator must also 
have tile command of a cistern of clear water, plenty of fire-wood, ashes 
of oak (though 1 fancy other ashes might answer as well) a fire-place, 
however rude, and lastly, a sufficient quantity of slips; of the inner bark of 
the paper tree, such as is peeled off the plant by the paper-makers, who 
commonly use tire peelings when fresh from the plant ; but that is not indis- 
pensable. With these “ appliances and means to boot,’’' suppose you take 
lour seers of ashes of oak ; put them into the basket above mentioned, 
place the earthen receiver or vessel beneath the basket, and then gradually 
pour five seers of clear water upon the ashes, and let the water drip slowly 
through the ashes, and fall into the receiver. This juice of ashes must be 
strong, or a dark like red colour, and in quantity about 2 lbs. and if the 
fust filtering yield not such a produce, pass the juice through the ashes a 
second time. Next, pour this extract of ashes into the metal pot, already 
described and boil the extract ; and so soon as it begins to boil, throw into 
it as many slips or peelings of the inner bark of the paper plant as you can 
easily grasp ; each slip being about a cubit long, and an inch wide ; (in 
fact, the quantity of the slip of bark should be to the quantity of juice of 
ashes, such that the former shall float freely in the latter, and that the 
juice shall not be absorbed and evaporated with less than half an hour’s 
boiling). Boil the slip for about half an hour, at the expiration of which 
time the juice will be nearly absorbed, and the slip quite soft. Then take 
the softened slip and put them into the stone mortar, and beat them with 
the oaken mallets, till they are reduced to a homogeneous or uniform pulp, 
like so much dough* Take this pulp, put it into any wide-mouthed vessel, 
add a little pure water to it, and chum it with a wooden instrument film 
a chocolate mill, for ten minutes, or until it loses all stringiness, and will 
spread itself out, when shaken about under water. Next take as mudi 
of this prepared pulp as will cover your paper frame, (with a thicker or 
thinner coat, according to the strength of the paper you need), toss it into 
such a sieve as I have described, and lay the sieve upon the paper frame, 
and let both sieve and frame float in the cistern : agitate them, and the 
pulp will spread itself over the sieve ; the grosser and knotty parts of the 
pulp will r emain in the sieve, but all the rest of it will ooze through into 
the frame. Then put away the sieve, and taking the frame in your left 



384 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

hand as it floats in the water, shake the water and pulp smartly with your 
right hand, and the pulp will readily diffuse itself in an uniform manner 
over the bottom of the frame. When it is thus properly diffused, raise the 
frame out of the water, easing off the water in such manner, that the 
uniformity of the pulp spread, shall continue after the frame is clear of 
the water and the paper is made. 

To dry it, the frame is set endwise, near a large lire ; and so soon as it is 
diy, the sheet is peeled off the bottom of the frame and folded up. When 
(which seldom is the case) it is deemed needful to smooth and ixtlish the 
surface of the paper, the dry sheets are laid on wooden boards and rubbed, 
with the convex entire side of the conch-shell ; or in case of the sheets 
of paper being large, with the flat surface of a large rudder of lurid and 
smooth grained wood ; no sort of size is ever needed or applied, to prevent 
tire ink from running. It would, probably, surprise die paper-makers of 
England, to hear that the Kachar Bhotcahs can make up this paper into 
fine smooth sheets of several yards square. 1Sil A few words need to be said 
with regard to the geographical distribution of the manufactories of the 
Nepal paper. Mr. B. H. Hodgson is inclined to think that the name of 
the paper has no reference to the place of its manufacture. “ Though called 
Nepalese," says he, "the paper is not in fact made in Nepal proper. It 
is manufactured exclusively in Cis-IIimalayan Bhote, and by the race of 
Bhoteahs, denominated (in their own tongue) Rangbo, in contra-distinction 
to the Trans-Himalayan Bhoteahs... Most of the Cis-IIimalayan Bhoteahs 
east of the Kali River make the Nepalese paper ; but the greatest part of it 
is manufactured in the tract above Nepal proper, and the best market for 
it is afforded by die Nepalese people ; hence probably it derived its name. . . 
The manufacturies are mere sheds established in the midst of the immense 
forest of Cis-IIimalayan Bhote ; which affords to the paper-makers an in- 
exhaustible supply, on the very spot of the firewood and ashes, which they 
consume so largely : abundance of clear water (another requisite) is likewise 
procurable everywhere in the same region .” 19 Mr. Atkinson only echoes 
Mr. Hodgson when he observes that the paper “ is manufactured exclusively 
by the tribes inhabiting Cis-Himalayan Bhote, known as Murmis, Lepchas 
etc. or gencrically as Rongbo .” 20 But it is just possible that the opinion of 
both the writers is based upon insufficient observation. Dr. Campbell refers 
to two Nepalese villages where paper-manufacture was in a highly flourish- 
ing state, and which produced the two finest varieties of the Nepal paper. 
He observes that the “paper” called Kimchat is reckoned the best; the 

18a. The pulp is dried and made up into the shape of bricks or tiles, for the 
convenience of transport. In this form it is admirably adapted for transmission 
to England. 

19. Pol. O. C.. no. 19 Jany. 13, 1832. 

20. Atkinson — Himalayan Districts, pp. 378, 795-97. 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 385 

manufacture of Dholoka is considered the second best.- 1 Kimchat lies 20 
miles west of Cathmandoo and Dholoka 30 miles east of the place. The two 
places at the time of Mr. Campbell’s stay in Nepal were entirely inhabited 
by paper-makers. The fact that these two villages supplied the two finest 
varieties of the paper with their names confirms us in our conclusion that 
Nepal has greater claim to be proud of her excellence in the art of paper- 
making than her sister kingdom. We are told that the common size of the 
sheet of Kimchat paper was two feet long by 19 inches ; and that of the 
Dholoka being somewhat less. But both sorts could be had to order of any 
dimensions, upto 30 feet long by twelve broad. These papers were procur- 
able at Cathmandu in any quantity. What better proof could be adduced 
:n support of the extraordinary skill of the Nepalese in manufacturing paper? 

All writers who have left any account of the Nepal paper agree in 
observing that it once commanded a very extensive market. We are told 
by Dr. Hodgson that Kathmandu itself consumed a great quantity, but 
a much greater quantity was annually exported southwards to Hindusthan 
and Northwards to Sokya-Gumba, Digarchi and other places in Tremoun- 
inne Bhote." 22 “ It was invariably used ” says a 19th century writer “ all 
over ICumayun and was in great request in many parts of the plains for 
the purpose of writing Mmibnamahs or genealogical records and deeds.” 23 
Dr. Campbell mentions the following markets for the article Patna, 
Kiissarish in Sarun, Janikpoor, Darbhanga in Tirhoot, Poorneah, Govind- 
gunge, Alligunge in Sarun, Nichloul and Lorun in Gorukpoor, and Toolsi- 
coor, Bulrampoor, and Tandah in Oude. 21 According to Mr. Watt, the 
1 m;xt could be purchased throughout the greater part of India even as late 
as the Nineties of the 19th century.® 5 

Something may also be learnt from the accounts left by different 
writers regarding the prices of the paper in different parts of India. About 
the time of Mr. Hodgsons stay at the Nepal Court, the paper sold at 
Cathmandu at 12 annas sicca per dharni of 3 seers and the bricks of the 
dried pulp at a price ranging between 8 to 10 annas sicca per dharni. 
Dr. Campbell reported in 1837 that the price then varied from 160 sheets 
per Nepalese rupee to 400 ; or from 9 to 13 Company’s Rupee per maund. 
He estimated the cost of transport of the article from Nepal to Patna at 
about 1 Rupee 12 annas per maund, but the price there was almost equal 
to the Kathmandu price. Dr. Campbell explained the apparent paradox 
by the circumstance of these being a monopoly of the sale of paper kept 
up at Cathmandu by the Government whereas much of the paper reaching 

21. Transactions of Agri~Horticulti$ral Society, Vol. V. 

22. Pol. O. C. no. 19. Jany. 13, 1832. 

23. Dictionary of the Economic Products of India , Vol. III. p. 20. 

24. Transaction of the Agri-Horticultwral Society . Vol. V. 

25. See 23 above. 

26 



386 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Patna was exported from the hill manufacturies direct to the plains. The 
enormous demand for good quality paper among scholars and other men 
with reading habit partly explains the extensive nature of the market com- 
manded by the Nepal paper. We. have it on the authority of Dr. Campbell 
that the paper was held in high favour for all uses except that of letter 
writing, being mo6t economical. But Mr. Baden Powell testifies to the possi- 
bility of a very thin and fine letter paper admirably suited for foreign post 
being prepared from the Daphne plant. He himself saw a specimen of 
this light paper which could only be torn with the greatest difficulty. Dr. 
Cleghom also asserts that the paper can be made very thin and yet of 
surprising strength and durability. 

But the use of the paper was not limited to the literary field only. 
Reference lias already been made to its fitness for parcel-packing, box- 
papering and other rough uses. Dr. Campbell considered it much better 
adapted for packing medicines in, than any of the Indian papers or even 
the blue or brown paper of England used at the general dispensary at 
Calcutta for the purpose about the time he wrote. He also gathered from 
Dr. Davies of Patna that the paper was far preferable to any other in 
the manufacture of cold drawn castor oil, and that the latter used several 
maunds a month of it in this operation, the tenacity of its fibre preventing 
shreds of it from mixing with the oil, as was unavoidable when using the soft 
paper made from doth or other less durable material than the inner bark 
of the paper tree from which the Nepal article was manufactured. 

The same writer tells us that the Nepal paper was sometimes used 
as a lining to house roofs. The post office at Katmandu was thus lined 
presenting according to him a cleanly durable and pleasing canopy. The 
paper was laid on the rafters with the common floor paste. It was used 
as a cheap and efficient substitute suitable for wax cloth in the packing of 
letter mails and bhangy parcels for despatch by dak. This wax paper, lie 
tells us. * was prepared in a manner similar to wax cloth.’ He himself used it 
for dak purposes but never heard a complaint against “ wet mails ” even in the 
height of the rainy season. 

But the paper was not always used in its plain manufactured state. 
It is worth while to note that the Nepalese resorted to a very efficient method 
of prolonging the durability of the article. Dr. Campbell has collected the 
following outline of the method of preserving the Nep<u paper which may 
prove to be of interest to all archivists - 

“ To preserve 100 sheets of Kimchat paper, (two feet by eighteen inches) 
and have it of a straw colour, take two pounds of rice, and pound it well in 
eight or ten pounds of cold water ; when the feculum has subsided, strain off 
the superincumbent solution, and place it on a brisk fire for ten or fifteen 
minutes, stirring it all the time from the bottom. When cool, give a coat- 
ing of it with the hand to one side of the sheets of paper, hanging than in 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 


387 


the air (shaded from the sun) until dry : when quite dry, and you wish 
to colour and preserve one side only of the paper, give the other side a 
coating as before of the rice water, in which has been previously dissolved 
the following ball of arsenic- -then, dry in the air as before. Take of the yellow 
oxide of arsenic ( Marital of all the Indian bazars) 180 grains, (1 tola) and of 
tlie red sulphuret of arsenic (Munsil or Mwisila of the Indian bazars) 180 
grains ; grind them carefully on a marble slab, or in a mortar, and when 
finely comminuted, form into a ball to be used as above. When a deep 
orange colour is wanted, and the object is to secure the paper most effec- 
tually from insects, the solution of rice is to be made somewhat stronger, 
and the quantity of both kinds of arsenic is to be doubled— thus, for 100 
sheets, take 360 grains of the Ilarital, and the same of the Munsila. I have 
examined some books, the copying of 200 years date— the paper of which 
had been arsenicated in the latter mode, and found them damaged only to 
a very trifling extent by some insect (supposed to be a bug) but the texture 
of the paper, save where actually cut by the insect, was quite sound. 

For papering trunks, this mode of preservation might be advantageously 
adopted. The paper so treated, however, has a disagreeable smell ; and 
besides, it is not a settled question among the people who use it, how much 
of the practice is referable to fashion and taste, and how much to the object 
of guarding against insects : many persons assert, that i without the arseni 
cation the paiier will last just as well as with it. Yellow paper is the 
fashionable style for transcripts of the sacred writings, without direct refer- 
ence to the preservative powers of the arsenic. I am, however, inclined 
to think, that the arsenication is quite as useful as it is ornamental. The 
common objection among Englishmen to the use of Nepal paper is its 
roughness, compared with Indian and English paper. As sold in the bazars 
on a large scale this is valid, But it admits of being made as smooth as is 
necessary, and is so smoothed to a considerable extent here, previous to use. 

The rice water prepared as alxjve, is applied to the paper and then 
dried ; all that is required to give the paper a gloss and polish, is to rub 
it well with a glass bottle, or a smooth stone, or even a piece of close grained 
wood, when it becomes as even as need be. Tire coloured, preserved, and 
polished paper, costs nearly what the plain article is noted at 

European interest in this paper may be stated to have originated in 
Lord Auckland’s enquiry regarding it in the year 1837. But it had attracted 
the notice of English officials even before that date. We find from one of 
the records that on the 8th December 1831, Mr. B. II. Hodgson, then 
Kesident at Khatmandu sent to Mr. II. T. Prinsep, Secretary to the Gover- 
nor General some specimens of the Wpal paper for presentation to Lord 
William Bentinck. 26 In his letter to Mr. Prinsep. Mr. Hodgson regretted 

26. Pd. O. C. No. 19 Jany. 13, 1832. 



388 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the evil of using ‘ conunon paper of Hindusthan as office records and highly 
recommended its complete substitution by the Nepal paper.’ “I believe" 
he wrote “ the Nepal paper needs only to be known to be very generally 
adopted in the plains for office records. These records are now committed 
to the common paper of Hindusthan, than which few substances are more 
perishable ; and 1 suppose the loss of public records consequent upon the 
decay of the paper to which they are committed must be deemed a great 
evil. So 1 consider it one which might be prevented by the substitution 
of paper of Nepal for that of the plains.” After pointing out the cheap- 
nt'ss, durability and superior quality of the paper as also the success with 
which it had been adopted in some offices in the plains he expresses his 
opinion that the adoption of the paper for such records as it was peculiarly 
desirable to preserve was as expedient as feasible. To remove the difficulty 
of the relative scarcity of the paper in the plains, he recommended to the 
Government that the people of Kumayun who had plenty of the paper plant 
at their disposal should be entrusted with the art of paper-making. Dr. Camp- 
bell who was Assistant Resident of Nepal for some time, showed himself 
to be equally interested in the. matter. He fully endorsed the opinion of 
Mr. Hodgson and wrote a letter to Mr. Scott, Deputy Secretary to Govern- 
ment (Nov. 15, 1837) pointing out the advantage to be derived from the 
replacement of the paper of the plains by the Nepal paper in all Govern- 
ment offices. 21 Finding that there might be difficulties in the way of pur- 
chasing the article owing to the monopoly held over it by the Nepalese, 
court, he made the following suggestion : “ In the event of our Govern- 
ment directing the use of Nepal paper in all the offices of the plains, where 
it could be had at less cost than Indian paper and of its substitution for 
English and Indian paper and for permanent records, the requisite quantity 
could be purchased here annually during the rains and forwarded to the 
Ganges during the four cold months. But, with reference to the existing 
monopoly here (in Nepal) and such other obstacles as might Be possibly 
put in the way of purchase by the Durhar or its agents, of the article in 
large quantity, I would recommend trusting to the markets of Palna, Kessa- 
riah in Sarun, Tanikpoor, Darbhanga in Tirhoot, and Poomeah, for such 
supply as might be wanted for Bengal ; and to those of Govindgunge and 
Alligunge, in Sarun, Nichloul and Lohun in Gorakpur, Toolsipoor, Bulram- 
poor, and Tandah in Oude for what might be required 'or the Central and 
Western Provinces.” 

The recommendation of Dr. Campbell and Mr. Hodgson did not fail 
to impress the British Government To meet their own needs they decided 
to open an experimental factory for* the manufacture of paper from the 
Nepalese bark and Dr. Campbell, then Superintendent of Darjeeling, was 


27. Transaction of Agri-Horticultural Society, Vol. V. 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 


389 


entrusted with the task. A factory accordingly was opened at Darjeeling 
in 1841. About the mode he adopted for the manufacture of paper he 
writes to Mr. G. A. Bushby, B!t Secretary to the Government of India (Poli- 
tical Department) as follows : — 

“ I found that the wire gauze sieves furnished by the Military Board of 
considerable use in enabling one to make a smoother paper and 1 regard 
the use of these sieves as a great improvement on the native method of 
preparing the pulp. The dingy colour of the paper depended much on the 
dark colour of the solution of potass used to dissolve the bark. With a view 
to making a white paper, I had the alkaline solution clarilied by passing it 
repeatedly through washed sand. By this means it was procured of a very 
light straw colour and the paper produced by its use was many shades lighter 
than any I had previously succeeded in procuring. 

Mr. T. Maddock, Secretary to the Governor-General (Political Depart- 
ment), sent in the year 1841, to Dr. W. B. Q’shanghuessy, M.D., Chemical 
Examiner, for the purpose of bleacliing two sample packages of the paper 
manufactured by Dr. Campbell. The samples were not however sufficiently 
white in colour. The following account 28 of his bleaching process is given 
by Dr. O’shanghuessy himself “The process consists essentially in using 
a solution of chlorine in water instead of chloride of lime generally employed. 
The lime of the latter with the colouring matter of the Darjeeling paper 
forms a substance very difficultly bleached but which yields at once to the 
simple watery solution.” 

“The materials employed are red lead'" (350 grains), common salt 
(GO grains), sulphuric acid (} fluid ounce), water (8 fluid ounces). These 
proportions are observed on any scale and instead of strong sulphuric acid 
n proportionately larger quantity of the weak acid abundantly manufac- 
tured in Calcutta may be. employed.” 

The experimental paper-factory of Dr. Campbell at Darjeeling con- 
tinued to work upto the 16th April, 1842 when it was closed by him, for 
the reason that he found it uneconomical to run the factory “ unless the rude 
machinery of the country hitherto employed were changed for better and 
more expensive factory gear.” 31 

An endeavour was made by the Military Board (Stationery Depart- 
ment) to have the paper-making industry renewed by Dr. Campbell at 

28. Political O. C. 11 May, 18-12, No. 70. 

29. Political O. C, 29 Nov. 1841. No. 147. 

3a Red lead is a common and cheap bazar article whose usual price is 
Rs. 8-4-0 per maund of 80 lbs. One gleat advantage in having recourse to this 
Process is that it avoids the necessity of using the Oxide of manganese which is 
not found in the bazars. (Political O. C. 29 Nov. 1841, No. 147). 

31. Letter to Mr. G. A. Bushby, 21st April, 1842. Political O, C. 11 May,. 
1842 No. 70. 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


390 

Darj eeling. But he again objected to it on the ground of economy. “ That 
at the present high rate of the wages of ordinary labour at Darjeeling, the 
paper from the barks of the Daphne cannabina cannot probably be made 
at a lower rate than Rs. 10 to 15 per ream, each sheet being 2 feet by 18 
inches and calculated to make four letter-envelops.” Dr. Campbell con- 
tinued : — “ It may be desirable to renew paper-making at Darjeeling for 
various reasons but at present I doubt that it would be profitable to do so.” 

From the preceding account it will be clear that Government made 
anything but a fair trial of the scheme, and its failure may reasonably be 
attributed to the lukewarmness of the high officials. It was essential for 
the success of the scheme that it should have been organised scientifically 
and put on a rationalised basis. But rightly or wrongly Government 
thought otherwise and the experiment ended in a hopeless failure. 

The question which now remains to be discussed is whether the dying 
industry can be resuscitated under modern conditions and can be kept in 
a thriving state against the keen competition of machine made paper. Tire 
problem is not easy to solve and demands careful deliberation from experts. 
One thing however is certain. The days of hand-made paper are not over 
as some sponsors of complete mechanisation of industries would have us 
believe. So great an archivist as Hilary Jenkinson boldly expresses the 
opinion that hand-made papers are best for the purpose of records. 32 The 
contributor to the article on paper in Encyclopaedia Brilannica recognises 
that hand-made paper is indispensable for all special purposes such as bank 
note ledger, drawing or other high class paper - in one word in cases where 
great durability is the chief requisite. 31 ' So it is quite feasible that the 
hand-made Daphne paper may well exist side by side with machine-made 
rag- or wood-paper since the demand for the former has not been completely 
obliterated by the appearance of the latter. 

'Hie only cogent objection that may be raised against the use of the 
plant as a paper material is that of the chemist according to whom the 
rag-made paper is the best of its kind and the Daphne bark is chemically 
very poor. But experience tells us that so far as India is concerned, rag- 
made paper is highly inferior to the Daphne-paper. And before accept- 
ing the verdict of the chemist on the relative virtues of different raw 
materials for paper as gospel truth, we shall do well '?> bear in mind the 
warning pronounced by Mr. Jenkinson. “ We should also while counselling 
the archivist to make the fullest use of any advice that the chemist can 
give him warning in regard to modem materials that no laboratory test 
can tell us what the effect of time will be on materials.” The same writer 
observes that “ good rag paper from Europe may, without any special mal- 

32. Hilary Jenkinson— A Manual of Archive Administration, p. 159. 

33. The article on Paper Encyclopedia Dritmmica, 11th edition. 



THE DAPHNE PAPER OF NEPAL 


391 


treatment, decay in an extraordinary way if exposed to tropical climate. 
He himself admits that actual experience encouraged him to form this 
opinion.” 34 

There is moreover one practical objection to the extensive use of rags 
ior paper-making. The supply of rags is entirely uncertain, and there is 
often a corresponding uncertainty in the quality of the paper due to the 
uneven proportions of the mixture of materials.' 13 It goes without saying 
that in the case of the Daphne pajxir a greater amount of certainty as to 
the supply of materials and uniformity in quality may be assured. 

That there is ample scope for the development of the Daphne fibre 
as a raw material even for large-scale paper-making may be easily inferred 
from the extensive market for foreign paper as well as for foreign paper 
material in India. The total import of paper in 1934-35 was 2 ,038 ,000 cwts 
valued at Rs. 2,73 lakhs as against the total aggregate production of the 
Indian Mills amounting to 892, 000 cwts. a lamentably low figure. The 
import of wood pulp amounted in the same year to 19, (KH) tons valued aL 
Us 26 lakhs. The figures will conclusively prove what a vast field for the 
development of an important industry is still lying in India — a field which 
!;ns hitherto been completely neglected. It is for experts to explore this 
field more deeply ami to find out the possibilities, if any, of building up a 
lug nationalist paper-making industry with a view to make India dependent 
on none but herself for her writing material. 


t 

34. Hilary Jenkinson- zt Manual of Archive Administration. 

35. Paper-making m the Bombay Presidency — R. T. F. Kirk, I. C. S. p. 9. 

36. Review of the Trade of India, 1935-36. 



BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE THE PURANIC 
DATE OF BUDDHA S BIRTH 

By 

M. RAJA RAO, m.a, 

Mysore Govt. Educational Service (retd.). 

1. There is a well-known verse in the Rfhat-Samhita of Varahamihira 
about the Saptarshis (The Great Bear constellation) having been in a line 
with Magha Nakshatra when, at the close of the Mahabharata War, King 
Yudhistfiira reigned at Ilastinapur. It has proved to be a Delphic Oracle, as 
it has lent itself to several interpretations. (Bri. Sam., Chap. 13, verse 3). 
It runs thus : 

Asan Maghasu munayah. sasati prithvTm Yudhi$thire nrpatau ; 

Shad drika panca dvi yutah saka kfilah tasya rajanyasca. 

There are two distinct statements made here. The first line tells us that 
the Great Bear was in alignment with the aslerism of Makha whose yoga-tara 
is Rcgulus. The astronomical implications of this statement have been dis- 
cussed by me in my article on the Puranic interpretation of the Saptarshi 
cycle contributed to the Gangdndtha Jha Research Institute Journal, Allaha- 
bad, (Vol. I). Kalhana in his Rajatarahgini and Bhatotpala in his commen 
tary on the Brhat Samhita have interpreted tlie second line to mean that. 
King YudhLsthira lived 2526 years prior to the commencement of the Siih- 
vahana Saka in a.p. 78. This assigns the date B.c. 2449-2448 to Yudhi§t.hira, 
by which time 53 years of the Kali Yuga had already passed. Bhatotpala 
quotes a verse of Vriddha Garga in support of the first statement, but not of 
the second. In verse two , Varahamihira tells us that his exposition of the 
Saptarshi Cycle follows the lines laid down by Vriddha Garga. For several 
reasons, the second statement could not have been made by Vriddha Garga 
himself. There arc at least three Gargas mentioned in Samskrit literature. 
The first Garga was the person to whom Sri Rama gave away his w r ealth just 
before starting for the forest. (VBlrmki Ramayana, Ay odhyakapda, Sarga 
32). He must have been the formulator of the Garga Triratra sacrifice des- 
cribed in the seventh Kapda of the Krishna Yajurveda. (T. S. vii, 1-5). As 
pointed out by P. C. Sen Gupta in his article on Hindu Astronomy in the 
Ramakrishna Centenary Volume , (Vol. 3 f ) Vriddha Garga was a contemporary 
of the Pamlavas and a great astronomer. He was visited by Balarama during 
his pilgrimage at the time of the battle. ( Mahabharata , Tfrthayatra Parva, 
Salya Parv, Chap. 37, verses 15-18). He seems to have been the earliest com- 
mentator on the Vedahga Jyoti$a cycle of five years, and has been extensively 



BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE PURANIC DATE OF BUDDHA’S BIRTH 393 

cited by Somakara, Varahamihira, Bhatotpala, S. B. Dikshit and other astro- 
nomers. It is therefore clear that the second statement in the verse of 
Varahamihira cannot be attributed to him. There was the third Garga. the 
astrologer, who has been assigned to the earlier half of the first century b.c. 
by Dr. Kern in his introduction to the Brhat Sarhhita. He should have been 
a contemporary of the founder of the Vikrama Samvat Era. Thus all the 
three Gargas appear to have lived long before the Salivahana Saka was start- 
ed. Dr. R. Shamasastry points out that the term Saka as a synonym of the 
word Era came into use only after the close of the Andhra period. None of 
the Gargas could have employed it. It must be therefore attributed to Varaha- 
miliira himself. In the same manner Aryabhata declared that, at the time 
he composed his great work, sixty cycles of sixty years each had elapsed since 
die commencement of the Kali Yuga. Varahamihira seems to have meant that 
at the time he wrote the Bjhat Sarhhita 2526 years had been completed since 
the passing away of Yudhi$(.hira. If we assume for Varahamihira the date 
vd. 505 mentioned in his Panchasiddhantika, the above interpretation assigns 
to Yudhisthira the date b.c. 2021. In my article contributed on this subject 
to the Ganganalha Jha Research Institute Journal, I have pointed out. how 
this date is in complete harmony with the statement of the several Puranas. 
On the other hand, C. V. Vaidya opined that the saka referred to should be 
the Buddha Nivana Era, B-c. 543. ( The Mahabhurala, A criticism, p. 80). 

llis arguments are based on the assumption that the statement had been made 
by a Garga and could not therefore refer to Salivahana who was later than 
all the Gargas. So he agreed with Velandai Gopala Aiyar that the reference 
was certainly to Buddha’s nirvana. Varahamihira lived in an age of Bud- 
dhistic revival represented by Buddhaghosa, Fa Ilien, Bhartrihari, and 
Amarasimha. Vaidya interpreted the second line, to indicate the number 2566. 
Add 2566 to 543 and we go back to b.c. 3109, which is very close to the tra- 
ditional beginning of Kali Yuga B.c. 3102. 

2. Even now scholars are not agreed about the date of Buddha’s nir- 
vana. The Ceylonese chronicles, the Mahavamsa and Dipavamsa, and the 
Burmese chronicle, “ Malla-linkara ’ Wouttoo uniformly assume the date 
543 B.c. for the nirvana of Buddha and base their chronology on it. Though 
these Buddhistic chronicles adopt the date 543 b.c. for the nirvaija, they 
state the interval between the nirvaija and the accession of Chandragupta to 
be only 162 years, whereas all the Hindu Puraijas estimate the interval at 
about 260 years. This discrepancy has hitherto proved irreconcilable. The 
dates assigned by the Chinese chronicles vary from about bjc. 1200 to 600 
b.c. Of them all, what is known the Peguan date, B.c. 638 approximates 
to the Puraijic date (Prinsep’s essays, Vol. 2, p. 165). European scholars like 
Fleet, Cunningham and others have rejected both Hindu and Buddhistic 
traditions and adopted the date b.c. 478 as the most probable, as it accords 
very closely with the interval of 162 years stated by the Ceylonese chronicles 



394 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to have existed between the nirvana and Chandragupta, whose accession is 
assigned to 320 b.c. There is no consensus of opinion regarding the date of 
Chandra-gupta’s accession. It fluctuates between 324 B.c. and 311 B.c. The 
Burmese Chronicle, Malla-linkara, translated by Bishop Bigandet, is unique 
in itself. It furnishes the name of the week-day and the Hindu calendar date 
for some of the most important events of Buddha's life. Cunningham’s date 
for the nirvana, B.c. 478 agrees in the main with the provisions of the Malla- 
linkara. Dewan Bahadur Swamikannu Pillai has shown in the first volume 
of his Ephemeris that six out of the eight events mentioned by the Burmese 
Chronicle fall on the week-days assigned to them, if the Nirvana is assumed 
to have occurred on Tuesday, First April, 478 E.c.- the full-moon of Vaisakha. 
The learned editor of the Mahratti Gyana-kosa. (Gyana-kosa, Vol. iv. p. 153) 
approves of the date. 

3. The Puriujas embody the traditions current in the land of Buddha’s 
birth. A total summary rejection of all the data furnished by them, in favour 
of foreign testimony in which they themselves who adduced them had no 
full confidence, is rather unwarranted. The part played by Chanakya has 
been totally ignored. The reliability of the Puranas regarding the Andhra 
dynasty has been acknowledged by Rapson in his Catalogue of Indian coins. 
(Introduction, pp. xxvi and lxv). ilis statement that "there is no reason to 
doubt that the long period for which the testimony of inscriptions and coins 
scarcely exists, was actually occupied by the reigns recorded in the Puranas ", 
can be equally true of the Mauryan and pre-Mauryan times. Inscriptional 
History begins with Asoka. The Puranas, the Jatakas, and scattered refer- 
ences in contemporary literature are the only data available for re-construc- 
ting the history of pre-Asokan times. It is unfair to dub them unreliable} 
and ignore the whole lot. It is the duty of the conscientious historian to try 
and pierce through the outer shell of age-long accretions and reach the ker- 
nel at centre. Delicious water and sweet pulp will be found, though the quan- 
tity be small. 

4. It is rather unfortunate that no evidences, inscriptional or numis- 
matic, are available for the period preceding Asoka, except oral tradition 
committed to writing centuries later. Whereas the Puranas furnish details 
regarding all contemporary dynasties of pre-Mauryan times, the Buddhist 
chronicles mention only those kings that took an interest in their religion. The 
Burmese chronicle. Malla-linkara, mentions that Chanakya discovered, while 
he was yet young, signs of kingship in his palms. On the advice of his mo- 
ther, he kept the knowledge to himself. (Bigandet, Vol. 2, pp. 125-128). 
Though all the Puranas agree in assigning,a total of 100 years to the Nandas, 
some of them allot only 28 years to Mahapadma and 12 years to the eight 
brothers. The Purfuias state that Chanakya also ruled for sometime after 
the Nandas and brought the total period to 100 years. It took him 12 to 16 
years to dispossess the Nandas. It is not improbable therefore that some 



BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE PURANIC DATE OF BUDDHA’S BIRTH 395 

years intervened between the dethronement of the last Nanda and the instal- 
lation of Chandragupta. It is quite possible that the principles of state-craft 
so fully elaborated by Kautilya in the Artha-shastra reflected the experience 
gained by Chanakya during his own kingship. As Chandragupta was a candi- 
date of his own creation. Chanakya might have fulfilled his boyish ambition 
of becoming a ruler in his own person, before he handed over the kingdom to 
Chandragupta voluntarily or otherwise. It should be no wonder if Chandra- 
gupta had sought the help of Alexander or Saleukos as stated by Justin. The 
period is shrouded in mystery. The Buddhistic chronicle allots only 22 years 
to the whole Nanda dynasty. Kalasoka and his nine sons are allotted 61 
years. Where does the discrepancy lie? Experts have yet to discover. 

5. There is a mention in Bigandet's translation (Vol. I, p. 13 ; Vol. II, 
p. 123) of a Kauzda Era which was in vogue at the time of Buddha’s mater- 
nal grand-father, Ectzana, King of Devaha. At the time of its abolition by 
Eetzana, 8640 (eighty-six forty) years had elapsed. At a synod of astrono- 
mers convened by the king and presided over by the foremost astronomer of 
the times, Kala Devala ( Asita Devala ) it was decided to start a new era in 
honour of the King, and it was called the Eetzana Era. The year 8640 of 
the Kauzda Era was terminated on Saturday the new-moon of Magha and 
the new Era began on the next day a Sunday, the first day of Sukla Paksha. 
Another interesting bit of information found in the Malla-linkara (Vol. II, 
p. 134) is that King Thamug-dara (Samuddhara) of Prome, an eminent 
astronomer himself, reformed the calendar in the year of religion 625 (a.d. 81) 
dropping away 622 years and began the reformed computation with two, 
equating it to a.d. 79. Tit i s is a remarkable coincidence with the Salivaliana 
Saka and probably its nucleus. In the declaration of the Samkalpa at the be- 
ginning of our religious functions. Salivahana Saka and Bauddhavatara often 
go together. The association may not be accidental. The point deserves 
further investigation at the hands of experts. 

The Asita-Devala who abolished the Kauzda Era is probably the Asita- 
Devala frequently cited by Bhatotpala. This gives us a date for him in the 
8th century B.c. The word Kauzda does not occur in any other context, if we 
remember that the Kosala kings traced their descent to Ikshvaku of the Solar 
dynasty, Kauzda may very well stand for Kakustha. It is remarkable that 
they should have preserved a tradition dating back 8640 years to 9300 B.c. 
Were they in any way an off-shoot or the main-stem of the Kassites and the 
Mitanni (Mitra Anu) tribes who invaded Assyria in the 15th century B.c. ? 
It is a suggestion for Assyriologists to investigate. The name Tushratta (Dasa- 
ratha) borne by the Mitanni king might possess a significance of its own. 

6. There is thus nothing inherently impossible in the suggestions of 
C. V. Vaidya and Gopala Aiyar that the Saka referred to in. the verse of 
Varahamihira was the Buddha Nirvana Saka. If the number indicated in 
the second line is accepted to be 2526, as usually interpreted, by subtracting 



3S6 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


this number from b.c. 3102, we get the date 576 b.c. for Buddha nirvana. 
This date differs from the Buddhist tradition by only thirty years, and is in 
complete accord with the Puranic tradition. It satisfies all the conditions re- 
garding week-days laid down in the Malla-linkara. All the eight events fall 
on the days allotted to them. A careful examination of the auxiliary tables 
furnished in the Indian Ephemeries reveals the fact that 98 solar years (Juli- 
an) constitute an exact cycle of the week-day and the day of the month of 
the Hindu luni-solar calendar. The lunar tithis occur on the same week-days, 
but are displaced three days forward in the Julian year. For example, the 
full-moon of Vaisakha occurred in the year 576 B.c. on Tuesday the fourth of 
April, whereas it occurred in B.c. 478 on Tuesday the first of April. In this 
connection we have, to remember that the system of into.rcalation in vogue at 
the time was that of the Vedanga Jyotisha, according to which one month 
was intercalated at the end of every thirty months. The intercalated months 
were according to Dikshit (Hist, of Astron., p. 91) Adhika Sravana and 
Adhika Magha. One of the five year periods ended in a.d. 80 according to 
Varahamihira. The system of intercalation adopted in the Indian Ephemeries 
is that of the Siddhantas. When this difference in the mode of intercalation 
is taken into account, the two discrepancies inherent in the set of 
dates ending with 478 B.c. get themselves obviated in the set ending with B.c. 
576. The proposed date is thus not only in harmony with both Puranic and 
Buddhistic traditions, but also in complete accord with the week-days assign- 
ed to events, a memory of which was carefully preserved by Burmese tradi- 
tion for well over a millennium and a half. It is a truly remarkable feat of 
racial memory, wortliy of the best Vedic traditions. 

The chief events mentioned are the following : — 

1 & 2. King Ectzana did away with the Kauzda Era 8640, on a Satur- 
day, on the new-moon of Tabaong (March) and fixed the beginning of the 
new Era on the following day, that is to say, on a Sunday, tire first day after 
the new moon of the same month. This happened in the year 691 B.c. (543 
plus 148). Volume II, p. 133. 

3. Buddha was conceived in his mother’s womb, in the year 68 of the 
Eetzana Era, under the constellation Outtarathan and born (on the full moon 
day of Vaisakha) under the constellation Withaka, on a Friday, Volume II, 
p. 71. 

4. He went into the solitude in the year 96, on a Monday, at the full- 

moon of July, under the constellation, Oottarathan. Vol. I, p. 63> ; Vol. IE 
p. 72. * 

5. A little before break of day, in the 103rd year of the Eetzana Era, 
on the day of the full-moon of Katson, the perfect science at once broke over 
him : he became a Buddha. Pages 97 and 98 of Vol. I. 



BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE PURANIC DATE OF BUDDHA’S BIRTH 397 

6. Buddha’s father, gently breathed his last in the day of the full-moon 
of Wakhaong (August), on a Saturday, at the rising of the sun, in the year 
of the Eetzana, era 107, at the advanced age of ninety-seven years. Vol. I, 
pp. 208 and 206. 

7. It was not quite full dawn of the day when he entered the state of 
Nirvana (Neibban), in the 148th year of the Eetzana Era, on the full-moon 
of Katson, on a Tuesday, a little before day-break. Vol. II, p. 69. 

8. In the year 148, the first day of the month of Tagoo (April), which 
fell on a Sunday, was fixed as the beginning of the new computation, em- 
phatically called the era of religion, 543 BC. Vol. II, p. 133, foot note. 

N.ft. — • On page 216 of Volume I, Bigandet equates the full-moon of 
Tabaong to (February) and the new-moon of Taong to March, Vol. II. 
p. 133. So Tabaong corresponds to the month of Magha which must end 
early in March so that Chaitra might have commenced before the 12tli of 
April, when the solar year commences. In the absence of definite informa- 
tion about the method of intercalation adopted by the Burmese, it might 
refer to Magha or Phalguna. (Vide last paragraph, pp. 9, 10). 

Dates of important events in Buddha’s life 

Dates : 

1. Kauzda era ended on the new-moon of Tabaong Saturday : 

or Magha (ending) in B.c. 722. New-moon at the end of 15 Jan. 722 B.C. 
Magha ended at -95 of Saturday after Mean-rise i.e. on 
Saturday night 15-1-722 bjC. 

2. Eetzana era began the next day, the first day of Sunday : 

the waxing moon of month Tagoo, Sunday. 16 Jan. 722 B.C. 

3. Buddha’s birth on full-moon of Katson in Vi- Friday : 

sakha nakshatra, full-moon ended at, -54 of Friday, Vi- 8 April 655 B.C. 
sakha ended at -92 same day Eetzana era — 68 current. 

4. Buddha left Kapilavastu at midnight of full-moon Monday : 

in Uttara-ashadha nakshatra. Full-moon of Adhika Sra- 27 June 627 b.c. 
vana ended at -23 day after sunrise on Monday 27th 
June. Ut-Ashadha ended on Sunday midnight a few hours 
before Monday began. Era 96 current. 

5. Buddha attained Buddhahood about sunrise on Wednesday : 
Wednesday, in Vishakha nakshatra, on full-moon. Full- 11 April 620 B.c. 
moon ended at -33 of Wednesday ; Vishakha ended at *49 

same day. Both current at sunrise. 11-4-620. Era 103 
current 

6. Buddha’s father dies ; Saturday, sunrise on full- Saturday : 
moon of Wakhaong. Era 107 current. Full-moon of Sra- 24 July 616 B.c. 
vana (after Adhika Ashadha) began at '23 of Saturday 

24-7-616. 



398 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


7. Buddha Nirvana on Tuesday night before sun* Tuesday : 
rise. Full-moon of Vishakha ended at -99 or just before 4 April 576 B.C.. 

sunrise on the night of Tuesday 4th April ; Visakha end- 
ed at *66 day after sunrise. Both current at sunrise Era 
147 current. Age seventy-nine complete. 

7. Buddha died on his eightieth birthday, after completing seventy-nine 
years. A few months after his death, a conference of all the followers of 
Buddha was held, under the aegies of the king, AjataSatru, and presided over 
by Kasyapa. It lasted for seven months from the full-moon of Wakliaong 
to the full-moon of Tabaong. “ It was at the conclusion of this council or 
Sangharana, that king Adzatathat, with the concurrence of the Buddhist 
patriarch, Kathaba did away with the Eetzana era, and substituted the reli- 
gious era beginning in the year 148 of the said era ; that is to say, on. the 
year of Gautama’s death, on a Monday, the first of the waxing moon of 
Tabaong.” (Bigandet, Vol. II, p. lib). On the other hand, Bigandet’s note 
on page 133 of Vol. II, declares that in the year 148, the first day of the 
month of Tagoo, (April), which fell on a Sunday was fixed as the beginning 
of the new computation, emphatically called the era of religion, 543 B.c. 
It is adopted by all the southern Buddhists. The two statements are self- 
contradictory and somewhat ambiguous. Buddha’s death took place on the 
full-moon of Katson (Vaisakha). When did the new Era begin? Was the 
computation to begin from the month of Tabaong or Tagoo prior to the 
death or from those that followed his death, about the time of the conclu- 
sion of the first council ? Was it from the waxing first of Tabaong a fort- 
night earlier than or from the waxing first of Tagoo which occurred a fort- 
night later than the conclusion of the council ? The point has to be clari- 
fied before the exact week-day and date of the commencement of the era 
could be fixed. The same ambiguity appears in the case of the commence- 
ment of the Eetzana Era. The statement on page 13 of Vol. I, conflicts with 
that of page 133 of Vol. II. There is no ambiguity about the week-day ; it 
is only about the month. Dr. Fleet and Sir Alfred Irwin have clearly demon- 
strated in the Indian Antiquary for 1910 a.d. (Vol. 39) that the Burmese ca- 
lendar possesses elements similar to those of the Hindu calendar but not 
identical throughout. There are twelve months in the year composed alter- 
nately of 29 and 30 days. The first or waxing half of the month always 
contains 15 civil days ; the second half, alternately 14 and 15 days. Seven 
months are intercalated for every nineteen years at an average interval of 
three years. The system is similar to that of Meton and to that explained 
in the Maitrayaniya Samhita (1-10-8). Like the ancient Babylonians, the 
same month is intercalated by duplicating (Arakanese) or Watso (Burmese). 
With the ancient Vedic seers it was the month of Pausha that was dupli 
cated. Though the months are supposed to correspond to the entry of 
the sun into the signs of the fixed Hindu zodiac, they agree neither with the 



BURMESE RECORDS CORROBORATE PURANIC DATE OF BUDDHA'S BIRTH 399 

solar nor with the lunar months, except occasionally. The commencement 
of the month of Tagoo can fall on any date between the 19th of Wednesday 
and the 21st of March. Since the two halves of the Burmese month get out 
of step with the full and new-moons, the waxing first of Tagoo may not al- 
ways coincide with Sukla Pratipad. The new-moon just preceding the waxing 
first of Tagoo may correspond with the new-moon ending either Hindu lunar 
Magha or Phalguna. It is therefore clear that the assumption made by the 
author of the Indian Ephemeries that Tabaon coincides with Phalguna or 
Tagoo with Chaitra, is not always correct. In the present case the identifica- 
tion of the new-moon of Tabagaong with the new-moon ending Magha yields 
the correct days of the week, for the commencement of the Eetzana and 
Nirvana eras. I have therefore adopted it in my calculations. At the time 
of Buddha’s birth, the calendarial system of the Vedanga-Jyotisha seems to 
have been in vogue. The year commenced with Magha. So Tabaong might 
have been the first month of the year in those days. Later on, when the king 
of Promo, Samuddhara, adopted or inaugurated the Salivahana or Dando- 
ratha Era the year was probably made to commence with Chaitra or Tagoo 
in 78 a.d. Tagoo certainly commenced the year, when the Pagan or Pouppa- 
zdau Era was started the first of Tagoo in 638 a.d. as Zero— Buddha's death 
occurred in tiic 147th year (current) of the Eetzana era and year 148 was 
current when the council adopted the Nirvajna Era. The Buddha Nirvana 
Era commenced on the 22nd of January, 576 D-C. which was a Sun- 
day. This date does not conflict with the Puranic, Singhalese or Burmese 
traditions. It is as it were a compromise between them and is in full accord 
with the data of the Malla-linkara-wouttoo regarding the chief events of 
Buddha’s life. 



UJJAINI IN MRCCHAKATIKA 

• • 

By 

Dr. S. MUKERJEE, m.a. (Cal.), doctor-es-letters (Paris), 
vedanta-tirtha, sastri, etc. Mayurbhuj Professor of Sanskrit, 
Benares Hindu University. 

“The intense life with which Sudraka animates action and personage 
gives illusion to reality, one believes oneself to be in the middle of beautiful 
Ujjaini, but a comparison with the literature of tales dispels this error. We 
are, as in the rest of Indian stage, amid full convention, and amid full 
fantasy.” Thus says Professor Sylvain Levi in speaking of the Mrcchakalika 
in his “ Theatre Indien," and it has become an article of faith with modern 
scholars that in the Mrcchakafika, as in other Sanskrit plays, we are dealing 
with a city of convention and a conventional society. An examination of the 
minute details of the feature of the city and of the society described in the 
Mfcchakapka will however convince any impartial reader that the poet was 
dealing with an actual city and a living society, every feature of the life of 
which was familiar to him, though perhaps the name of the city might not 
have been Ujjaini and though the genius of the poet has certainly cast a 
radiant life over it. 

Famous UjjainI 

The celebrity of the city of Ujjaini had spread all over the country and 
its affluence, the amenities of its life, the amusements and diversions it afford- 
ed to the gay, the beauty, refinement and wealth of its courtesans had been 
magnified by travellers’ tales and allured the curious and leisured people from 
distant parts of the country. Simple Sarpvahaka who belonged to distant 
Pa(aliputra and was left by his father in rather affluent circumstances , 1 was 
attracted to Ujjaini by tales heard from the mouths of travellers . 2 

Geography. 

The city of Ujjaini covered a large area, the centre of the city was thickly 
populated, gradually thinning out towards the outer perimeter. Here were 


1. i l ( qHfogpf ^ aRpjfa : « 

i )— Act. II. ' 

2. — t# snl^-wi gfast amft i 

( q* ftspzs i )_Act. H. 




401 


UJJAiNi IN MRCCIIAKATIKA 

situated large shady gardens 3 adorned with beautiful lakes, belonging to the 
wealthy inhabitants, and the king had an extensive garden called Pu$pa- 
karantfaka which was the most beautiful of all 4 and at a considerable distance 
from the city. 3 The gardens were separated from one another and screened 
off from the public road and were full of umbrageous trees, 3 throwing cool 
shadows over the road and people could walk from the city to the Royal 
Garden, Pu$pakarandaka in the shade of the overhanging trees without ex- 
posing themselves to the sun. 7 The boundary walls were however not always 
carefully maintained and king Palaka’s garden, Puspakarantjaka at least 
had a gap large enough to admit of a carriage passing through over the debris 
of fallen bricks and for Sakara to fly by leaping over/ 4 It was otherwise 
neglected and large heaps of unswept dried leaves were blown about by the 
wjnd and gathered at the feet of trees. 0 On the other side there were temples 
with spacious compounds built, by the citizens outside the busy part of the 
city and we hear of one such temple in which the image had not: yet been 
installed. 10 Beyond this were the gambling houses and evidently the low 
quarters, the East-end of Ujjaini. 






foj:- 


I ) — Act. VII. 
raters atom, i— Act. viii. 


4. 


5. 


6 . 


*w srwjsnorpr yoM53»§sn3t fawt, ^ ^ 

qifSrsi ft3Tfo I °r i fft 5*i 3^* 

fewfltr I etc. ( tTrjwiff ¥if5t#T^T 5RT* 

5jnT5Sf: <TR)4 ftifPrl I ST I <T5T R 

etc.) — Act. VIII. 

sn4^: — a# I— Act. VII. 

an%: — TTffW9ncJpr5°n^ft4 afasnft i— Act. VII. 


7. fe: — tRnfo sftstR: I— Act. VIII. 

8 5PPTC: — «WWL I ( | )_Act. VIII. 

qT3TI5P30t 3&ff3T Tpegfftr I ( mFPsP3»pri 

> )— Act. VIII. 

9. 3I^R: — t^an Tsgfcfo I ( ^RTFftgfsRta 

i )-Act. VIII. 

FRTS# fag: — I ( 55 ^RTT5ftgfsi% 
IPWW&'A 5RfRf«MTf*r I )— Act* VIII. 

10. «T&ft ^ gwi^3® Tf4%3T I ( 3T5 

<nwri afopr 1 )_Act. ll. 

SRFR: — I qwrsi <T54t I (tp J*3ffa I fjf jpm 'TStft l)— Act. II. 


27 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


402 

Streets. < 

The streets of Ujjaini were narrow, especially in the busy part, the 
merchants’ quarters" where Cfrrudatta’s large family mansion with its garden 
and orchard, now out of repair, was situated, so that there was hardly room 
for two carriages to gd abreast, especially if one of them happened to be a 
lumbering country cart . 18 In the market place of Ujjaini, the shops were built 
close to one another, with only narrow lanes between, where the street dogs, 
who lived on the leavings and sweepings of the shops, comfortably ensconsed 
themselves at night from the inclemencies of the weather under the projecting 
eaves of the shop rooms .’ 3 

The streets were not lighted" and on dark nights citizens had to cany 
their own lights, lights strong enough to give confidence to the pedestrians 
that no bad characters were lurking about. 1 "* Indeed the streets of Ujjaini 
were infested by bravos, rowdies and revellers after night-fall and the 
favourites of the tyrannical king Palaka added not a little to the insecurity 
of the streets. IB Flushed with insolence and wine they pursued unprotected 
females and made fun of simple citizens any oddity in whose appearance or 
manners happened to attract their attention . 17 Thus were molested both 
Vasantasena and Radanika and poor Mai trey a who was with Radanika. 
There were no pavements for pedestrians apart from the high carriage way 
and the houses gave right on to the streets. Pursued by the licentious im- 
portunities of Sakara, Vasantasena passes her hands over the boundary wall 


11. H^5l: — ^ qfoTOfe I ( m Rffaafr i )— Act. II. 

12. ^ *WRI3p&fr> <3% I ( *TUT: I ) — Act. VI. 

— ft qiHP? gr: dFlRrt I— Act. VIL 

W SHT: )— Act III. 

14. SFER: — srforr ^ 3^*431# $3? rrfogftsiT qfl- 

)— Act. I. 

ftis — I — Act. I. 

15. SRftflftT: I — Act. I. 

16. — tRfir qrfq% 3 itT ?i 3 T*iwr nfasn fasr a? gftw 

i ( qen?it sfqtq^srarSr? *ranpf ftzi^ar nsraswi*? gw - - 

I ) — Act. I. * 

err «j% 3 rt foai arilgsprfeqt » 

( «jfw *T^«fTtr i ) 

— Act. I. 


17 . 




UJJAINl IN M?CCHAKATIKA 


403 


of Garudatta’s house and finds the door. 1 * Houses of any pretension, as those 
of Oarudatta and Vasantasena, had, besides the main entrance, a side 
entrance 111 also leading to a retired part of the house or to the garden and 
orchard which was situated on a side. Vasantasena had a temple to Cupid 
in her garden 20 and Carudatta had in his a beautiful pleasure house 21 which 
however was much the worse for want of repairs. 

City Police. 

There was arrangement for patrolling of the streets by the police, and 
thieves and bad characters were spotted, questioned or pursued, but under the 
lax administration of the tyrannical king Falaka, the city-guards were negli- 
gent of their duties, especially in the early part of the night when rowdies 
moved about the streets and brawls with the followers of the king’s favourites 
were to fie apprehended. When Vasantasena was pursued by Sakara and her 
servants fled from fear, there was no city guard to be seen anywhere. ' 2 The 
policemen came out later at night, when there was no danger of brawls and 
thieves and bad characters might be on their nightly prowls. When Caru- 
datta returns home, after escorting Vasantasena to her place, he finds the 
city-guards astir . 23 and we find the robber sarvilaka mighty afraid of the 
city-guards on bis way back from his nocturnal adventure at. the residence of 
Cr*rudatta. 2 ‘' 


is. spRrfor — ^ i iri«iiuf *nrtrror 

»rsr£Rt I SIRTftr g tpflrhT 

w I ) — Act. i. 


19. ggi$?>: — i# qEprr-fc 3rnig^mi<|gre5% i nr q^i^m i ( tfTSFpn- 

«iswifcnsi 5 R^ sn% 5 Tif^ )— Act. If. 

:-o. % g 1 * 51^ % i ( &r fjj 

ft® • )— Act. IV. 


2 i. ufttf •- 

gpSW. — a g fe fl ^ qgq p ff 

tfh'farct. Wlft f^TRU. I 


-Act. V. 





Hl^rr fotfirfcl: ll_Act. V. 

22. — ( sugggesteg ) sfe qar qftamf ft qfonit 1 tni w m 

srw f:f^ 5 ^r i ( ?r §r i ^ qfosRtsfa qftsre: i am jtwtt 

I ) — Act. I. ' 

23. 'grew; — ?rswinf % g i— Act. I. 

24. — 3ft I HI «nil iftR: t ^ I ftmft l—Act, III. 

— fRgftgii «TRqkft fpft i— Act. IV. 




404 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


At convenient points in tlic city there were stations for the policemen 21 
<gulma) and there were inspectors in charge of such police-posts. In case 
,f alarm, all pedestrians and conveyances were stopped and searched .* 8 Under 
fang Palaka, this inquisition was carried out with a good deal of unnecessary 
zeal and anybody who excited the suspicion of the police was searched, 
questioned and apprehended, whether he took the air in a garden, was seated 
in an assembly, was walking in the streets or was transacting any business in 
a shop .- 7 Tf any citizen had the misfortune to be viewed with an evil eye 
by the police or any favourite of the king, he had no peace till he disappeared 
in the underworld of the city. Thus the policeman Candanaka, once he had 
a quarrel with VTraka, the chief insjiector of police, did not consider himself 
safe till he and his relations joined the rebel army of Aryaka . 28 The vita 
attached to Sakara when he finally abandoned his patron after the strangling 
of Vasantasena, to escape persecution, also had to join the rebel army of 
Aryaka . 20 


The SmaSanam. 


To the south of the city beyond the inhabited quarters, was the place 
of execution (daksminasmasanam). A place of execution is always a place 
of terror, but it was specially so during the reign of terror under king Palaka, 
when executions were frequent and it was not an unusual sight to find the 
body of a person executed still hanging from the gibbet, half devoured by 


25 . aft ^ stsiksr, arsim! ntrg gw?gi 5 tg fNr i ( atf: ^ ^tsrifc&r:, ararrai: 

#3 *rss t )— Act. VI. 

26. t&i — ( 8?S3tsS ) zft qS^ipTI, *TT SIS 3S ST^f? I ***f%T£ 

I $t si & arrest I si i ( ^ sss®rsrsf>, m 

t wldriiSI'n^ l S> SI I pi SI I )— Act. VI. 

27. — 3*n% g§tg 3T Jprt oiakts ans^t St§ | 

rf rf ^tf? gftat ?TfI SI 3S3Ttr 5IfS || 

( rwig sis sssrrrisSt sfs i 


28 . 


29 . 


d stp^sss rsftff JOft SI 3ITS% S^T II )~Act VI. 

^^ 145 : — ( ^nfippms#FT ) aft, f&WflRrcg it fassare# q fe»sa ft ftsst 
*^s aropsnit sst i % i Trrs^ssK3rt *fkart *i3rsarand ft d%st i rff 
'SITS grWIJffegSt ®ts aiSSxBtf^r l ( art f^SilSdl w f siSSSW : 
trsT«|5Rrt Set: I *IS$| I ?.SISS°5SR^t Sk# ^fgf SS# ft d fSRPI 

rWissf*rf^ grPtSTgSBSlSt I ) Act. vi. 

ft*— i ( * ^resign I rrsa i ^ 

*l^lfo I ( fosprcr: )_Act. VIIL 



405 


UJJAINl IN M?CCH AKA flKA 

prowling jackals at night. 1 "' When a person is led to execution, it was the law 
that his name with ancestry and the crime for which he is condemned should 
be loudly proclaimed, after a flourish of the drum." at five different fixed 
points in the city (ghosanasthana), the last point being the place of execu- 
tion . 12 The proclamation with beat of drum and the strange appearance of 
the condemned— a garland of red flowers, smeared over with red sandal paste 
on which rice-powder and sun-dried rice had been sprinkled and carrying the 
gibbet on his shoulder, 8 * could not fail to attract a crowd of curious lookers- 
on . 34 In one of the rond-points where the execution party stopped to make 
their proclamations, reared up the proud palace of the king’s brother-in-law 
Samsthanaka . 38 This palace had a terrace up at the top with perhaps a small 


30. — ( STHdt I 

3 T «5 tfop ?.£FFT <T? 0 ftn 31 T I 

ft || 

( <R*T I 3 P 4 ef&crt qfcjri qtfft efftnfaiqq: I 
spfflft SfpKSJT %71 II— Act. X. 

31. ftqoifiopq; I 3Tf^TPT I ftqoiq; I 

( & l arr^fr i ftepm I )— Act. X. 

32. Sf|03it3: — jjj 3T qfegji I AT dl^T I I 

( & =3r qfsro fttspnresmq: i crarRcf ftfb^ ^qwrq; i )_Act. X. 

33. ^tf: — ( taftqicfH) ERTOfttsfira 

ftcpragtwtfi#ftri ^ sRfcn i 

3 tR«fW% 3 Tf?cr 11 


34. 


35 . 





II 


ll— Act. X. 

! «n® 5 r^ — srsrr, ^t 5 i 5 Kr i 

( antKctrafc, srrarfl i )— Act. x. 

5 IW: — ( ^ ) JR 30 T 1 ^ c 05 i str 

3rem%ftq>R qiwwwwftfa E P t 3tt^3T 3 ^ q^pi tosnft I ( wr fRT 
* ) $ if, t^i5 oftamrnis 1 ( iruhs 3?nft- 

fWTR tf ftipiHaW f %TRI: I fltsRmRjfat ST*IK*I WWMdlfe+W lnfa«IlcW: 

TRlft I £ iff WR sftJWR^cTRRC, I ) 

—Act. X. 



406 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


room in which he had confined his slave Sthavaraka" 6 for fear lest he blurt 
out I he truth about his master having himself strangled Vasantasena. This 
was also his favourite resort” at idle hours from which he watched the crowd 
in the street below and what was happening in the city. Saipsthanaka’s palace 
opened right on the street and when his slave proclaimed that it was his 
master who had strangled Vasantasena, the executioner with Carudatta imme 
diately went in and closed the door upon the crowd, with the object of en- 
quiring into the slave’s allegations. ;IS 

The large powers wielded by the police! were somewhat justified by the 
large floating population of low characters who infested Ujjainf. Gambling 
was the favourite pastime of the people, high and low. When the jewel 
casket of Vasantasena was stolen from Carudatta's house by the robber, un- 
willing to admit the loss by theft, the excuse which readily suggested itself 
to Carudatta’s mind was that, he had lost it in gambling, 30 the propensity to 
gambling being not regarded as in any way a blemish on his high character 
(caritra) of the purity of which he was so meticulously careful. When 
Sarpsthanaka’s slave detained by the obstruction on the road saw the muffled 
figure of Aryaka slinking away in the early hours of the morning, the simile 
that occurred to his mind was that of a gambler evading from the clutches of 
the keeper of the gambling house. 40 A crowd of habitual gamblers, some of 
whom had lost everything in that fatal amusement, prowled in the by-ways 
of the city and swelled the number of adventurers and criminals. Some of 
them were brahmins and of high families and could pretend to no small 
intelligence and education. Sarvilaka was one such character who was con- 
nected with the rich and accomplished merchant Revila, a great friend of 
Carudatta and he left his newly-wedded wife Madanika confidently in his 

36. srcnr. — dd%a$ni 1 ftqraRmwd- 

T^ETtr ftipffjpF? i ( JT^tarai sirai^fr«w5icitfe*rat frft i 

ftidft ftdsrftd $cdi oimfiNift ) i 

—Act. VIII. _ 

( dm dftwrftr ddiididfttaidt srftfa i )_ Act. I. 

38. — 3TtaFj5vr %VT d«T ^*<7 iffa 3°^3fT I 

( spmid dm 5 ft fad'd ddd <ifCTT$t: II — Act. X. 

39. — dddSdl d dr dgddTd.-* drdcdTd lfd; SdtfdFSdldftdftft far 
ftwwpnd srd ?rftdR. i— Act. iii, 

40. ta n t ftT & I: — ( aredftd ) Wq., <# ’81# 51%3T ft3T A I ^ 

^T55r|^[ fad 3jj^3T% ddtdd I ( tJdtSfff: 

dftqifdd dt a^r dfdd ^PTdlftd TfflddsqdRlfdRdWldl^l^d: 1 ) 
Act. VI. 



UJJA1NI IN MRCCHAK.VflKA 


407 


■custody,' 11 before himself plunging in the perilous adventure of Aryaka. He 
had still a lot of family pride in him,' 2 though pursuing the profession of a 
robber and a frequenter of brothels. The beggarly rascal Darduraka was an- 
other such character whose impudence and cleverness redeem his abject poverty 
and whose well-ventilated pa\a was a well-known object in the gambler’s 
quarters. That he at one time belonged to cultured society is evident from 
the Sanskrit language which he uses. Indeed gambling was a form of amuse- 
ment licensed by tire king and the Gambler's Association, (Dyutakara- 
maiidall) wielded considerable, powers over the life and person of the gam- 
blers. When the gambling house-keeper Mathura declared that he was ar- 
resting Samvahaka in the name of the Gambler’s Association, Sarnvhhaka 
knew that he had no remedy. 44 Not only could the defaulting gambler be 
beaten and tortured in the most inhuman way, 14 but he could be even sold 
into slavery for the repayment of a gambling debt. 4 ' The last and extreme 
punishment was expulsion from the Gambler’s Association, which made the 
expelled member a sort of outlaw in the gambling world. Darduraka was such 
an expelled member."* 

n. i err ^ q 3 Fst 3# qtffa gEararon \ 

( tr«r qqg nroregef: qqfa i ) 

31^5: — ( ) q?, sjhiI l 

%E: — am i 1 ( 3T«r ffcq. l ) 

— era TO miq. I— Act. IV. 

42. — 3T? ^ gap qrq sfusoft qftraitRPtop?- 

I— Act. HI. 

43. — ( srara i ) ^ fi? i tpr 

ara^ifttr 5IJTTT I ( ejrPKq*Seqi qslsW l ^SraRS fjef- 

$qraq<3rfri: m i )— -Act. u. 

41. — q: tcF'T f^qRWRcT^ra qi# qipfardl 

q^r si «f sriei: foq: i 

d$dW q 

d^fPTrf’Bltra^l tidd 5T?fSqRf*f &H. II — Act. II. 
frPR: — qiqra s\m q anfcr I 
«TRST3T T#; 5ft fa ®r II 

( qfc qsrftr sk°t q qm qrilr i 

qf*TCi Ssftsft q qrcfa II )— Act. II. 

45. JTIft: — arqm faftqlq <T3T53 l k ( aTTOTiq fotfcf 5R^v5 I ) 

— aran, q ?q^t 51%3T^I Sc*TP| gqoq%fi| l ( anraT:, 

*n*rc*r qf»rara srar<yfa: i )_Act. n. 

46 - — 3WWW% 'Jjrafif# I— Act. II. 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


408 

Slavery. 

Slavery was an established social institution in Ujjaini, and all well-to-do 
inhabitants had one or more slaves : We meet with one slave, Vardhamanaka, 
and a slave girl, Kadanika in Carudatta’s household, one slave Sthavaraka, 
in Sakara’s and two slaves, Pallavaka and Kamapuraka and at least three 
slave girls, Paravrtika, Madhavika and Madanika in Vasantasena's house- 
hold. The powers wielded by the stave-owners over their slaves were abso- 
lute extending even to death. Thus Sthavaraka was prepared for any amount 
of beating, even death from iSakara 47 and Vardhamanaka was philosophising 
whether he was not better off under a kind though poor master like Carudatta, 
than under a rich but capricious master like Sakara (Act III). Devoted 
and reliable slave maids like Radanika exercised considerable influence in 
their masters household and accomplished .slave girls like Madanika were 
admitted to friendship and confidence^ of their indulgent and kind mistress- 
es. Such maids fetched a high price and Sarvilaka who was in love with 
Madanika was driven to robbery to procure the means of paying the price 
of her liberty.' 11 * But as soon as a slave girl was liberated, she took her rank 
as a free citizen and could be married in gentle society, no reproach clinging 
to her on account of her previous condition of slavery, — as is seen in the 
case of Madanika. 

System of Justice, 

Among a heterogeneous and numerous people as the inhabitants of 
Ujjaini, cases of dispute were not infrequent and there was an elatorate sys- 
tem of justice. The court of justice was presided over by a judge (adhika- 
ranika) assisted by a body of assessors/- 0 among whom were a Kayastha 
clever in recording the proceedings in court, a srostin or president of the 
merchants’ guild expert in mercantile law and the practices of commerce. 

47. or *&&&{ » 

( cireqg JTfUTg 5T I )— Act. VIII. 

— JTTT ^ <$■ 3prooT*P*5I& I cTrsrfc or 

q ^ r fa^ i fe cr: i craft * wm'vk cRr arrsRW i )— Act. X. 

48. ferotfl g^sft, <n fa oft*t, \ 

( arrt, Act. ii. 

49. H&mr. — fa cSfi {Jt^OT | 

i cr*t mfa — ■ 3^ W fiwr 3 

srar qft^of argf^w i ( ^rf&icn m arrar i ^r wfar 

m fawt *rt ^ft^rrr*r i )— Act. IV. 

50. rfff: I 

^cTlHr-Act. IX. 



409 


UJJAINi IN MRCCHAKATIKA 

perhaps one or more interpreters translating the various dialects used by the 
miscellaneous people who resorted to the court of justice etc. There does not 
appear to be any lawyer on behalf of either party in the suit and the practice 
of public crimes being tried witli the king as the prosecuting party also did 
not prevail. In the trial of Carudatta on the charge of murder of Vasanta- 
scria, the Sakara appeared as the prosecuting party ,' 1 and not as a mere wit- 
ness. On the opening of the court, the usher loudly proclaimed if there was 
anybody with any petition to the judge praying for justice. The parties 
had then to step up and on being called upon stated their cases, the Kayastha 
recording the statements. The accused and witnesses for the prosecution and 
defence were then called in and questioned about their knowledge of the facts 
of the case. Their statements were then recorded and we find the pampered 
brother-in-law of the king, Sakara stepping up to the Kayastha and rubbing 
out with his feet an inconvenient statement /’ 4 The judge’s duty consisted in 
taking evidence, ascertaining the facts, applying the law of the case before 
him and giving his findings on the issues of the case. lie however could not 
pass the final order which was the province of the king / 3 The judge could 
however submit his recommendations to the king . 54 

Tiie Kino. 

The king was the depository of all power and the system of administra- 
tion was one of absolute monarchy. This power was exercised by king PSIaka 
with great harshness and capriciousness. The poet has shown some humour 
in giving the name Palaka, lit. protector, to a king who punished young 
wives for any offence with the barbarous punishment of cutting off their 
hair 55 and brahmin offenders with decapitation , 50 against the dictates of 
Manu and the express recommendation of the judge. Persons of whom the 
king was afraid for jxilitical reasons were summarily caught hold of and 

51 . ^ WT I 

Wf: — (snrfaRI ) tltr 515 I ( 31 *, jpn Sf? I )— Act. IX 

52. am; — fife scfais® i ( fife g fi te r gv i i )-( ^fa ufaff n> 3 fa i ) 
— Act. IX. 

53. arfoRfirc;: — q?r jpjpjrR i 3 ft 3 *iarr i...Act. IX. 

54. BTfwfira: — SltsReB, fafIRai eg?r$: — 

‘ api it qRraft fast f>fat s-psnffa i 

faffiwt fasrWt: ss ll— Act. IX. 

55 * ijsrarc : — sst g ^ $fafa®r qis^i fa** 

gSFR ‘IfaFTOR, I ( 3 fRT qi55%!f SRqtj%*r- 

g*rNr Ifcraw Slfarfa i )— kct. 1. 

56 - ara 5S3ifimt3fl ^ arrereafa , °T 3tJ% i ( 3is 

^TSffa^tff: I )— Act. X. 



410 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


thrown into solitary cells in torture-houses where they were to die, without trial, 
perhaps of starvation. 3 ' The keepers of such Bastilles often paid with their 
lives 38 for the crimes of their master. King Palaka had a number of con- 
cubines and Sakara, the brother of one of them plays a leading part in the 
drama. This worthless fellow was rewarded by the king with the gift of one 
of the finest royal gardens, Ri$pakara|n<laka, in the outskirts of the city 1 , 30 
and boasted that he could turn out the judge and have a new judge appointed 
who would be more compliant to him, - a threat which was not without 
foundation, as the judge immediately decided to take up the case brought by 
him . ,i0 The king was so superstitious that on hearing a report that a siddha 
had foretold to a cowherd boy Aryaka that he would be king, he had the boy 
thrown into strict confinement. Ul put him to torture with the object of killing 
him. But every part of the administration was lax under a tyrannical ruler, 
and it was not difficult for a scientific housebreaker like Sarvilaka to set 
Aryaka at liberty . 8 - 1 There was a good deal of discontent brewing against 
king Palaka even amongst his immediate followers, 8 '* and his deposition was 
very largely facilitated by his discontented followers many of whom were 
secretly in Aryaka’s party. 


57 . 


58 . 


59 . 

60 . 


61 . 


62 . 


63 . 


3tpp£: — 3?5 Erafoisnfitaqfarfrr ?nrr iftsHro gspirt 

srg: I — At. VI. 

( 3t«t »faT<^rc3it gfrisi srfspi gftqrftai wraiftar ftfta? 

( tnfa gift gfftTRft sjfrcrrei gwpr ift^r i ) 

— Act. VI. 

— oft trn ^^nfrcrf^nrr SfpgsnoipJT gop^og-riiiui T^TOT I ( tTrfSfllT 
qPMtafftwr gqfcrrcHT ^ i )_Act. VIII. 

sm?- — ( i) ®n: ft; «r ^rf^, mr i ^ or ^ an§ei ^atwr 
qis? ftwrftar ftwrftar rr% adftsRsftrati trf«r 

ar»i arfoaraftrer i ( 31T: ft ^ mr i ^ n 

qifft ftura irrdt ^ 

sRftft i ) 

I *T?, — ' 3 TPP 35 , cFT 

l — Act. IX. 


^ 1 %: — ‘iTt* tilwmcd cnn x fo w i dM ft ftw- 

mI^h) <I|J1 MI4t'tl*iftl SR*: I— Act. IV. 


an^: — awre sraarerR a gt s fer 1 — Act. Vi 



^WWI F ff folfgr 

sfaanflr m?- i......Acl iv. 



UJJAINi IN MUCCHAKAflKA 


411 


The Courtesans. 

There appears to have been a large number of courtesans for whom a 
separate quarter (vesa) was assigned'" and who were frequented by the gay 
and the dissolute. 611 The lady’s-maid of Vasantasena was glad when she heard 
from Maitreya's mouth that Carudatta had gambled (Vasantasciiii's jewelry 
away), considering a gambler to be a suitable companion to a courtesan. 66 
The Courtesans were in many cases highly accomplished and association with 
them was, for rich men, considered a venial offence. Thus Carudatta. when 
questioned in the court of justice by the judge about his friendship with 
Vasantasena, though rather ashamed of it, thought it enough justification 
that he was a young man whose character in no way suffered by such associ- 
ation. 67 The position of the courtesans in some measure resembled that of 
the Hataira in Athenian society, where a man of the eminence of Pericles was 
not ashamed to lx? associated with Aspasia. The courtesans obtained a 
measure of protection from the king ; they could not abandon their profes- 
sion 6S or marry and become virtuous maids without the special dispensation 
of the king. One of the first acts of Aryaka when he became king was to 
recognise Vasantasena as the married wife of Carudatta. 6 ** It is noticed 
that the mutual acceptance of a man and a woman was considered valid 
marriage in UjjainI society represented in the Mrcchakafika. Thus Mada- 
nitei was recognised by her mistress, and Sarvilaka led her away as his legally 
married bride. Even an honoured and high-placed man like Revila would 
not refuse to accept her as a member in his household, her who was a public 
woman and a slave too. The union of Vasantasena and Carudatta in mar- 

64. cRRraqT — fife UoSf rprnft I 

(%fe, fife TT tprft I )....:.Act. IV. 

65. 5TT3T!cJT$^T I 

II Act. V. 

66. 3T33TCT fegan | 3f^t 1 

( a#, I anqi 33ti: I ) Act. IV. 

67. atfvresfara;: — 3TR, qfSrai rtT felR. I 

( 355TT I ) 

— srsRM?!, > srs asm* i ti ^ i 

( 3TpNi 6^, I 3R5 55SRn I ) 

— ( 4W«TJ<) vfr affafrTT:, *Pir «T?R3qH, W nf&ftil *TO ffTT- 

fafit | ami ^?Rt(5rPTO*a^r, * ^Ilft^lH, I— Act. IX. 

68- ( 1 ) 

are i gim ft snat *n < 

anft w igni ^ i an^rr «— Act. VHI. 

€9. Slf^F: — 31$, qft# C!5IT I— Act. X. 



412 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


riage (Act X) is, apart from the sanction of the new king Aryaka, not 
marked by any religious ceremony ; Garudatta’s married wife, the intelligent, 
well-bred and virtuous Dhuta, also accepts Vasantasena as a legally married 
co-wife, addressing her by the appellation my sister . 70 (It reflects no small 
credit on the author that though depicting a society with no very high sense 
of morality, he has nowhere depicted any scene of immorality or put any 
speech in the mouth of any character which smacks of it.) Though courte- 
sans were suffered in UjjainI society, they were not allowed to mix with well- 
born ladies or to enter the ladies’ -quarter in a family. When Vasantasena, 
pursued by Sakara, took refuge in Carudatta’s house, and the latter, mistak- 
ing her for the maid Radanika, asked her to take his sleeping son Rohasena 
to the inner apartments, Vasantasena said to herself that she was so unfortu- 
nate (being a courtesan) that she could not enter into the ladies’ quarter . 7 1 
And after the union wish Carudatta on the night of the storm, when she 
woke up in the morning, her first thought was whether she had been admitted 
to tire honour of the ladies’ quarter in Carudatta’s house as his accepted 
wife . 72 Indeed as compared with ladies in virtuous households, courtesans 
were regarded so very untouchable that even Carudatta though deeply in 
love with Vasantasena would not think of introducing jewelry worn by her, 
a courtesan, into the inner apaitments of the house . 73 When Madanika was 
accepted by sSarvilaka as his lawful wife, Vasantasena could not help heav- 
ing a melancholy sigh, that as a virtuous wife, Madanika had become an 
object of reverence, while she herself continued as an untouchable courte- 
san.™ (These small inconsistencies of social etiquette and docorum 
characterise all living societies and would not have happened, had the author 
been dealing with a correct society of complete convention). 

Repined Life of UjjainT. 

There appears to have been a high degree of refinement among the cul- 
tured classes in UjjainI which was not confined to the courtesans alone. 
Carudatta had come down to perhaps the lowest depth of poverty. — his house 

7J. — ( JRRrctar ?£i ) f frfewft i 

( i ) — Act. x. 

71. SRRPfclT — ( SspifTH, I ) spaRKSI i 

( I )_Act. I. 

72. eRFcKtal: — & TftgT I 

( Wfe, ft | ) — Act. VI. *- 

73. — 3T5S t"? 2RRRC. I— Act. III. 

74. SgFK I 

( SiSflflL Pifo €frll I ) — Act. IV. 



413 


UJJA1NI IN MRCCHAKATIKA 

was dilapidated, the doors had huge cracks, 7 -' the pleasure-house in the 
garden was crumbling, 7 * there was no oil even to light a lamp 77 and no food 
to offer to an honoured and beloved guest, like Vasantasena . 78 But his 
drawing room was full of musical instruments, 7 -* he frequented musical 
soirdcs in the houses of his rich friends (like Revila) and as a conoisseur of 
music could be in ecstasy when he heard good music. 8 " Scarves scented with 
delicately perfumed flowers like jasmine were used . 81 The use of golden and 
jewelled ornaments appears to have been the fashion both among men and 
women. The coxcomb sakara wore a profusion of jewelry, 1 ** and though 
Carudatta had given away all his jewelry, we hear of his having worn golden 
bracelets and jewelled rings . 83 Women naturally used a lot of jewelry. 


75. anfa: — 25 HITOTK: I — Act. VI. 

76. -'tltyitrl: — etc. — Act. V. 

77. fogra: — ft, dl3Tl mi 3TJ5R T^fasTiait fast ufStsp 

4grrr i ( flr: 

^ ufStTit I )— Act. I. 

78. hrri&u — 3p5t m 5t5T°T gwwrfesn g^rfa i ( $r gwfc 

i ) 

fa^JPR: — Htfe, 3lf5 °T tsTltaifa 01 *ft| 3TK I ( m 3 ^TKl# 3 I ) 


— Act. V. 

79. I ) 3^, 2*W: I 3T2 5^: I 3T3 <m: I 533ft 

#n i ®Nir: i amt gsem: i $4 3 T«trt 4?3 25f*fa4. i— Act. in. 
so. faa: — fa %ar gforj i ( srfr 455r4^rH^ti^ 

33*3 i ) 

3T65W. — 3T5t 31?r, 313 313 *W^3 I— Act. III. 

si. ^ 3 : — tt^st ftarr^ar HT^nr^fr 

<3 r 

3^31553*3 fal i ( trq 

1 : 51[3K#S;$fa3: i 



M»fd 0 3 5fa 1 ) — Act I. 

82 . war. — gfaarsr c rfe a n^ t ( ^i ; iftoiw: » ) 
faa: — 3?% srgtrfaoomfos^: I ( 3f$t 3g§3oi3fo?3: » ) 


—Act. VIII. 

m\i‘ — ( 313133333313 I ) 455 25 3?55^R3fq I 25l^35PSTC3L 1 ) 

—Act. vm. 

— «r ^ aarorfwRrfs^ 51 ^ 3T3fafa \ 

( 3f| CHf wmfsi $33 531*3331^ t— Act. x. 

83. sd iqfrfc : — tr^OT 50015 3T53T5mi5 TOgfaW 3^ *Ifa33T 3*5 ofafarai 3T3t 313*3?! 

33 33 ft fafW 1 ( 2%3 ^iRrworwiflifa 3 * 12*3 as3 sn*3 $ 31-313 

SIRR# 33faft I )— Act. II. 



414 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


especially rich courtesans like Vasantasena. 84 Indeed Vasantasena’s jewels 
play a great part in the plot of the drama, — the deposit of the jewels with 
Garudatta, the theft of the jewels by Sarvilaka, the return of the jewels by 
fiarvilaka after stealing them from the house of Garudatta, the gift of the 
jewels to Rohasena in his clay-cart, Carudatta’s direction to Maitreya to 
return to Vasantasena the jewels which she had stuffed into Rohasena’s clay- 
cart, the discovery of the jewels with Maitreya (which he was taking with 
him for return to Vasantasena ) in the trial scene which led to Carudatta’s 
condemnation to death. Even the poor wife of Garudatta, Dhuta, still had 
a magnificent pearl necklace. 515 the last remnant of an evidently large and 
expensive set of jewelry befitting the wife of a wealthy merchant like Cam 
datta, and with this she redeemed the reputation of her faithless and spend- 
thrift husband, by sending it to Vasantasena in lieu of the latter’s jewelry 
which was stolen. Dandies like Sakara used to wear long and flowing hair 
which they used to perfume and dress in a variety of ways. 80 Drinking of 
wine appears to have been common, especially in the houses of courtesans. 87 

Religion. 

In Ujjaini courtesans like Vasantasena lived the life of householders 
surrounded by their mother and brother and performing the regular duties 
of householders. Thus we find Vasantasena's mother requesting her to per- 
form the daily worship of the domestic deity which is the regular duty of the 


84. ft fr3T T55T3Tf?l « 

( ft Tsraft urrfttar t )— Act. i. 

^ ^ 3t^ 3Topn3fir ?n && fft areftrcai stares 


( 3tw, i)— Act. I. 

— 31? 3p?rn 3f35T3n swift rtr 4fttr i 

( 3Fpft I )— Act. VI. 

85, — >rr ^ 


CTPfift «ft*lft 1 )— Act. III. 

86. 4W>R-—~ tst'ftil ft 5T55T 41 t 

srftir g% *?rn ?ft ssrsrenft n 

( ft sjvr ^R51 31 i 

sift* gw: crapna: u )— Act. IX. 

87. — fftftsfft aTH-TTit t...?ft 

flsssar nf&mraftfi| ft g$i ft fftarfftr i ( «toift 4HW 

ra f test t ufocr i sft ^Thr4krrg5RRft?if tigw 
g^reft fofer i )~Act. iv. 



UJJAINf IN M?CCHAKATIKA 


415 


head of the household.** In rich households like that of Vasantasena, there 
were regular priests employed for the worship, when the head of the house 
could not for some reason or other, perform it. 8 ” Poorer people did the wor- 
ship themselves and we find Carudatta meticulously observing the morning 
and evening worship of the family deity and distributing the offering at the 
cross-roads . 110 Pious householders also used to offer an oblation of water, 
with a prayer to the rising sun at early dawn, and the robber (Sarvilaka 
found a part of the wall of Carudatta’s house worn out by the daily sprinkling 
of water to the sun at dawn . 01 This popular religion was buttressed by a 
number of superstitious like, faith in DakinI 9 - (malignant female spirit), 
omens like the trembling of eyelids or throbbing of limbs , 00 the cawing of 
crows on dry branches of trees 01 or seeing snakes on the way . 00 The omni- 


88 . rrri — apsiTT, anforfr — ‘ vrftar <53? 1 ) 

( 3T$, JTTdjERlft, — ifqr ^RrTIffr <£5ff ’ ffr I )— Act. II. 

89 . sj»RT&rr— 3^, — * 3 fsr 1 dr ^ <j 3 t 

fa \ ( Rie^n. — aw r 1 ctt, mr npi 

’ # 1 )— Act. II. 

90. — RRW, ^ rn\ I Pmfr RTcJWft 

Rfegrir* 1 farter fafa: 1 <rror 

?NRf RRRI fflffa: RT^wftPT: I 

SlfRRT Ftp) f$ T%RTftd: II —Act. II. 

rrft i wangqr^ 1 — Act. III. 

91. 5#34>: — gffl: aTI^fforr l 

Act. III. 

92. 3TSt R ^^rpT^rftrr Ttjri^ITd 1 

( 3T^r, 3TC3T: I ) — Act. IV. 

93. rrw&tt — ( ijRfacwr sr^wwgi *t 1 ) (% <wi3 

^013 | 3PFTI 3Tf5rftfa <TR33^ | ( ft 

3 K 5 FT #RRH, I 31*131 R#TRftl*fa I )— Act. VI. 

WSRri: — ( 3 M%P 7 ^T ) R% 3 R: | 

Wl 

arq^mta w sriwt rir sfawr i 
3pwwR.3Pi sr«i^ RR H— Act. VII. 
rrw&it — wfe Rlf^T 3t3T»lH. 1 foffsin. 1 

( * 5 ^ RfaR 1 §RRR(. 1 ) — Act. VIII. 

94 . creeper: — w| 3rrf^nf%^^r 1 

Rfa wr" n— Act. ix. 

95. R^r i%ftiS[d?f§$fwffal5TRIR: : I 

arfwRricl WtRt Qir^clieRIfffft^imfckq if RiriRraw gw: «— Act. IX. 



416 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


potence of Fate’ 16 was a universal belief, as also belief in the predictions of 
siddhas. 97 Popular religion in all ages has been tinged with a local and even 
family colouring and this naturally was the case in Ujjaini. The prevailing 
religion appears to have been the Pauranic form of Brahmanism with the 
worship and invocation of various gods in the Hindu Pantheon. 1 ’ 8 Idols were 
worshipped in temples and we hear of an empty temple being ready for the 
installation of a god. 9 ” There were public temples frequented by all the 
citizens on festive occasions and it was at the sight of Carudatta in such a 
temple that Vasantasena fell deeply in love with him. 100 There was a ring 
of fatalism in the form of Brahmanism and a reliance on the gods. The 
educated and refined Vita when fearing lest Sakara murder Vasantasena, 
utters a resignation to the gods. 101 Mendicancy was still practised by reli- 
gious persons and we hear of a Parivrajaka (Brahmanical mendicant) being 
attacked by the rogue elephant of Vasantasena. 192 Buddhism though no longer 
the dominant religion was still prevalent and the monastic discipline of 
Buddhism was still very strict ; thus when the gambler Samvahaka expressed 
his desire to turn a Buddhist monk ( Sakyasramanaka ) , Vasantasena in view 
of the hard discipline of a Buddhist monk’s life warned him not to take the 
vow rashly. 10 -' They had to subdue all their senses, shave their heads, wear 
ochre-coloured scanty clothes, repeat prayers, dwell on the inconstancy of 

96. 35»=5&ti — * f3pf ERteftr gq , 

( *oiq«3»dl'a, c5 55531355: l ) Act. VI. 

97. ( ) trq T3T 3|5!%3 

^IlfT 3t5T5Ht3 lift 3S33r3ft 55: I — Act. IV. 

98. 5^34* : — 81331 jp? 3J?f 53l 3t 3? I 

( 3155 55 5513 sft tf3«l I 

5<5I 5]^ spqftgnU 5«n II )__Act. VI. 

99 . — m ^ 1 

( m frrftflrRr srf^r 1 ) 

—Act. V. 

100. W: — 351 3gf4 5I§ 5fef3nf?5If[ 313351 5 3 

*61315 I ( 3W *155$ «iq^5T55irr?ir5(c!P^ 555 5^5515551531355*1 3 31 
**>W5d I ) — Act. I. 

101. ffc: — 51451 4551: 55^3 I...Act. VIII. 

102. — 551 55 P#43I 33T51lf45t 3ft35153ll I 5T5 

31WI353...I ( 555^3 52|f553T. . .33151^5: '5^513?: 1,35 qfo*S5°3- 
#*5535155 1 ) — Act. II. 

103. 55RKl3f— -3P1, 9T« Sl?3°l I ( 3Tf4, 3155 31?$3 I ) Act. II. 




UJJAINl IN MI?CCHAKATIKA 


417 


worldly things, believe in Lord Buddha, not indulge in too much repose and 
occupy themselves with succouring the distressed as a dharma, an obligatory 
duty of their religion . 101 They were not unoften despised by the rich and 
aristocratic society and we find the kings brother-in-law treating the Sarp- 
vahaka turned mendicant with blows and relating how he treated Buddhist 
mendicants as bullocks by passing a nose-string through their nose and yok- 
ing them to the cart . 105 Though they were tolerated by high-minded persons 
like Carudatta, the sight of a Buddhist monk was still considered inauspici- 
ous and avoided as far as possible . 100 The Buddhists still had their own 
religious establishments inhabited by monks and nuns and we find the 
Shampoocr- mendicant; leading Vasantasena after she had regained conscious- 


K)-i. rasj: — Arams Arm srato i 

fesmr mra ti 

Sffo 3T l ruArmrrtr arm* '-TrfTi'jj | 

%ir uri^r #ra mAra -mu i 

3 smra Rf ^ «ji? 5 mgft? ii 

Rp= 5 gi'o?7 f»5 fori or gfte<? ^ gi»5% i 

m? tot 3T gfe^ mg 5jg mz gfam; n 

( m~-w t Atfir i 

mfli ftfar Rk Rf%rf rrh n 

=er i smftmrci asm wftow i 

qsram mftm mm {farm i 

arm* $ r m: mfir n 

fMf gfed goj jjpiJd f%d if gpsd gA?d | 

3^^ ftfi gfef m% ftosrer gA?dg)...Act. VIII. 
maj: — fvraj fepmnit ^ l ( f+iaj: sja wz *m *rra I )... Act. VIII. 
io5. fay: — g^ur Anrim 3^^ ffct arm At 3rf| dei nAr 

idn °ira fop-ra 3fRr|f^ i 

(g%*T f*rapn<ra^ m firaj qmrfa, mftw mftrai 

l )— Act. VIII. 

3 F 5 R: — % % gprmm, fog i mRAraflsmT&gmi ^fhi % 

i ) 

sftei ^ ftesssig. i ( Ate ^ t%g i mmRwrmsifcs#? rgsg^^ 

^ HarfU I ) ( ^ dRRrfcIf i ) Act. VIII. 

tor:— ^ orf^r f^Bra mn mat m^=r:)-Act. vm. 

loe. — 5*rflfirg<3TRfvf?Rr« tro»rc>m&ig, i ( i ) 

afospwpte mn \ mn magim. i_Act. vii. 


28 



418 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


ness to a Buddhist nun in a vihara close to the royal garden Pu$pa- 
karaodaka. u>r They quietly pursued their religious duty of succouring the 
distressed. 10 * There was however no ban to Buddhists attaining high 
honours and position in state. Thus on the recommendation of Oarudatta, 
who was grateful to Sanivahaka-bhik$u for preserving Vasantasena’s life, the 
Bhifcgu was made the chief abbot 109 of all the Buddhist monasteries in the 
kingdom, the king being evidently the head of all the religious endowments 
in the kingdom. 

The above sketch of the picture of Ujjaini and the life of Ujjaini is 
enough to dispel the idea that Sanskrit dramatists were always delineating 
a conventional society and an imaginary city. Whether we call it Ujjaini 
or not, the author of the Mrcchakatika was dealing with a real city which 
he knew intimately and the life in which lie delighted in. 


107. f*18Js — RR I rift WWlfiWTO! 3RlfRRT 

?r? Rfta q fe i ( rr RsfiRflpft Erefa t era rrwwr«<i 
H I )— Act. VIII. 

108 fag: — tf 5 iT ^ fa rr 

(trqr fat, w vM'&Z: \ )_Act. XIII. 

109. Rl^f: — dcSfowR fowilH. •— Act. X. 


THE STORY OF DHANIKA, THE POTTERS SON, AS 
TOLD IN THE DIFFERENT VINAYAS 


By 

Dr. P. C. BAGCHI, m.a., dr. es lettres (Paris). 

The second parajika commences with tlie story of the potter's son Dha- 
niya in the Pali Suttavibahanga. Dhaniya was the first to be guilty of the 
d large of stealing and this was the occasion for Buddha’s narrating tire 
second parajika in detail in order to warn the Bhiksus against the offence 
of stealing The story occurs in all other Vinayas in more or less modified 
forms and a comparative study of the different versions will clearly show 
how each of the schools has developed the story. 

I. 

SUTTAVIBHANGA - -PARAJ IKA II. 

(Ed. Oldenberg. HI. pp. 41 ff. ; translated by Horner, Book of the Discipline I) 

The story in the Suttavibhariga may be summarised thus : Buddha was 
staying at Rajagaha on the Vulture’s Peak. At that time the Venerable monks 
were in the habit of setting up temporary huts for residence during the rains. 
The Venerable Dhaniya, the potters son, also set up a grass hut and not 
only passed the rains there but also the summer and the winter. Once when 
he. had gone out to the villages for alms, the hut was demolished by the 
women gathering grass and firewood. Dhaniya on his return found that the 
hut had been demolished. He built a second hut but that also was demolish- 
ed in the same way. He built a grass hut for the third time and this time also 
the hut met with the same fate. 

Dhaniya then thought of building a hut with more durable materials. 
He said “ I am well taught, experienced in my own craft, accomplished in 
the potter’s craft. What now, if I, kneading mire myself, should make a hut 
consisting of nothing but mud ? ” Dhaniya thereupon made a mud hut and col- 
lecting grass, wood and cow-dung baked it. It was a beautiful, lovely, pleas- 
ing red hut, just like a little tndragopa and just like the sound of a small 
bell, so was the sound of this hut. 

It so happened that Buddha while descending the slopes of the Vulture’s 
Peak saw the hut and on enquiring labout it learnt that it belonged to Dha- 
niya. He disapproved of Dhaniya’s action in strong terms as it was unbecom 
ing of a recluse to possess such a hut and ordered the monks to demolish 
it so that it might not bring downfall to those who would come after. So 



420 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


was tlie mud hut destroyed. Dhaniya did not oppose and said : “ Destroy it, 
reverend sirs, if the lord of dhamma causes it to be destroyed.” 

Dhaniya then thought of making a wood hut. The overseer in the wood- 
yard was his friend and so he resolved to go to him to beg some sticks. He 
then went to the overseer and asked for the sticks. The overseer replied : 
41 There are no such sticks, honoured sir, that I could give the master. These, 
honoured sir, are sticks held for the king, serving to repair the city, laid down 
in case of accident. If the king has those dealt out. you might take them”. 
Dhaniya said : “ Your reverence, they arc gifts from the king.” The over- 
seer could not disbelieve a Sakyaputta and allowed him to take away the 
sticks. 

Now the chief minister of the king of Magadha named Vassakara while 
inspecting the works in Rajagaha came up to the overseer in the wood-yard 
and spoke thus to him : 14 Look here, where are these sticks held for the king, 
serving to repair the city, laid down iri the case of accident ? ” 

The overseer said : ” Sir, these sticks were given by the king to master 
Dhaniya, the letter’s son." 

The Brahmin Vassakara was very much displeased and not believing 
that the king could really give it went up to king Seniya Bimbisftra of Ma- 
gadha and told him : “ Is it true, sire, that the sticks held for the king, serv- 
ing to repair the city, laid down in case of accident, were given by the king 
to Dhaniya, the potter's son ? 

“Who said that?” 

“ The overseer of the wood-yard, sire ”, he said. 

“ Then, brahmin, send for the overseer of the wood-yard ”, he said. 

The overseer was then sent for. While he was being taken to the king 
bound, Dhaniya saw him and asked why he was being taken bound. lie said : 

14 Because of this business with the pieces of wood.” Dhaniya then promised 
to follow him to the king. 

Then Dhaniya went to the dwelling of king Seniya Bimbisara and sat 
down on the appointed seat. The king asked him : 44 Is it true, honoured 
sir, that the pieces of wood held for the king, serving to repair the city, laid 
down in case of need, have been given by me to the master ? ” 

“It is so, your majesty”-— he said. 

“ We kings are very busy, honoured sir, with much to do, having given, 
we may not remember. Come, honoured sir, remind me.” 

44 Do you remember your majesty, when you were first anointed this 
phrase was uttered : Let the recluses and Brahmins enjoy, gifts of grass, wood 
and water ?” 

‘T remember, honoured sir, there are, honoured sir, recluses and Brah- 
mins who are modest, scrupulous, anxious for training, there is only a little 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 


421 


worry with them. What was uttered by me was meant for those and that 
was : what was in the jungle not owned. So, you, honoured sir, think to 
steal wood not given (to you) by this trick. How could one like me flog or 
imprison or banish a recluse or a Brahmin living in the kingdom ? Go, ho- 
noured sir, you are freed on account of your hair but do not do such a thing 
again.” 

The remaining part of the story is not of any special interest. When 
this incident was reported the people began to speak ill of the Sakyaputta 
Samanas. It reached the ears of Buddha. He had Dhaniya called before 
him. When Dhaniya admitted what he had done Buddha took him severely 
to task. He defined the act of Dhaniya as an act of stealing- a parajika 
offence for which the punishment prescribed was not to be in communion. 

U 

Sarvastivada-Vinaya, Parajika II. 

(Chinese Tripitaka, Taisho ed. XXIII, pp. 3-4.) 

Buddha was staying in the city of Rajagrha. The Bhik$us then used to 
pass the rainy season (var§a) together in one place. A few of them used to 
live in cottages. They would beg grass and wood from their acquaintances 
and make huts to live in. When the Bhiksus entered the city for alms the 
men who gather fire-wood demolished the huts and took away tire wood. 
The Bhiksus on returning from begging saw this and felt very sad. They 
said : We suffered great pains in begging. Sinful jx’ople have demolished our 
cottages and taken away the wood. We had to beg the grass and the wood 
from our acquaintances in order to make these huts to live in. 

Amongst them there was a Bhik§u named Dhanika who was the son of 
a potter. By means of his own art he made a mud hut with mud doors and 
mud windows. The lintels, the ox’s head, the elephant's tusk, the supports, 
were all made of mud. He then collected grass and wood and burnt it. The 
hut took a fine red colour. He then left the hut in charge of other Bhiksus 
and went out for two months on begging. 

At that time Buddha was advising Ananda to make rules concerning the 
huts. From a distance he saw this hut of beautiful red colour. Buddha 
knew what it was but still he asked Ananda : What is this beautiful red 
thing? Ananda replied : The Bhiksus of the city of Rajagrha lived 

in one place. Cottages were few. The Bhibs>us begged grass and wood 
from their acquaintances and made huts to live in. When they had been 
away to the city for alms people came to gather fire-wood, demolished their 
cottages and took away the wood. After begging for food they came back, 
saw it, felt sad and said : We had great pains in begging— sinful people came, 
demolished our cottages and took away the wood. Amongst them there was 
a Bhik§u named Dhanika who was a potter’s son. By means of his own art 



422 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


he made a mud cottage, collected grass and wood and burnt it. So it is 
beautiful like this. 

Buddha then told Ananda : Demolish this red mud cottage of the Bhik- 
?u Dhanika. Don’t let the anyattrthikas either blame or suspect us or laugh 
at us by saying : During the life time of Buddha the sin defiles the law. 
Ananda followed the instruction, went and demolished the hut. The Bhikgu 
Dhanika came back after two months' travelling and saw that his hut had 
been demolished. He asked the Bhiksus in whose charge he had left it : Who 
has demolished my hut? The Bhiksus replied : The great teacher Buddha 
ordered it to be demolished. Dhanika thought : When the custodian of the 
law orders it to be demolished we have nothing to say. The master of wood 
in the city of Rajagfha is my acquaintance. It is possible for me to make 
a wooden hut. 

After the night had passed Dhanika put on his robe, took his bowl and 
entered the city for alms. As he was begging for food he came up to the 
place of the master of wood (and told him) : Do you not know that the king 
of Magadha, king Ajatasatru, the son of Wei-ti-hi (Vaidehl) has given me 
wood ? The master of wood replied : When the king has given you wood 

you may take whatever you like. There are some heavy sticks inside, used 
for protecting the city, and difficult to be taken out or put in. You should not 
take them. He however took those sticks, cut them into pieces and collected 
them ir> one place. At that time the city chief saw that the heavy sticks fox 
protecting the city had been cut into pieces and collected. When he saw this, 
he became horrified, his hairs stood on end and he thought : I shall be satis- 
fied only when the brigand comes out. He then went to the master of wood 
and asked : These heavy logs are meant for the protection of the city. Who 
has cut them into pieces and stored the sticks in one place ? The master of 
wood replied : The Bhik$u Dhanika came and told me : King Ajatasatru 
has given me wood. I then told him : If the king has given you wood take 
whatever you like. He himself must have taken the heavy sticks, cut them 
into pieces and collected them in one place. 

The city chief then thought : I shall now ask the king if he has given 
the heavy sticks to the Bhiksus. He then went to the king and asked him : 
Great king, your wood is missing. Have you given to a Bhifegu the wood 
meant for protecting the. city? The king answered : No, I have not given 
it The city chief said : The king has given it to-day. (The king replied) : 
Who says that I have given it? (The city chief said): The master of the 
wood says that you have given it. The king said : Ask the master of wood 
to come. , 

Following the king’s instruction order was sent to the master of the 
wood to come. At that time the master of the wood saw the Bhikgu Dhanika 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 


423 


cm the way and told him : I am in this difficulty for you. The Bhiksu said : 
You better go and I shall follow you. The king saw them from a distance 
and said : Leave the master of the wood and order the Bhik§u to come. The 
city chief then left the master of the wood and ordered the Bhiksu to come 
to the king’s presence. The king asked : Well Bhiksu, does your law teach 
you to take things that are not given ? The Bhiksu replied : Great king, I 
have not taken things that were not given. The king gave them previously. 
The king said : I do not remember to have given them. The Bhik$u replied : 
Allow me to remind the king now.. The king said : How? The Bhik§u 
replied : The king should remember that when he was first installed king 
he had said this — I give to the Sramanas and Brahmapas for their use all 
the grass, wood and water in my kingdom. The king said : When I said 
that I meant only the grass and wood that have no owner. The king then 
said : You have committed a great sin. The Bhiksu said : I am a houseless 
person (parivrajaka) living in your kingdom. Why should you kill me. The 
king said : Bhiksu, you may go. 


Ill 

MaiuSasaka-Vinaya- -Parajika II. 

(Chinese Tripit aka, Taisho ed. X'XII, pp. 5-6.) 

Buddha was staying in the city of Rajagrha. At that time there was 
a Bhiksu named Dhanika. lie was the son of a potter. He lived in a grass 
hut on the Isigila hill. At that time, when once he had gone to the. city for 
alms men who collect fire-wood came, destroyed the hut and took away the 
wood. Dhanika after returning from begging made it again. This happen- 
ed three times. He then felt dejected and thought : My body is fortunately 
capable in the mud work. Why not make a tiled cottage and remove the 
anxiety ? So he did it. It had a solid summit, the capitals of the columns 
beautiful, the supports, the transversal woods and the lintels were all deco- 
rated and the doors and windows were artistic and looked like something 
heavenly. lie collected fire-wood, burnt it and made the colour red and 
beautiful. At the time of the wind blowing it made the sound of a guitar. 
Buddha was staying on the Gfdhrakuta hill. He saw from a distance dif- 
ferent kinds of engravings, paintings and the beautiful red colour of the 
cottage. He then asked Ananda : What is this cottage. Ananda told Bud- 
dha : Dhanika by his own industry has made it. Buddha said to Ananda : 
This Dhanika has committed a sin. How can you call him a pravrejila ? 
By this bad act he has gravely injured the living things. He is not sorry for 
it. I have previously spoken in different ways on the law of mercifulness. 
How amid this Bhiksu not have a merciful heart ? The Venerable Ones will 
in various ways ridicule the Bhiksufe doing like this. You should go there 
and demolish it so that the Bhiksu may get (proper) instruction. So he went 
up to the cottage. At that time Dhanika had gone out of the cottage. (On 



424 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


his return) he asked the Bhiksus : I did not commit any sin. What for did 
the people demolish my cottage. The Bhiksus replied : The Exalted One 
ordered it. We did not do it. Dhanika said : The Chief of the law had it 
demolislK'd. So I have nothing to say. The Bhiksus then demolished it 
together and directed Dhanika to go to the place where Buddha was. For 
this thing Buddha was questioned. Buddha therefore assembled the commu- 
nity and Bhiksus and asked Dhanika : Is this true or not. He replied : It 
is true. Lord . Buddha as before took the Bhiksus doing so to task and said : 
If you, Bhiksus, bum tiles you will commit the Tn-lo rhe (Thullaccaya) 
sin. You will lx? guilty of T’u-Id io (Dukkaia). 

Dhanika then thought : I had previously a grass hut. People coming 
to collect fire-wood demolished it. Then I had a tiled hut. It was a trans- 
gression of the law of the Chief of the Law and the parwrajakos. I should now 
seek for good wood in order to build a big cottage. I can certainly live in it 
without much trouble. lie then thought : The officer of the wood-yard in 
the city of Rajagrha is my acquaintance. I should go there to seek for it. 
He then went to him and said : I need some wood. The king has given me. 
The officer of the wood-yard said : If the king gives you then you can take 

it Dhanika then took the big wood for the city rampart, cut it into pieces 
and took it away. At that time the Chief Minister named Vassa 
fcara was on an official tour to all places. He asked the officer of the wood- 
yard : Who has given the big wood for the city ramparts to this Bhiksu ? 
Tlie latter replied : I have not given it. Tie again asked : Wfio is it then ? 

The latter replied : It is the king. Vassakara then informed the king : 
Great king, without examining why have you given the big wood for the city 
ramparts to Dhanika ? The King said : Who says I gave it ? Vassakara 

replied : It is the officer of the wood-yard. The king then ordered his 
guards to arrest the officer of the wood-yard. According to the instruction 
he was arrested. When he was being led to the king, Dhanika was entering 
the city for alms. He saw him on the way and asked him : Why have you 
been put in chains ? Tic replied : It is for the Revel end one that I am hav- 
ing this punishment. You should now save my life. Dhanika said : You 
go first, I shall come after you. 

When the officer of the wood-yard was taken to the place, where the king 
was, the king asked him : Why have you given the big wood for the city 

ramparts to Dhanika ? He replied : Great king, I did not dare to give it. 
Dhanika said that the king had ordered it to be given When the king was 
giving orders Dhanika was waiting outside the gate. The king ordered him 
to come before him. When he came to his presence 1 the king asked : 
When did I give the wood to the Bhiksu ? Dhanika replied : Does not the 
king remember that he gave at the time of his first anointment all herbs, 
trees and water within his empire to the Sramainas and Brahmapas ? The 
King said : What I then gave were not things which have a master. You 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 


425 


are a strange Bhifcsu. By this means you take away oilier peoples’ things. 

I am an anointed king. How can I imprison or kill a Sramana ? You may 
now go away. 

IV 

Dharmai;i;ptaka-Vinay.\ # Parajika II 
(Chinese Tripitalca, Taisho ed. XXII, pp. 572-573). 

The Venerable One was then travelling on the Ordhrakiila hill in the 
city of Lo-yue (Riijagrha). At that time there was in the city of Rajagrha 
a Bhiksu named Dhanika, the potters son. He was living in a grass hut in 
an enclosed place. The Bhik$u once went to the village for aims. At that 
time the people who collect tire-wood came, demolished the grass -hut where 
tile Bhiksu used to take shelter. On coming back from begging be thought : 

I was staying in an enclosed place and had made myself a grass-hut. 1 had 
gone to the village tor food. The people who collect fire-wood came and de- 
molished my hut where l used to live. I myself know my art. 1 can knead 
the mud and can make a tiled cottage. So the Bhik$u kneaded the mud and 
made a tiled cottage. He then collected fire-wood, and cow-dung and burnt 
it. The cottage then assumed a red colour like the fire. 

While the Exalted One was descending from the Gradluakuia hill he 
saw from a distance this cottage red as lire. He knew what it was but still 
he asked the Bhiksus : What is this red thing ? The Bhiksus told Buddha : 

There is a Bhiksu named Dhanika, a potter’s son. He used to live in a grass- 
hut within an enclosure. When he had gone for begging the people who 
collect lire- wood came and demolished the cottage where he used to live. On 
returning he saw that the cottage had been demolished. He then thought : 

1 know my own art. 1 can now make a tiled cottage where 1 can live, without 
any obstruction. So he made a cottage. It is that cottage which looks red 
like that. The Exalted One then took the Bhiksus to task in numberless 
ways and said : You have done it in vain. It is not. conduct. It is not the 
law of Sramana. It is not a pure act. It is not in accordance with the 
proper practice, it should not have been done?. Why did the Bhiksu Dhanika, 
the potter’s son make a big collection of cow-dung and fire-wood and burn 
it? I have constantly and in numberless ways spoken about kindness to 
living beings. Why has this foolish man himself made a mud hut and by 
collecting fire-wood and cow-dung burnt it ? He should not have thus made 
the titles red and committed T’u-ki-lo (Dukkata). The Exalted One then 
ordered the Bhiksus : You should go there in a body and ask Dhanika to 
demolish this cottage. The Bhiksus then according to the advice of Buddha 
went to get it demolished. When Dhanika saw them demolishing the cottage 
he told them : What sin have I committed that my cottage is being demo- 
lished? Sin or not sin, we do not known. We have no hatted towards you. 
We have come to demolish your cottage according to the instruction ot the 



426 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Exalted One. Dhanika Bhik.su then said : The order of the Exalted One 

must be right. At that time the king of Magadha, P’ing-sha (Bimbisara), 
liad a keeper of the wood, and this man was more or less a friend of the 
Bhiksu Dhanika. 'Hie Bhiksu Dhanika then went to the keeper of the wood 
and told him : Do you not know that king Bimbisara has given me wood ? 
As 1 now require wood you should give it to me. The other man said : When 
the king has given you then take whatever you like, good or bad, few or 
many. The Bhiksu took the wood retained for the king and cut it into pieces. 
At that time one of the Chief Ministers (Mahamatras) while directing the 
affairs of the city came to the wood-yard and saw that the wood retained for 
the king had been cut into pieces and thrown hither and thither. On seeing 
this he asked the keeper of the wood : Who has cut into pieces the wood 
retained for the king ? The keeper of the wood said : The Bhiksu Dhanika 
came and told me that the king had given him wood and that he was in 
need of it. I then told him : When the king has given you wood you may 
take whatever you like. He then entered the wood yard cut it into pieces, 
took it and went away. When the Mahamatra heard it he doubted the king’s 
orders and said : Why have you given these useful woods to the Bhiksu ? 
You should have given him other sticks. Why have you spoilt these good 
sticks ? The king replied : I do not at all remember to have given wood to 
this man. If there is any record then tell me. The Mahamatra then asked 
the keeper of the wood to come by the order of the king. The keeper of the 
wood saw the Bhiksu Dhanika from a distance and told him : Reverend Sir, 
I have been arrested because you took away the wood. You must come to 
free me out of mercy. The Bhiksu said : You go earlier. I shall go at 
the. right time. The Bhiksu Dhanika went there afterwards and in a short 
time stood in the presence of the king. The king asked : Reverend Sir, 
Did I really give you this wood ? The Bhiksu answered : You really gave me 
the wood. The king replied : I do not remember to have given you the wood. 
You should make me remember it. The Bhiksu answered : Does not the 
king remember that at the time of his first installation lie himself pronounced 
this gift : While I am king in my kingdom let the Sramanas, the Brahmanas, 
the conscientious ones and those who happily practise the Sila take that which 
is given, not take that which is not given, use that which is given and not 
use that which is not given. From to-day let the sramanas and Brahmanas 
use the grass, wood and water according to their own liking. Do not take 
that which is not given. Use that which is given. Listen, the Sramanas 
and Brahmanas may use the grass, wood and water according to their own 
liking. The king said : At the time of my first installation I had really 
said so. Reverend Sir. The king then said : Reverend Sir, but I spoke about 
things that have no master. I did not speak of things that have a master. 
The reverend one must die. The king then remembered and said : I am a 
Ksatriya king bom from the race of anointed head ( murdhabhi$ikta) . How 
can I take the life of a parivrajaka for a small piece of wood ? This must not 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 


427 


be. Then the king in different ways took the Bhik$u to task and asked all 
his ministers to let the Bhiksu go. The king allowed him to go. Then all 
the ministers spoke in a loud voice that it was a great injustice. The King 
asked — Why? They said : This man instead of being put to death has 
been simply taken to task and allowed to go. 


Vi 

Tiie MfJtA-SARVASTiVAOA-ViNAY'A. Chap. II 
(Chinese Tripitaka, Taisho ed. XXIII, pp. 635-637). 

Buddha was staying in the bamboo garden of the Kic-lan-to-kia 
(Kalandaka) lake. At that time there was a Bhik$u named Dhanika. He 
was formerly the son of a potter. lie used to live in an A-lan-jo (Aianyaka ) 
grass hut. At the time when Dhanika entered the city of Rajagrha and was 
going from place to place begging for food, the cow-boys, the. people Who 
collect fire-wood and grass, those who live in the right way and those who live 
in wrong way came after the Bhiksu was gone, demolished his hut and look 
away the grass and wood. Dhanika on his return saw that his hut had been 
demolished and grass and wood taken away. He then built a new hut. In 
tire same way he also built a third hut. All the people came as before and 
demolished his hut. Dhanika then thought : Alas, what profound misery ; 

Alas, what great misery, at the. time I go for alms, they come and demolish 
my hut. This has been done thrice. I have good knowledge of the art of 
my forefathers. Why not make a tiled cottage ? Dhanika then dug the 
earth, mixed it with water which did not contain any insects and burnt the 
day. He first made the foundation of the hut and then raised the walls. 
The roof was given to cover it. Elephants’ tusks and posts were placed in 
different directions. Windows and doors were made of clay. The whole 
thing was given a white colour and decorated with drawings and paintings. 
Then cow-dung was collected and the hut was burnt. When it was very 
well burnt it got a red colour like the jutika flower. The Bhiksu Dhanika 
then made the following reflection : My cottage is well made, has a good 
colour and is lovely. It: should be looked after. Dhanika then entrusted 
it to the care of the neighbouring Bhiksus, put on his robe, took the alms-bowl 
and went out for begging. The Exalted One, as was his constant practice;, 
had not yet entered into Nirvana. He held his body in good order (yogak- 
tema) so as to be able to convert the people at the right time. At that time 
he was seeing the habitation of gods, the demi-gods and other living beings 
near the end of the earth and the hell and was asking the people. He was 
seeing also the lan- jo ( arapya ) , the forest of dead bodies, the mountains, 
the oceans and other places of habitation. The Exalted One then wished 
to regulate the places of habitation ’and for that- purpose told dyusmdn 
Ananda : Go and tell the Bhik§us that the TatKagata will now go to visit 
their places of habitation. The Bhik$us will do well in following the law and 



428 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


will be benefited by it. Ananda then followed the instruction of the Exalted 
One and went to the different places either in the forest or under the trees, 
inside the monasteries, outside the cottages, on the roads etc. He told the 
Bhiksus : The Exalted One today wishes to see your places of habitation 

The Bhiksus will do well in following the law and will be benefited by it. 
When the Bhiksus heard these words each of them put on the robe in order 
to show it to the Exalted One. When the Exalted One, in the company of 
the Bhiksus, was walking step by step along the road, he came to the place 
where Dhanika lived. The Exalted One saw Dhanika's cottage which was 
built of tiles, and had a red colour like the jaiika flower. On seeing it he 
asked the Bhiksus : Whose cottage is this ? The Bhiksus told Buddha : 

The Bhiksu Dhanika. the potter's son, himself made this cottage. Buddha 
asked the Bhiksus : Demolish this cottage, otherwise the anyalvrthikas will 
make light of my teaching and say : While the Sranmna Gautama is alive 

his sravakas are defiling the law. What will happen after his death? The 
Bhiksus then demolished the cottage according to the instruction of the 
Exalted One. The Exalted One after seeing the cottage demolished it, left it 
and went away. When the Bhiksu Dhanika came back he saw the cottage 
demolished and asked his associate monks : Who has demolished my cot 

tage ? The Bhiksus replied : The Great Teacher ordered it to be demolished. 
Dhanika said : When the Exalted One, the master of the law, ordered the 

demolition it must, be gcxxl demolition. At that time there was in the cit> 
of .Rajagrha a Chief Minister (Mahamatra) in charge of wood, lie was a 
former friend of the Bhiksu Dhanika. In course of conversation lie remem- 
bered it. The Bhiksu Dhanika then thought : The Chief Minister in 

charge of wood is my friend. I shall beg wood and make a wooden 
cottage. Upon this reflection he went to the Maharnutra's place and said : 
Do you not know at present that the Prince of Emperor of Magadha, king 
Ajatasutru previously gave me wood ? 1 want to take it now for use. May 
I see it ? The Mahamatra replied : Reverend Sir, If the great king has 

given you wood it is good. Take it according to your own choice. All the 
wood is only for this city. So it is completely under the protection of king 
Ajatasatru. It is well kept and protected to be used for the destroyed parts 
of the great city of Riijagiha. The wood is collected for this difficult work. 
How could he give it to you ? The Bhiksu Dhanika then entered the place, 
took a stick, cut it into pieces and took it away. At this time the Chief 
Minister in charge of the city while proceeding along tnc road saw that a 
big stick of wood had been destroyed. On seeing this he was much horrified 
and made this reflection : Is it possible that while king Ajata^atru of 

Magadha is ruling a discontented brigand could enter the city ? This wood 
is preserved for the king. It could not have been given to him. How could 
it be cut into pieces ? On seeing this he went to the minister in charge of the 
wood and said : Does the Mahamatra know it ? While proceeding along 
the road I saw that a big stick of wood has been cut into pieces. When I saw 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 


129 


it I was much horrified, my hairs stood on end. Is it possible that while- 
king Ajatasatru is ruling a discontented brigand could enter the city ? Or 
the officer in charge of the wood has given it to another man? The Chief 
Minister replied : I have not yet given the wood to the man. I met the 

Hhik$u Dhanika sometime ago. He told me : King Ajatasatru has given me 
wood. So you should six* that it is given to me. I then replied to him : 
If the great king lias already given you wood you may go and use your own 
discretion. Is it possible that he has taken this wood ? The Chid Minister 
sn charge of the city then went to king Ajatasatru and told him : King, 
do you know this ? While proceeding along the road l saw a stick of wood. 
!t is the wood which is preserved for the king to be used in difficult works. 
An intruder had cut it into pieces. When 1 saw it I was much bonified and 
my hairs stood on end. Is it possible that while the great, king is ruling 
thieves have entered the city? I asked the chief minister in charge of the 
wood : Did you allow the wood to be given to somebody or not? He 

n plied : I have not given it to anybody. Sometime ago I met the Bhiksu 
Dhanika who told me that the king had given him wood. The officer in 
charge of the wood told him : The king lias given you wood, then use your 

r:\vn discretion. The Bhiksu then cut the big stick of wood into pieces. Is 
it possible that the. great king has allowed the wood to he given to ihar man ? 
The king said : I do not remember it. Send for I he Chief Minister in charge 
of the wood. The Chief Minister then sent orders and wished him to come 
to the king. At that time the Bhik.su Dhanika was entering the city of 
Rajagfha for some business. The Officer in charge of the wood saw the 
Bhiksu Dhanika from a distance and told him : Reverend Sir. Do you not 

know this? As you took the wood the king has sent for me. The Bhik$u 
replied : You go first, I will follow you later. The Officer in charge of the 

wood went first. Dhanika went later. On coming up to the king’s gate he 
waited. Then the envoy went to the king and told him : Great king, the 
officer in charge of the wood is waiting outside the gate. The Bhik$u also, 
although not sent for, has come and is waiting at the gate. The king said : 
D't. the officer in charge of the wood come in. Ask also the parivrdjaka to 
come. The envoy then called the Bhiksu. On entering he raised his hand 
and told the king : Oh Great king, be free from disease and live. long. He 
then sat on one side. The king then asked the Bhiksu Dhanika : Reverend 
Sir, did you take the wood not given to you and cut it into pieces? 
Dhanika replied : Not quite so. The king asked : Why then did you take 

my wood ? Dhanika replied : The king gave it previously. The king 
said : I do not remember it. If you remember it then make me remember 
it. Dhanika replied : Does not the king remember that at the time of his 

first anointment he said in a lion’s voice in the great assembly let all the 

Sramanas, Brahmanas. the people who practise slla, those who. are in the 
good path and those who do not commit theft within my kingdom, let all of 
them enjoy according to their own wish the use of grass, wood and water in 



430 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


my kingdom. The king said : I meant by saying so only tilings that have 
no master. This wood is protected by another. Why did you cut it? 
Dhanika replied : Hie king meant things which have no master. But what 

about the king’s things ? The king, on hearing this, was extremely angry 

and said : iSramaija, you should die. But 1 cannot put you to death. You 
may now go away but don’t do it again. 

VI 

The Mahasanciiika-Vinaya, Parajika II 
(Chinese Tripitaka, Taisho ed. XXII. pp. 238-240). 

Buddha was staying at Rajagrha and speaking at length as before. At 
that time the Sthavira Dhanika, the potter's son, had built a monk’s cottage 
to live in, decorated it in various ways and furnished it with good and big 
sculptures. He had rubbed the ground with scented oil and it got the colour 
of blue Vaidurya. He used to collect there various kinds of food and drink. 
At this time a Sthavira Bhiksu came to Dhanika and enquired about his 
age. Dlianika having replied the newly arrived Bhiksu said : You arc 

younger than me and so I should live here. Dhanika allowed the elder monk 
to live there and built a second cottage for himself. Later on another 
Sthavira Bhiksu came, did as before and got this cottage too from him. 
Dhanika built a third cottage for himself. Another Bhiksu came and did 
as before. Dhanika now thought : Although I took great pains in 
making these cottages I was not allowed to live in them. Where can I get 
wood and artisans every time to make a cottage for me ? Besides there is 
suffering on account of wind, rain, cold, heat and insects. Neighbours 
waited for the cottages that I first made just as cats wait for the mice. I 
do not sec any place. What to do ? Dhanika then thought : I am an 

artisan and have a strong body. I should go to the Rsi’s hill (R$igiri) on 
the black stone by the side of the cave and make a solid shelter of burnt tiles. 
Dhanika did as Vie thought. He built a house of tiles on the black stone by 
the side of the cave of Rsigiri. In this house he had various kinds of engrav- 
ings, designs and walls with doors. It had doors, windows, and brackets. 
Moreover as it had been burnt the house had a red colour like the Yu-t’an- 
p’o (Udumbara) flower. 

At this time the Lord came after the rains to the 0;dhraku(a mountain 
to stay and to go about (cankramana). There is nothing which the Buddha 
TatMgata cannot see, there is nothing which he cannot hear, nothing which 
he cannot know. In order to make the Sutras and the Vinaya he asked the 
Bhik$us : What is that thing of Udumbara colour on the black stone near 
the cave of the Rsigiri? The Bhiksus replied: O, Lord, the Bhiksu 
Dhanika had built a Saftgharama sometime ago. It was embellished with 
sculptures, decorations etc. This was taken by a Sthavira. He built a 
second and a third, but all were taken by the Sthaviras in the same way. 



THE STORY OK DHAN1KA 


431 


He tlien built this house of burnt tiles on the black stone, by the side of the 
cave of the R$igiri. Its colour is beautiful like the Udumbara flower. This 
is what you see on the black shine by the side of the cave of Rsigiri. Buddha 
then said to Ananda : Bring my robe. Ananda brought his robe, and gave 
it to the Tathagata. Thereupon the Exalted One put the clothes on his self, 
and went towards the black stone near the cave of the R$igiri. The Exalted 
One performed great miracles. 

Buddha then reached the tiled house of Dhanika. The gods and the 
divinities opened the door for him. Although the door was low the Tatha- 
gata entered it without lowering his head. Although the door was low it did 
not obstruct him. So the Exalted One entered the tiled house of Dhanika. 
Joining the palms of his golden hands he told the Bhiksus : You all see the 

house of Dhanika. it is well constructed, decorated and fine. Such is Bhiksu 
Dhanika. Although he had given up the. world he could not give up his 
original practice. He is not able to give up his craft. Then again by burn- 
ing the earth you kill all sorts of living beings. The tiled house is cold in 
winter and very hot in summer. It destroys sleep and brings disease and 
pain. You should destroy this cottage. Or else all the Bhiksus will follow 
this method of building houses. In future the Bhiksus will say : During 

the life time of the Lord the Bhiksus made such houses to live in. So you 
must, destroy it- Thereupon the Bhiksus destroyed the house. After destroy- 
ing the house the Exalted One returned to the Gfdhrakuta. 

The Sthavira Bhik$u returned after begging and saw his house demo 
lished. He asked : Who has destroyed this house ? The Bhiksus who 

were there told Dhanika : You have obtained great benefit. The Tatha- 
gata condescended to turn his face to this house. By having this house you 
have acquired merit. The Exalted One knew the projier time and so he has 
destroyed this house. On hearing it Dhanika was much pleased and forgot 
to eat and drink during seven days. 

After seven days he made this reflection : Where shall I go to procure 
wood for constructing a wooden hut? There is the Chief Minister (Maha- 
matra), Ye-shu-t'o, the carpenter of king Ping-sha (Bimbisara) whom I 
knew formerly. He must have wood. He then entered the city with his bowl 
and went to the house of Ye-shu-t’o, and after exchanging words of greetings 
said : May you be hale and long-lived. I want to build a cottage but 
there is no wood. Can you not find some wood for me? The MahamaHa 
replied : There is no wood in my place excepting the king’s wood. I can 
give you wood sometime later. Dhanika said : Don’t say so. Tell me 
where is the king’s house and you speak of preserving his wood. The 
Mahamatra said : Reverend Sir, If you don’t believe, go and see for your 
self. So Dhanika went to the place where the wood was kept. He found 
there the wood of five flying ladders. He took two of these and went to 
construct his house. 



432 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


It was an ancient custom of the former kings to go out once in five days 
to inspect the arsenal the treasury, the people of the palace, the horses^Shc 
elephants, the chariots etc. On coming to the place of wooden things he saw 
that his flying ladders seemed diminished and that two of them were missing, 
lie told Ye shu-i'o that two of the flying ladders were missing. Ye-shu-t’o 
said : O, Great King, all of them are there and none is missing. After the 
second and the third round the king said the same thing to Ye-shu-t’o, but 
the latter replied : Great King, all a. re there and none is missing. The. king 
was then angry and said : You must have burnt my wood. You cannot 
get it again or you must have given it to somebody. He then ordered Ye- 
shu-t’o to be arrested. When Ye-shu-t’o was under arrest he remembered 
that when the Venerable Dhanika came, there was no wood. Did he tak; 
them? So he sent a message to Dhanika enquiring whether he had taken 
the two pieces of the flying ladders. The reply was that he had taken them. 
Another message was sent : f am in prison for having lost the flying lad- 

ders. So you must find out some moans so that I may be soon freed. 
Dhanika replied : You only tell the king that the Bhiksu Dhanika, i.e. 

myself, has taken the wood and that he can enquire from me. The king 
sent for Dhanika and the latter came to the king. The Sthaviia Dhanika 
appeared as a straight man. lie had fine appearance like a godly man. On 
seeing him the king felt very happy. He asked : Reverend Dhanika. have 
you taken the two pieces of flying ladders belonging to me? He replied : 
Yes, 1 have taken them. The king said : Reverend Sir. the houseless ones 
cannot take things that are not given. Dhanika said : O, King, it was 
formerly given, it is not that it is not given. The king asked Who gave it ? 
Dhanika said : The king has given it. The king said : Reverend Sir, 1 am 

the ruler of this country and have to attend to many things. 1 do not re- 
member it. Why do you say that \ have given it? Dhanika replied : O, 
King, do you not remember that you gave St at the very beginning. In this 
kingdom in the assembly of ministers you gave all rivers, lakes, fountains, 
medicinal herbs etc. while receiving the royal abhiseka on the white elephant's 
tooth. At the time of becoming king you said yourself : I am today king. 

I give the Sramanas and Brahrnrrnas all forests, trees, waters and springs 
within my kingdom. So I said that the king has given it. It is not not- 
given. The king said : Reverend Sir, in my kingdom I have given things 
that are not protected hut not the things that are prtM^Cted.; My! former 
words have been wrongly interpreted by you. The king then ordered Ye- 
shu-to to be released. All Brahmins, religious men and women became 
happy and thanked Dhanika. As they were all pleased they requested the 
king to condone the past. 

VH 

Conclusions 

As may be expected, there is a fundamental agreement amongst the six 



THE STORY OP DHANIKA 


433 


versions of the story. By a wrong interpretation of the first proclamation 
of the King of Magadha which the latter made at the time of his corona- 
tion, the Bhik§u Dhanika took away the wood owned by the king. He was 
thus guilty of the offence of stealing (adattadana). The king's law pro- 
vided the punishment by death for such offences, but as Dhanika was a 
houseless monk, he was allowed by the king to go away unscathed. Accord- 
ing to the Jaw* of Buddha it was one of the four grievous offences and the 
punishment prescribed for it was expulsion from the Safigha. 

But a detailed examination of the different versions will bring into 
piominence their differences and throw light on their origin. The name of 
the king of Magadha is given in some of the Vinayas (Theravada, Dharma- 
guptaka, Mahasahghika) as Binibisara but in two of them (Sarvaslivada 
and Mula Sarvasastivada) as VaidehTputra Ajatasatru. In the Mahisasaka 
Vinaya no name, is given. The name of the Chief Minister of the king is 
eiven as Vassakara only in two versions (Theravada, Mahisasaka). No 
name is given in other versions. In the Sarvaslivada and Mula-Sarvastivuda 
versions he is called the “ the city Chief ” and the “ Chief Minister in charge 
of the city ”, both probably meaning the same officer — the nagara-vydva- 
hfiraka-mahain atra. The Mahasahghika- vinaya alone tells us that it was 
the king himself who was out on inspection. In this connection the same 
Vinaya gives us an interesting information that it was an old custom of the 
kings to go out once in five days to inspect the arsenal, the treasury, the 
enlace, the horses, the elephants, chariots etc. 

In regard to the cause's which led Dhanika to build a tiled cottage on 
■ he Rsigiri mountain the account of the first five Vinayas (Theravada, 
Sarvastivada, Mahisasaka, Dharmaguptaka and Mula-Sarvastivada) is un- 
animous. Dhanika built grass huts thrice but every time il was destroyed by 
fbe people who came to collect fuel-wood and grass and the wood taken 
away. But the Mahasfmghika-vinaya gives quite a different account. 
Dhanika built huts three times to live in but every time it was taken by 
more elderly monks on the pretext that they were old in age but Dhanika 
was young and capable of building a new hut for himself. 

As may be expected, the Mahasahghika Vinaya has introduced elements 
which are characteristic of the special leanings of the school. The followers 
of this school believed that Buddha was lokottara, supra-mundane, and that 
his divine powers were limitless. This doctrine had evidently its influence 
on all writings on the school. Thus the Vinaya of this school alone says that 
wiven Buddha came to the tiled cottage of Dhanika 41 the gods and the divi- 
nities opened the door for him ” and that 44 although the door was low the 
Tathagatha entered it without lowering his head 

But the Sarvastivada and the Dharmaguptaka vinayas which are sup- 
posed to follow strictly the conservative traditions (Sthaviravada) are not 
quite immune from this influence. Both the Vinayas say that while Buddha 
29 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


434 

saw the tiled cottage of Dhanika from a distance, he came to know what 
it was, evidently through his supernatural power, but he still made enquiries 
about it from Ananda according to the ordinary human custom. The 
Mulasarvastiviida version betrays this influence to a larger extent. When 
Buddha intended to regulate the habitation of monks he started not directly 
with their dwellings but with the dwellings of the gods, demi-gods, etc. This 
was because he was the master not of this world alone but of all the three 
worlds (tri-dhatu). 

One of the most important things which the Pali Vinaya fails to state 
is the reason which guided Buddha to order the demolition of the tiled 
cottage of Dhanika. It is simply said that it was unbecoming of a recluse 

to possess such a hut and that it might bring downfall to those who would 

come after. The Sarvastivada and the Mula-sarvastivada Vinayas arc also 
silent about, it. The former says that Buddha feared that the anyalirthikn > 
might ridicule the Buddhists and say “ During tire life time of Buddlia the 
sin defiles the law". The latter almost reproduces the same sentence. None 
of these three Vinayas say why the construction of a tiled hut. was un- 
becoming of a recluse and why by doing so a Buddhist monk exiioscd him- 
self to the ridicule of the heretics. The three other Vinayapitakas, viz. the 

Mahisasaka-vinaya, the Dharmaguptaka and the Mahasanghika, give a 
cogent reason for Buddha’s ordering the demolition of tire tileci hut. The 
Mahisasaka says that Buddha disapproved of Dhanika's act because it 
involved the killing of living beings. Buddha says : “ By this bad act lie 
has gravely injured the living things. He is not sorry for it. I have previ- 
ously spoken in different ways on the law of mercifulness. The Venerable 
Ones will in various ways ridicule the Bhiksus doing like this." Buddha 
then clearly says : “ If you Bhiksus, bum tiles you will commit the T'u-lo- 
c«e (ThuHacaya) sin. You will be guilty of T’u-ki-lo (Dukkata) The 
Dharmaguptaka says the same thing. Buddha disapproved of Dhanika’s act 
because it involved injury to living beings. Buddha says : “ I have con- 
stantly and in numberless ways s|x>ken about kindness to living beings. Why 
has this foolish man himself made a mud hut and by collecting fire-wood 
and cow-dung burnt it ? lie should have thus made the tiles red and com- 
mitted T'u-ki !o < Dukkata 1." The Mahasanghika says that Buddha dis- 
approved of the construction of the tiled hut for two reasons. Firstly because 
it involved injury to living beings and secondly because it was unhealthy. 
Buddha says : “ Then again by burning the earth you will kill all sorts of 
living beings. The tiled house is cold in winter and very hot in summer. 
It destroys sleep and brings disease and pain.” On this point therefore the 
Pali Vinaya seems to be defective. With the development of the Sangha 
certainly a time came when the monks t could not quite tolerate an injunction 
prohibiting the use of dwelling places made of tiles or burnt bricks. The 
Pali, the Sarvastivada and the Mula-sarvastivada-Vinayas in this regard 
seem to have suffered some alteration in the hands of their redactors. 



THE STORY OF DHANIKA 435 

The imperfection of the Pali account can be noticed in another connec 
tion. While describing the tiled cottage of Dhanika it says that “it was a 
beautiful, lovely, pleasing, red hut, just like a little indragopa and just like 
rht sound of a small bell, so was the sound of this hut” ( kutikd abhirupa 
dassaniyd pasddikd lohitikd seyyatkdpi indr ago pakd seyyathfipi nanui ktnkim- 
hasaddo evameva tassa kulikdya saddo ahosi ). But the last pail of the 
sentence — " just like the sound of a small bell, so was the sound of this hut M 
seems to be absurd. The Mahisasaka-vinaya is more complete on this point. 
It says : “ At the time of the wind blowing it (i.e. the hut) made the sound 
of a guitar”. The colour of the cottage is compared with different things 
in the different Vinayas. According to the. Pali Vinaya it was red like an 
indragopa which is according to the Pali commentaries a coral- red insect. 
According to the Dharmaguptaka the colour of the hut was red like tire, 
according to the Mula-sanfistivada it was like the jtitika flower while 
according to the Mahasahghika it was like the Udumbara flower. 

Oil another point the accounts of the Pali, Sarvastivada and Mula- 
Sirvastivada Vinayas are less interesting than the accounts of the other 
Vinayas. It is about the wood which was taken from the wood-yard in 
charge of the royal officer on the false pretext The Pali Vinaya says that 
li'ese were sticks ‘held for the king, serving to repair the: city laid down in 
case of accident ” ( nagara- pal isam k hank (ini dpadalthdya nikkhittdni) . 

According to the Sarvastivada it is 41 the heavy sticks used for protecting the 
city” and according to the Mula-Sa rvastivada it was wood “to be used for 
rise destroyed parts of the great, city of Rajagrha.” The Dharmaguptaka 
simply says that it was the wood retained for the king. But the Mahisasaka 
'■•m the Mahasahghika accounts attach greater importance to the wood taken 
away by Dhanika. According to the former it was “ the big wood used for 
the city rampart ”. whereas according to tin 1 latter it was “ two of the five 
flying ladders M . Probably the last two accounts mean the some thing. The 
wood taken away by Dhanika was therefore of such importance as the king 
could not afford to lose it without a proper enquiry. 

The comparative study of the different versions of the story of Dhanika 
therefore shows that in spite of their fundamental similarity in regard to 
the commission of the sin of stealing by a monk for the first time, there are 
important and significant differences between them. They raise problems 
which may be answered only from a thorough and comparative study of all 
the six Vinayas. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND THE TAKING OF LIFE 


By 

Miss I. B. HORNER, M.A. 

The Indian genius we arc often, and rightly, told is for religion ; and 
when the religion we now call Buddhism arose in the sixth century B.c. in 
India, the tradition and exercise of religious thought, speculation and liveli- 
hood were strong, and they were protected. Kings were patrons of religion, 
and the men of religion commanded much respectful attention and enjoyed 
kindly and honourable treatment alike from kings, ruling chieftains, their 
ministers and the ordinary people. There abounded, as early Buddhist and 
Jain texts show, all kinds of ascetics, t a pas as. numerous wandering teachers 
and students, paribbtljakas .. and a diversity of sects, titthiyas, many of them 
brahminical. Among the most famous of all the religious groups were the 
Jams, whose doctrines were already well developed by the time of the list! 
of Buddhism. 

In India in the sixth century n.c. there was thus much that went by 
the name of religion ; and there was much besides that masqueraded under 
a religious guise. For example, there was the offering of sacrifices, partly 
made for temporal gains, and which might involve the taking of life. There 
were, on the other hand, various other habits and customs which, while no 
attempt was made to attribute their origin, observance or perpetuation to 
any religious source, yet also dejjcnded on the taking of life. I middled, 
perhaps by a mixture of motives, the two greatest religious systems flourish- 
ing in these times, Jainism and Buddhism, both made an indelible impres- 
sion not only on the India of their day but, in the case of Buddhism, on the 
lands where it has since spread, by the firm stand they took against the 
prevalence of practices which deprived creatures of life. The object of this 
paper is to discuss in a general way the attitude adopted by Early Buddhism 
to a practice which it deplored. 

There is no doubt that in the lay world of the Early Buddhist epoch 
life was frequently deliberately and knowingly destroys. Human life was 
taken by kings and their armies in battle. It was taken again by murderers 
who, after all, broadly speaking, do in an unorganised way what armies do in 
an organised way. Animal life was taken by kings and their attendants 
when out for the pleasure of hunting. It was taken, although unintention- 
ally, by farmers ploughing and by agriculturists digging. It was taken by 
anyone who felled a tree, 1 or destroyed vegetable growth, 1 who trampled down 

1. Vi n. iv, 34. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


437 


crops and grasses 2 and who dug the! soil. 3 * For according to the Indian way 
of thinking, as this is expressed in the 'Pali canon, a certain form of life 
called “ one-facultied ", ekindriya fiva, inhabits trees, plants and the soil, 
and even water may have creatures, or “breathers”, ( sappdnaka udaka) in 
it.* Again, animal life was taken by hunters and trappers, by butchers and 
fishermen for human consumption and other human needs. And it was taken 
by brahmin priests for sacrificial purposes, as was perhaps, although cer- 
tainly to a lesser extent, human life. 5 * Thus slaughter took place under four 
major forms : in battle, in agriculture, for eating meat and fish, and for 
sacrifice. 

The emergence in India of the notion of ahit/tsd, non-harming, non- 
injury, is historically speaking not clear. Its origin cannot be attributed to 
a definite date or to any particular teacher, social reformer or law-giver. 
The problem of the birth of the idea of non-injury is indeed as obscure as 
that of “ leaving the world ”, u of forsaking home for homelessness. Non- 
injury, which includes the principle of sparing life, of not taking it, of not 
depriving man or beast of it, receives much emphasis in the surviving Jain 
texts ; but whether the notion actually sprang up under the Jains or whether 
they exploited some life-sparing tradition already there we do not know. 
Although the birth of the notion may lie hidden to us, the magnitude of 
the stress the Jains lay on doing anything so calamitous as taking life has 
the appearance of a protest ; a protest against an existent and more or 
less widespread slaughter of creatures of which it was impossible to be un- 
aware. 

Buddhism also was aware of this state of things, and was very much 
alive to the divers purposes for which life was destroyed. If it did not use 
the word ahitrisa and the verbs connected with it as frequently as the con- 
temporary Jains, it all the same fostered the scruple against the taking ol 
life as much as they did. Other sects which inhabited the Valley of the 
Ganges at the same time, while not making such a mark on the thought and 
custom of the day, nevertheless contributed to this new or revived scruple 
and upheld it by themselves practising non-injury under the form of vege- 
tarianism. 7 

But in spite of teaching, precept and example, the evil persisted for some 
two hundred and fifty years at least after Gotama’s lifetime until it was 
given, not a mortal, but a severe blow by the Emperor Asoka. His Rock 
Edict I is a revelation of the terrible slaughter of animals that went on daily 

2. Vin. i, 137, 138, iv, 296. 3. Vin. iv, 32-33. 4. Vin. iv, 49, 125. 

5. Cf. A. B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanishads , 

p. 347, and C. H. /., vol. I, p. 106. * 

& This latter problem is discussed by Mra Rhys Davids in Ch. II of Poems 

of Cloister and Jungle. 

7. M. i, 80, 



438 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


so that the royal kitchen could feed hundreds of people and the kings popu- 
larity thereby increased. But Asoka, who became exceedingly sensitive to 
the. taking of animal life, abolished this communal feeding, first of all reduc- 
ing the number of animals to be slain daily to three, and for use only at the 
loyal table itself, and then decreed on the rock that “even those three living 
creatures shall not be slain in the future.” The Emperor’s conviction of the 
sanctity of animal life culminated in his Pillar Edict V, assigned to the 
date 243 B.c. This lays down “ an elaborate code of regulations restricting 
the slaughter and mutilation of animals throughout the empire. Those 
regulations were imposed uiH>n all classes of the population without distinc- 
tion of creed, social customs, or religious sentiment.” s The broad principles 
of Buddhist teaching on compassion to all that, lives and breathes here finds 
concrete, detailed and definite, expression. Asoka applied this teaching to 
his times, he lived it. and he spread it through the unusual medium of hard 
rock and polished pillar. 

it may have been acquaintance of the fact that during the early Buddhist 
eiioch some control was exercised over the unchecked slaughter of animals 
which emboldened Asoka to restrict their destruction or mutilation on certain 
days : on holy days. Although wc have little knowledge of any such pre- 
vious interdictions. Asoka 's Pillar Edict would suggest in some form these 
bad existed before his time, and that therefore he was continuing a practice, 
perhaps expanding it, but not innovating it. A brief reference is found in 
the Vinaya to a “non-slaughter day." In the story of the lay woman fol- 
lower Suppiya. it appears that before she cut a piece of flesh from her own 
thigh for an ill monk to whom she had promised some broth, she had a 
search for meat made throughout Benares. But she was told that none was 
to hand, “ for today is not a slaughter day ”, maghalo ajja. 0 The Jalaka 
mentions the “ drum of no-slaughtcr ” being sounded through a town. 8 9 10 and 
as having been heard by kings of old, 11 and it mentions a zemindar who had 
laid an interdiction upon the slaughter of animals. 1 2 

It is tempting to suppose that some of these no-slaughter days coincided 
with the uposatha, or Observance days, days of the new and the full moons 
when monks in each “residence” recited their body of Patimokkha rules, 
and when lay people were meant to abstain from some of their more conge.- 
nial activities. And for such a coinciding there is supp^u from a /at aka in 
which it is said that a man was unable to get meat, not merely because it 
was a no-slaughter day but, with greater precision, because it was a “ fast day 
on which there was no slaughter,” uposalhamaghata . 13 This may well have 
been the case, but yet it throws little light upon any early connection made 

8. Vincent Smith, Asoka, 3rd edn., 1920, p. 57. 

9. Vin. i, 217. 10. Jo. iii, 428, 434. 

11. Jo. iii, 428. 12. Jo. iv, 115. 13. Jo. vi. 346. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


439 


between such a restriction and special days. For the Jataka prose is com’ 
parativdy late, and was probably composed nearer to Anoka’s time than to 
Gotama’s. 

There is plenty of evidence however to show that, before Asoka’s reign, 
Gotama had protested against, the taking of life. Ilis surviving talks and 
prohibitions and “allowances” i mrujammi ) too- arc addressed mainly to 
monks, and these after all formed his most malleable as well as his most 
vulnerable material since they were under the control and discipline of the 
Order, of which he was, as the canon shows particularly tire Vinaya, the foun- 
tain head. Yet records are not lacking where Gotama is portrayed as either 
directly or by implication trying it) drive home to lay people his abhorrence 
of taking life. 

In one resiwct, he was not unsuccessful. For he was instrumental in 
bringing about a. decrease in the popularity of great animal sacrifices. But 
in the three other ways- that is, in warfare, agriculture and meat eating 
v'ilh its attendant trades of hunting, trapping and butchery, it may be said 
iiiat he met with only a limited success. There is no means of assessing 
lb: number of those who turned to the humaner way of life presented to 
thun by Gotama. It would however be reasonable to suppose that some 
• ►I his contemporaries responded to his gifts of jx-rsiiasion, and, further in 
■pine! by a feeling for ahiiiisti, refrained from activities which involved des- 
troying animal or human life. For this has been the case later and in other 
Buddhist lands. On the other hand, there is no doubt that even if warfare, 
agriculture and meat-eating diminished somewhat as lay occupations in 
Gotama’s times, they were by no means abolished nor even largely re- 
nounced. And for this two chief reasons may be adduced : in the first place, 
kings and jxioplc did not want to give up these ways of ministering to 
their ambitions, livelihood or pleasure ; and in the second, since Gotama 
was not a temporal ruler, he had no actual power to impose a body of 
icslrictive regulations and penalties on the laity as he had on his monastic 
followers. 

With blood-sacrifice the case was different. The times were ripe for 
its virtual abolition ; and it only needed some authoritative lead, some cham- 
pion, and the support of a strong-minded, convinced and articulate oppon- 
ent for the perhaps already dying brahminical customs of animal sacrifice 
and of such human sacrifice as there was to fall into decay. Gotama en- 
tered the area ; and according to passages in the canon, however infrequent, 
fie spoke with vigour. Of his protests, I will mention two : the one serious, 
the other revealing a delightful sense of humour. Both are well known. 
The serious protest is found in verses occurring in the Samyulta, Angutiara, 
Suttanipdta and Itivuitaka . ,4 ’ 

14. S. i. 76, A. ii. 42, iv. 151, Sn. 303, It. 21. 



440 


a C. LAW VOLUME 


The sacrifices called the Horse the Man, 

The Peg-thrown Site, the Drink of Victory, 

The Bolts Withdrawn, and all the mighty fuss : — 

These are not rites which bring a rich result. 

Where divers goats and sheep and kine are slain, 

Never to such a rite as that repair 
The noble seers who walk tlie perfect way. 

But rites where there is no bustle nor no fuss 
Arc offerings meet, bequests perpetual, 

Where never goats and sheep and kine are slain. 

To such a sacrifice as this repair 

The noble seers who walk the perfect way. 

These are the tiffs entailing great results. 

These to the celebrant are blest, not cursed. 

The oblation runneth o'er ; the gods are pleased. 

This is serious and persuasive. Yet the half humorous way which 
is chosen to convey the protest made in the Kutadanta Suttanta 15 does 
nothing to militate against its fundamental earnestness. In his Introduc- 
tion to tills Suttana which, as he points out, lc consists of a legend obviously 
invented ad hoc, Rhys Davids wrote : “ having laughed the brahmin ideal 
of sacrifice out of court ... the author or authors of the Suttana go on to 
say what they think a sacrifice ought to be. Far from exalting King Wide- 
Realm’s (Mahavijita) procedure, they put his sacrifice at the very bottom 
of a long list of sacrifices each better than the other, and leading up to the 
sweetest and highest of all, which is the attainment of Arahatship. 17 King 
Wide-Realm’s sacrifice, although it never took place except in the half 
serious, half comic legend told for the sake of its moral, is, as described, 
typically Vedic in character. There would have been the slaughter of cows, 
goats, cocks and pigs. As it was, in the legend, only ghee, oil, butter, milk, 
honey and molasses were used, and largesse was distributed in the four 
quarters. Rhys Davids thinks that the battle over the Vedic form of 
sacrifice “was really won by the Buddhists and their allies. And tlie com- 
bined ridicule and earnestness of our Suttanta will have had its share in 
bringing about the victory.” 18 

At all events it is sufficiently clear that strictures such as these did not 
fall upon deaf cars. The people were sympathetic, broad minded and not 
completely dominated by priestly superstition. In a word, they provided 
excellent material on which to work in the matter of suppressing the destruc- 
tion of animals for quasi-religious purposes, and the growing realisation that 
large-scale sacrifice was both spiritually and economically unsound will have 
played a decisive part in stamping it ojit. 

15. D. i. 127 ff. 16. Dial. i. 162. 

17. Dial. i. 164. 18. Dial. i. 165. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


441 


This potent stand against a mistaken custom may have been further 
backed by the feeling, even by the knowledge, that in India animals had not 
always been offered up on the sacrificial altar ( vedi ). There would appear 
to be a contrast between the religion of the Aryan invaders and the attitude 
adopted, in particular to the cow, by the cattle-breeding inhabitants of the 
overrun territory. Horse 19 and cattle sacrifices were characteristic of the 
Vedic tribes ; and by their own religion they were enjoined to sacrifice cattle 
to their gods and to slay them for guests, the actual worship of the cow as 
such not being found in Rig-Veda.-" But, on the other hand, it would 
appear as though among the indigenous population a certain reverence for 
ihc cow had gone back to a remote antiquity. The Sutlatiipala, in a very 
remarkable Sutta, 21 speaks of the brahmins of old as having regarded the. 
cow as their parents, brothers and kin, as their best friend and as the source 
of all healthful things. So in gratitude they never slaughtered cows. 29 But 
then then; came a change. The brahmins became greedy and avaricious. 
Fired by tlie huge gifts they obtained from the king by instigating him to 
offer horses and human beings in sacrifice, their next choice fell upon cows. 
And Okkaka, the king, doomed hundreds and thousands of cows to be slain. 
A sense of the injustice and wickedness of this, felt by the teller of this story : 
The cows that do no hurt with horn or hoof, 
yes, gentle lamblike cows that fill the pail, 
he bade be taken by the horn and slain'- 9 
was shared by others at the time when of old this outrage ( ad ham mi ) began: 
’Tis wrong ! ’tis wrong ! arose th’united wail 
of Brahmas, Indra. titans, demons too, 
as cows were butchered for the sacrifice 24 

as it was by other and still later people presumed to be the contemporaries of 
the story-teller : 

Thus, thus the wise condemn this ancient guilt, 
and folk condemn the sacrifices’ crime. 25 

This outstanding Sutta doubtless refers in its thirty-two verses to some 
ancient tradition of brahmin degeneracy. Instead of their former life of zeal 
and rectitude which needed no animal sacrifices to abet it, later, in the lust 
for wealth, brahmin priests procured the sacrifice of horses, men, and finally 
of cows. But sacrifice in its turn succumbed to the force of public opinion. 
Substantiation for such popular disapprobation may be found in the outcry 
the people made at the prospect of the sacrifice of elephants, horses, bulls 

19. RV. I. 162, 163 were used at horse-sacrifices in Vedic ritual. 

20. A. B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanishads, p. 191. 

21. Sn. BramunudhammikasuUa (hfo. 7 in Cufavagga). 

22. Sn. 295-297. 23. 309. 

24. Sn. 310. 25. Sn. 313. 



442 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and other four-footed creatures, and which is recorded in a Jdtaka story.-* 
The evidence provided by Pali “ literature ” for the suppression of great 
animal sacrifices suggests that outside brahminical circles, this practice was 
not one particularly cherished by the ordinary people. 

This degeneration from harmless rites to bloody sacrifices is noticed by 
Buddhaghosa in the Samyutta Commentary - T and by Dhammapala in the 
Itivuttaka Commentary /-* in their exegesis on the verses beginning : “ The 

sacrifices called the Horse, the Man," already quoted. Formerly, these Com* 
mentaries tell us, the assa-medha, horse-sacrifice was sassa-medha. a corn or 
crops festival ; the pnrisa-medha , human sacrifice, took the form of a six 
months gift of food and wages to gnat, soldiers ; the throwing of the peg. 
samnuipnsa , was then called a bond to bind men's hearts ; people addressed 
one another in affectionate language, vdtapcyya , the word being later altered 
to vdjuptyya , a sacrificial drink and people were so pleasant that there 
was no nerd to bolt the doors of the houses.- 1 ' But, so the commentaries go 
on with no doubt the Snllanipdta in mind, in the time of the former king, 
Okkiika (who is there regarded as in part responsible for the brahmin ascen- 
dancy) the brahmins upset all this happy arrangement, and the “four bases 
of popularity ” and contentment in the realm took on the aspect of sinister 
sacrifices and orgies . 31 

In speaking of human sacrifice, pwisamedha . which in the verses quoted 
is mentioned with a&samedha, horse- sacrifice, and three other rites which did 
not involve death for the. victim, the question should be borne in mind of 
whether it was in early times ever more than a symbolical ceremony. No 
reference to the practice can be established in the Rig- Veda the Brahmanas 
do not describe a rite of an actual slaying of a man ; 3:| “ there is in the Saia- 
ratha and Taittiriya Brahmanas and their Sutras merely the symbolic offer- 
ing of men/* as is the case in the Yajurvcda . 34 Indeed evidence for a 
human sacrifice on the lines of the horse-sacrifice appears to be provided only 
by two of the later Sutras. 

This does not mean however that on occasion a man may not have been 

26. id. No. 133. 27. SA, i. 144 ff. 28. It, A, i. 93. 

29. On Vajapcya, or Drink of Strength, see A. B. Keith, Religion and Philo- 
sophy o) the Veda and Upanhhads, p. 339 ; and for mention of the assamedha and 
the “ V a jape y a (soma sacrifice), associated with secular Brahmanism ” as being 
M two forms of sacrifice having a political significance, see 13. C. Law, India as des- 
cribed in Early Texts of Buddhism and Jainism , p. 205. 

30. Cf, Megasthenes, Futgm . XXVII (McCrindlc, Ancient India, p. 70) : 
“their houses and property they generally leave unguarded/* 

31. Cf, G . S. ii. SO, n. 1, to which T am indebted. 

32. A. B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanhhads, p. 347; 
and C. H . /., vol. I, p. 106. 

33. A. B f Keith Religion, p. 347. 

34. A. B. Keith, C. //. 7, vol. I, pp. 123, 136. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TARING OF LIFE 443 

slain for some sacrificial purpose. In the Takkariya Jdlaka 35 one brahmin 
proposes the slaughter of another so as to make an oblation with his flesh 
and blood when a new gateway for a town was to be built. Rouse, in his 
translation of this Jdlaka, 7 "'' has an interesting note on the persistence cf 
traditions about human sacrifice at the founding of a building and so on, 
so as “to propitiate the spirits disturbed by the digging,” and he refers to 
the rumours current at the time of many young children being immured in 
the foundations of the Ilooghly Bridge at Calcutta. Keith, in discussing the 
later Saiphitas and Brahmanas, alludes to the building of an altar for the 
sacred fire. He says. “ in one sense no doubt this was an ancient and simple 
rite, accompanied as so often by the slaying of a man in order to secure 
the abiding character ol the structure .”' 7 Even if there was some tradition, 
as the Pali Canon and commentaries may suggest, for a full scale Human 
Sacrifice similar to the llorse Sacrifice, evidence is lacking for any actual 
slaying of a human victim or victims. The more casual, and far less cosily, 
sacrifice of one man on occasions when buildings were being erected appears 
to be better attested. There is no ground for believing however that it was 
customary to offer human beings on such occasions ; there are more grounds 
for believing that in early Buddhist times any form of human sacrifice was 
much less common than animal sacrifice. Yet however progressive and 
enlightened was the bulk of the population, there was always a backward 
element to contend with, the element which, for example made oblations 
(. bdikamma ) of doer and swine to yakkhas.** 

It would moreover seem as if animal sacrifice had been superimposed, 
partly as a royal and priestly undertaking, on an older tradition of harm- 
lessncss, breaking it, cutting into it- it is true, but not crushing it into obli- 
vion. The survival, the memory, of this tradition, denying to animal sacri- 
fice the status of an unbroken custom, must be regarded as a further reason 
why any difficulties which the Early Buddhists may have met in fighting for 
the abolition of the sacrifice of horses and cattle, in particular, were by no 
means insuperable. 

The Early Buddhist attitude to warfare, agriculture and meat-eating was 
more mixed than was its attitude to blood-sacrifices. It made no whole- 
hearted condemnation of these three practices although they all entail the 
taking of life. But it did what it could to lessen their incidence and popu- 
larity. The most fertile field for reform was the monastic Order. Monks 
were, forbidden to have more than a minimum to do with armies 39 on pain of 
committing offences which needed confession as their expiation : and no one 
who was a soldier, subsumed under the heading “ in a king’s pay," was 


35. Ja. iv. 246. 

37. C. H. vol. I, p. 142. 

39. Vin. iv. 104-108, Pac. 48-50. 


36. Ja. TratU. iv. 155. 
38. JS. iv. 115. 



444 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


allowed to “go forth " 40 from home into homelessness, that is, to take the 
first step to becoming a monk. Further, monks were forbidden to dig the 
soil or to get another to do so , 11 a rule which presumably could have been 
companioned by another to cover ploughing. But because monks were en- 
tirely supported by the laity, and because apparently they had not attempted 
to plough, there was no occasion to formulate such a prohibition. But a 
different set of considerations was entailed in regard to eating meat, the 
result of which was that monks were allowed to eat meat and fish provided 
that it was “ pure ” in three respects, which means a monk had neither seen, 
heard nor suspected that it had been killed on purpose for him and fur- 
ther, provided that it was not the flesh of certain animals which it was made 
unallowable to eat . 43 

I will say a little more about these three practices in turn and will 
begin with warfare. But I have written about the early Buddhist views on 
this subject elsewhere . 1 1 I will here only point out that Gotama is represented 
neither as having glossed over nor as having passed by its existence without 
a word of censure. On the contrary, he faced the fact of fighting openly 
and frankly, and in three main ways. In the first place, there are verses, 
attributed to him, depicting the utter futility and inconclusiveness of war , 45 
and more verses contrasting the use of force with the exercise of dhamrna* ' 
conscience, what ought to be done, because it is right. Yet. although the love 
of fighting is deeply embedded in the human heart, there were apparently 
some people in the times to which the Vinaya purports to refer who regret- 
ted that they Iiad to have anything to do with an army . 47 It was their karma 
which drove them to this means of livelihood, and in a vicious circle this 
means of livelihood set up a new bad karma for them. Many classes of 
people, as the Sutlanipdta enumerates, including the farmer, kassaka, the 
fighting man, yodhajiva, and the sacrifices yajaka, are what they arc because 
of their deeds, kammand. iS 

Again, it is interesting to notice that public opinion 40 and the opinion 
of the pious monks/" as well as that ascribed to Gotama , 01 was against 
monks talking tiracchanakatha™ low, inferior talk concerned with mundane 
matters, and that two out of its twenty-seven specified forms are talk about 
armies and talk about fights. Such talk is said to be connected with the 

40. Vin. i. 74. 41. Vin. iv, 33, Pac. 10. 

42. Vin. i. 238, ii. 197, iii. 171, M. i. 360. 43. Vin. i. 219 f. 

44. Ceylon Daily News. Vesak Number, 1939 ; and (briefly) B. D. ii, Intr. 
p. xxxii. 

45. S. i. 85. 46. Dhp. 256, 257. 

47. Vin. iv. ,104. 106, 107. , 48. Sn. 650-652. 

49. Vin. iv. 164 . 50. Vin. i. 188. 51. A. v. 128-129. 

52. Also mentioned at D. i. 7, 178, iii. 54 ; M. i. 513, ii. 1, 23. In all these 

passages, except D. i. 7, wanderers are spoken of as talking tiracchSitakatha. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


445 


goal nor to tend to the highest form of godly life . 53 In substituting ten topics 
of conversation Gotama is made to say to the listening monks that if they 
would engage in these they would outshine in brilliance the moon and sun — 
not to mention the wanderers, followers of other sects and who, as other 
records show, were prone to indulge in brace hanakatha." * 

In the second place, it adds greatly to Gotamas fame as a leader of 
humanitarian thought and practice that he was able to eliminate warfare as 
an occupation for his monastic followers who, after all, formed a consider- 
able proportion of the population. In this respect Eastern monachism differs 
strikingly from Western, where monks not only regarded themselves a 9 
soldiers of Christ but saw nothing wrong or incongruous in resorting to arms. 
1’ighting was automatically closed to Buddhist monks by their third Parajika 
iiile : if they deprived a human being of life or incited him to commit sui- 
cide or instigated another person to murder him, they committed an offence 
< r the utmost gravity whose penalty was expulsion from the Order. They 
' tre further debarred from lighting by other rules which made it an offence, 
although of a lesser kind, knowingly to take animal life. 85 And since two 
of the four “ wings ” of an army consisted of elephants and horses, these were 
inasmuch danger as the infantry ( fxtiti ) of being targets for destruction in 
battle. 

The third way in which Gotama faced the fact of fighting was, however 
ol range this may seem, by expressing a certain admiration for the soldier. 
Although metaphors from warfare are less frequent in Buddhist than in 
Christian literature,'" there are several similes which arc military in nature, 
their point usually being to encourage monks to be steadfast in endeavour as 
soldiers are steadfast in battle and to wage spiritual battles as they wage armed 
ones. Discipline was the aim for both. On the other hand unstable monks are 
likened to the (five kinds of) warriors who lose heart : as the latter falter 
at various (preliminary) stages of the battle so the former falter if they are 
unable to steer quite clear of women. 57 Thus soldiers, even cowardly ones, 
have their uses as jiegs on which to hang various aspects of Buddhist teach- 
ing for monks. 

And the same may be said of the soldiers’ various battle adjuncts : the 
warrior elephant and horse. The former especially is used in metaphor. 
But it is interesting to find that the ways in which a monk is compared to 
a battle elephant represent as a rule quite initial stages in his spiritual train- 
ing. For example, when monks are! compared to elephants who falter when 

53. S. v. 420. 54. A. v. 129. 

55. Vin. iv. 33, 35, 49, 125. 

56. Pss. Bretk., p. 144, n. 1. But sJee T. R. Glover, The Disciple, 1942, who, 
in his chapter on The Soldier points out that in Paul’s Epistles the soldier and the 
athlete are "sometimes confused by English readers”. 

57. A. iii. 89, 100. 



446 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


going forth to battle because each of their five senses is afflicted by disagree- 
able sensations— a metaphor which resembles that of the soldiers who lose 
heart almost before the battle begins — it is to show that such monks are not 
yet immune to the lure of the five senses /* 8 Again, as the elephant, entering 
battle, destroys all parts of the fourfold army and endures the blows of 
weapons, so should a monk destroy all sensual thinking and endure physical 
discomfort.^ Both these metaphors point to stages where a monk is not 
far advanced in his training. 

A verse from the ThtragiUha ' Jt) further suggests that only the early stages 
of the training were envisaged where warrior-elephant similes are used. This 
verse is ascribed to the former soldiers, Sona. Potiriya’s son . 61 After having 
gone forth, he remained so sluggish and did not apply his mind to medita 
tion that Gotama had to admonish him. lie thereupon reflecting upon his 
shortcomings and working for insight 0 - uttered this verse : 

If in the fight my warrior elephant 
Advanced, ’twere better, fallen from his back, 

Dead on the field and trampled I should lie, 

Than beaten live a captive to the foe. 

This is a verse which comes well from a former soldier ; and it may be only 
accidental that Sona compares his own almost desperate state after he had 
turned monk with his imagined desperate state in battle due to being dis- 
lodged from his elephant. But, on the other hand, this comparison may be 
deliberate since in other similes battle elephants are apt to be connected with 
weak or elementary attainments in the life of religion. 

Agriculture does not involve the taking of human life, but in the process 
of ploughing and digging small animals and insects may be destroyed. Now 
in regard to taking life. Early Buddhism drew two distinctions. In the first 
place, there was a distinction between taking it deliberately and taking it 
unintentionally. Thus if monks took human or animal life in the latter way 
there was no offence for them /* 3 But if they took it knowingly and inten- 
tionally there was, as I have already indicated, the most serious penalty in 
the case of human life, and a penalty also, although less severe, in the case 
of animal life. For in the second place, Early Buddhism recognised a dis- 

58. A. iii. 157. 59. A. ii. 116, iii. 161. 60. Thag. 194. 

61. 7 hag. and Vtn. evince some discrepancies. This is one, for Vtn. i. 74 
forbids monks to allow anyone in the king's pay to go forth. Again, Vtn. i. 79 
decrees that monks shall not let a youth under fifteen years of age go forth. But six 
" boy-theras " arc mentioned in That*., all of them recorded in the Corny . to have 
M gone forth " when seven years old, including Sivali, who lay in his mother’s 
womb for seven years before being born, «but who “went forth ” on the seventh 
day after this event (Tkag. A . i. 147). 

62. From Corny, on Thag. 194. 

63. Vtn. iii. 79 ff., iv. 33, 35, 49, 125. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


447 


tinction between men and animals. But since this was in degree rather than 
in kind, it therefore held it as principle of right behaviour for monks ttiat 
they should destroy neither the one nor the other. 

Agriculture certainly ojxined the door to the danger of taking life. A 
farmer could hardly avoid killing or maiming small creatures in the soil. 
Yet, because he did not destroy them of set purpose, the evil of taking life 
was not the point of Gotama s famous ploughing talk with the fanner 
Bharadvaja." 1 The point was that his kind of ploughing -that of the mind 
and spirit -was richer in result than the farmer’s ploughing of the land, 
and it was meant to show how much finer were the activities of those who 
were able to devote themselves to a spiritual instead of a mundane way of 
life. 

But agriculture had been practised from time immemorial. Moreover, 
it was, in the India of Gotama’s days as it had been for centuries previously, 
not only the economic mainspring of the people and by far the greatest 
industry, but its results were vital to the life, health and prosperity of the 
entire population. So vividly had this been realised even in remotest anti- 
quity, and in lands wide apart, that ceremony and ritual had come to be 
connected with the chief agricultural operations of the year. 

Everything depended on the fertility of the crops. These therefore had 
to be sown in an atmosphere of the rite and festival. It is true that triis may 
have dwindled by the. Early Buddhist epoch, even if it had not disappeared 
altogether. Yet certainly the tradition remained. The ] didkaniddna, the 
Introduction to the Jdlakas , a collection of stories of the past, contains a 
valuable description of a Festival of Sowing or of Seed-time, called a vappa 
wait gala S ,: > This was a ploughing festival, in which the king played a lead- 
ing part. The people decorated the city like a dev as mansion and all the 
servants and workmen, in swtlcss white clothes and adorned with scented 
garlands, collected at the king's house. A thousand ploughs, nan gala . were 
yoked “ for the king’s work M . He himself had a golden plough ornamented 
with red gold, and the horns, reins and goads of the oxen were ornamented 
with gold. Of the thousand ploughs, a hundred and seven (or seven hundred 
arid ninety -nine™) were adorned with silver as were the yokes and reins of 

64. S. i. 172, Sn. 76-80. 65. Jd. i. 57. 

66. Jd. i. 57. The Pali is ekena iinam atthasataifi and ekounailha&ataw . Rhys 
Davids, Bud. Birth Stories, 1880, p. 74 renders ' 4 a hundred and eight minus one ”, 
and A. K. Coomaraswamy, Rg-Veda as Land-nama-B6k, p. 14 as " a hundred and 
ven M . At some time 108 certainly came to be regarded as an auspicious number : 
108 marks on the soles of the Buddha’s feet, 108 “books” in the Tibetan canon, 
108 beads on a Buddhist rosary. On the other hand allhasala has the meaning of 
“ a great number M and as such is 800. »Thia is the meaning which C. P. D. as- 
cribes to this passage. Moreover una is generally prefixed to round numbers. But 
*799 ministers’ was! large in proportion to the then 200 ploughmen, unless Ibis was 
an intentional device used to emphasise the importance of the occasion. 



448 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

their oxen ; and these were used by the ministers. The ploughmen took the 
remaining ploughs and ploughed from this way and that, ito c'ito, perhaps 
Bp and down, while the king went orato param potato oram, from the hither 
to the further (side) and back again, perhaps across the field, on the analogy 
of orato paraw when crossing a river. There is no doubt that once this was 
a most important festival and things were done on a lavish scale. 

The Jatakanidana relates tliat while the ritual ploughing was in pro- 
gress the shadow of the Jambu-tree stood steady and circular. 07 This inci- 
dent provides a clue to the time of the year when the festival was held, for 
it relates to a solar solstice, and as the seed will have been sown at the 
turning of the year, it is reasonable to assume that the spring equinox was 
intended. 

The Samyutla Commentary 03 and the Suttanipdta Commentary ™ in 
passages very similar to one another, discriminate between a wet-sowing and 
a dry-sowing, 70 and in elucidating the verses addressed to Bluaradvaja say 
that here the latter is meant. This is the first sowing of the year in a land 
fertile enough to bear two sowings annually, and it is done before the ground 
has been watered by the rains of Die monsoon (June-Septcmber). It would 
therefore have taken place about the same time of year as the mangalavappa 
of the Jatakanidana . 

The Samyutla Commentary goes into a good deal of detail, as docs the 
Suttanipdta Commentary , as though recalling a ceremony no longer custo- 
mary and therefore in need of recapitulation. Both say that they arc des- 
cribing a mangalavappa or Sowing Festival, a ritual sowing, which took 
place on the first day (of Die sowing). After this the sowing went on in the 
ordinary way and without any ritual. Each of the three thousand oxen was 
adorned with golden hooves and silver horns, and all had sweet smplling 
white garlands. Their bodies were coloured with signs or marks ( lakkhana ) : 
some black, some white, some red, some variegated. The fronts of the 
ploughs, the yokes and goads were decorated with gold. The leading plough 
was yoked with eight oxen, the others with four each. There were five 
hundred ploughmen, all clad in white, and they were adorned with scented 
garlands and arrayed with bunches of flowers on their right shoulders ; their 
limbs were dyed red and yellow and they got the ploughs into teams of ten. 
No king is spoken of as taking part in the sowing here, but the brahmin 
farmer Bharadvaja. 

He had his beard attended to, he bathed, 71 he was smeared with swoet- 

67. Jd . i. 58. 68. SA. i. 242 f. 69. Sn. A . 137 f. 

70. Of. VA. 550, udakavappa , sawing" in water, and thalavappa (v. 1. thiila-), 
sowing on the dry ground. C/. Mcgasthenes*, Fragm . XI (McCrindlc, Ancient India, 
p. 55) and Strabo, Geography 15. 1. 13. 

71. Probably meaning ceremonially here. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


449 


smelling unguents ; he clothed himself in costly garments, put many rings 
on his fingers, the “lion’s earrings” 72 in his ears, folded the brahmins 
turban on his head, and placed a golden garland round his neck. His wife 
too s having had rice milk cooked in a hundred assorted vessels, had these 
placed in great wagons. She then bathed herself in scented water, and put on 
ail her ornaments and went off to the ploughing accompanied by a crowd of 
brahmin women. Nor was the house neglected : it was sprinkled with corn 
and decorated with full pitchers, plantains, flags and banners. Flags and 
banners were likewise erected here and there on the held. Then came the 
oblation to the plough, nangaiahalikamma : the brahmin had a golden bowl 
washed, he filled it with rice milk, then mixed ghee, honey and molasses into 
this and had the! oblation made. The brahmin lady, having had vessels of 
gold, silver, copper, bronze and brass given to the live hundred ploughmen, 
took a golden spoon and stayed beside the rice milk. When the brahmin had 
made the oblation and had put on his red-gold sandals, he took up a red- 
gold stick and said : “ Give rice milk here, ghee here, sugar hero.” This, says 
the Sawyutta Commentary , is how the business, or the ploughing, kammanta, 
prexaueded : ayam lava kamnwnte pavatli . 

it will lx* noticed that a woman (the brahmin s wife) took part in the 
festival. She, like the furrow, .sif/7, was a symbol of fertility, and as such 
was a necessary feature in the ceremony. In the Rig- Veda there is a plough- 
ing hymn in one verse of which 73 Slta is venerated as a kind of deity of 
agriculture and prosperity. The Sita of the R amity ana, according to legend, 
was not born in the ordinary way but sprang from a furrow as Janaka was 
ploughing. 

The Jidakanidima and these two Commentaries thus supply good evi- 
dence of a great ploughing and sowing festival held in times gone past. 
I think however that no such minute descriptions of any festival held at the 
ripening of the corn survive, although this too was an important time in 
the agricultural year. It secerns we have in fact not much more than live 
reference in the Saifiyutta Commentary and the Ilivuttaka Commentary 1 * to 
the sassamedha , corn or crops festival, as having been the original of the 
assamedha. Horse Sacrifice. Monier Williams gives sasyetshti as “sacrifice 
offered on the rijxming of new grain.'’ So there is some faint tradition. 
But the Pali canon pays no special attention either to the time when the crops 
are ripening or are being harvested. Various measures are taken to protect 
the growing com, 75 and wc hear that in the last month of the hot weather 
cows must be kept off all crops, 75 and again that deer must be herded away 

72. Sikakttydala. Sn. A. i. 138 lias the v. L sViamukkakurnlala as at Ja . v. 
138 which has? the shorter form as well. 

73. RV . IV. 57. 6. # 74. SA. I 144, It. A . I 93. 

75. Vht. i. 137, ,138, iv. 47, 205, 266, 296. Sn . p. 15. 

76. M. i. 116. 


30 



450 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


“ at the time of crops,” sassasamaya It looks as though any ancient festi- 
val to celebrate the ripening of the grain had given place to the practical 
and careful attention which by common consent was bestowed upon the 
growing crops, but which had nothing ritual about it. The dying out, if 
this were indeed the case, either of this festival or of that held at showing 
time in no way impaired the popular determination to keep the land pro- 
ductive. Crops were regarded as supremely valuable by the lay contem- 
poraries of the early Buddhist monks, and agriculture was ranked in the 
Vinaya. which was intended principally and one might say almost exclu- 
sively for monks, as one of the three “ high works ” or activities.™ It was 
not therefore an occupation which would yield easily or extensively to 
Gotama's deprecations of it. 

He realised that while people remained in the world, no radical altera- 
tion could be made in many of their activities. It was only when any 
member of the laity felt the call to come apart and decided to renounce the 
world and to become a monk that prohibitions, made partly for the sake 
of protecting living creatures and partly for the sake of the monks’ moral 
welfare, could be enforced and made fruitful. The monk world had a different 
code from the lay world, for it was one of as complete non-harming as il 
was possible to achieve. But in the completeness of this there was a curioui 
anomaly connected with some of the foods that a monk might oat. 

The eating of neither fish nor meat was banned for monks ; and if not 
positively encouraged was likewise not positively discouraged. Indeed fish, 
and meat formed two out of the five permissible “ soft foods,” the other 
three being different cereals. 70 It looks as if, because, the laity were neither 
slopjHxl from growing grain, which after all did not involve the intentional 
taking of life, nor from occupations which made the eating of meat possible, 
so similarly the monks were allowed to partake of cereals, fish and meat. 
But we have seen that in the case of the last two, certain restrictions were 
imposed : meat, and fish, had to be “pure” in the three respects, and meal, 
had to be “ the meat of those (animals) whose meat is allowable.” 80 Gifts to 
the Order were made allowable, kappakala, by the donor uttering some 
phrase to the effect that he was giving, for, with a few minor exceptions, it 
was an offence to take anything not given. 81 But, especially in times of scar- 
city, monks had a light to ask, and in fact incurred an offence of wrong- 
doing if they did not, whether the meat that was being given to them was 
that of certain animals : of an elephant, horse, dog, serpent, lion, tiger, 
leopard, bear or hyena, 84 For the meat of these animals came to be un- 
allowed. But the reasons for this ban do not in the least imply that for 


77. 

Ja. i. 143. 

* 

78. 

Vin. 

iv. 6. 

79. 

e.g. at Vin. iv. 83. 


80. 

Vin . 

iv. 88. 

81. 

PaiSjika 11. 


82. 

Vin. 

i. 218 0. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


451 


monks or laity meat-eating was thought to be wrong in itself. Elephants 
and horses arc attributes of royalty ; dogs and serpents are revolting and 
disgusting ; while to eat any of the wild animals mentioned, including again 
the serpent, might involve the monks in personal danger. 

Many other passages show, although almost incidentally, that the eating 
of meat was thought of as customary, and monks are recorded to have done 
so often enough to give meat the appearance of having been a fairly con- 
stant article of their diet. There was the monk to whom Suppiya promised 
broth, already referred to, and to whom she sent a piece of her own thigh, 
having prepared it, sampadetva. There was the nun Uppalavapna who got 
as a gift some meat from a cow killed by a robber chief, and which having 
prepared, sampudetva, she wished to present to Gotama.*- : And there were 
the monks who were, allowed to take and eat the kills of wild animals, 
which of course would be other animals,* ■ and they had these cooked, pacd- 
pcivd, before eating them. Only in the case of a strange non-human disease 
were monks allowed the remedy of the raw flesh and blood of pigs. Si These 
ate instances taken only at random. 

While injunctions survive showing which animals’ flesh was forbidden, 
there are none specifying which was allowed. Thus, in the absence of any 
definite rulings, we have to piece together our knowledge of those early times 
from any source that seems helpful or suggestive. We have just seen that 
if monks ate. beef or the kills of wild animals or, in certain circumstances, 
the raw flesh of pigs no objection was made. Similes which depict the 
cattle-butcher and his apprentice displaying piecemeal at the cross-roads the 
carcass of the ox they have slain,* 1 ' hacking at the inwards ,* 7 or flinging a 
bare bone to a famished dog who has made bis way to the slaughter house,** 
all indicate the cattle-butcher to have been a well known part of tire existing 
social fabric, ministering to the needs of those who had no objection to 
eating beef. There is too the simile which compares the life of man, insigni- 
ficant, trifling and full of ill and trouble, to the cow about to be slaughtered, 
and who with every step she takes while being driven to the shambles, comes 
nearer to her death and destruction . 89 

References to sheep, although often to their wool and the purjroses which 
this served , 60 point to these animals as forming a useful part of the animal 
population of India then as now. And from further references to the cattle- 
butcher, the sheep-butcher, the pork-butcher, the deer-hunter and the fowler, 6 ' 
and also to the fishermen, all selling their wares , 92 it would seem beyond 


83. Vin. iii. 208. 84. Viit. iii. 58. 

85. Vin. i. 202-3. 86. D. ii. 2<M, M. i. 58. 

87. M. i. 244, S. iv. 56, A. ill 380.’ 88. M. i. 364. 

89. A. iv. 138. 90. E.g. Vin. iii. 225-7. 233, 234. 

91. Vm. iii. 104 ff. = S. u. 254 ff. 92. Ibid., and A. iii. 301 ff. 



452 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


all doubt that the laity ate the flesh of cows, sheep, pigs, deer and game- 
birds, and fish. Such are the animals which (not including fish) perhaps 
yielded "the meat of those whose meat is allowable”, and hence might be 
eaten by the monks if offered them, so long as the other necessary conditions 
were fulfilled. 

There is a verse in the TheragathcP* which speaks of snaring a monkey 
by means of some sticky stuff, lepa, glue or pitch. The process is explained 
in the Sumyutta" 1 where finally the hunter, having caught the monkeys, spits 
him then and there and prepares him for eating, avasajjeti, over charcoal 
embers. We hear of a monk keeping a female monkey, 37 ' and of another 
monkey which was confined in captivity. 36 But there is no evidence that 
monkeys ever formed any part of a monk's diet. They were probably only 
eaten by such low people as hunters. 

Although the eating of meat by laity and monks alike is tacitly con- 
doned, the bloody trades which bring animals to destruction for this purpose 
by no means escape condemnation. Verses ascribed to the nun Punrta 37 
speak of sheep-butchers, ix>rk-butchers, fishermen and trappers, together with 
executioners and thieves, as evil doers who cannot be freed from their evil 
deeds by the rite of ablution. 1 ' 6 For then all aquatic creatures would go to 
heaven, which is clearly absurd. She is speaking to a brahmin who believes 
in the efficacy' of purification by water, but her verses plainly show the con- 
viction that butchers, fishermen and trappers are doers of wrong. The 
Anguttara, in knitting beings to their deeds, 39 posits one of two bourns and 
uprising for those who make onslaught on creatures (restraint from which 
is the first of the moral habits or silas), who are hunters, bloody-handed, 
given over to killing and slaying : either downright woe in hell, or rebirth 
in the womb of an animal. Again, horribly painful consequences in after- 
lives are ascribed to those who in this life had been butchers, hunters and 
trappers. 1 " 0 But similar painful consequences for their cruel deeds here are 
also ascribed to animal tamers, slanderers, frauds, adulterers and fortune- 
tellers. It is therefore impossible to say that slayers of animals, although 
considered as wrong-doers and liable to very uncomfortable rebirths, were 
worse thought of than the other wrong-doers here named. 

But monks did not, or should not, themselves actually take animal life. 
They did not act as butchers, they did not fish, hunt or trap. All their 
food was provided for them by the laity. ' But they were able, unlike those 
recluses and brahmins who are recorded to have lived on jujube fruits, sesa- 

93. Thag. 454. 94. S. v. 148 f. 

95. Vin. iii. 21. 96. Thag. 125 f. 

97. Thag. 241-2. 

98. Cf. M. i. 39, Kd. p. 6 for (heretical) notion of purification by water. 

99. Vin. iii. 104 ff. = S. ii. 254 ff. 

100. A. v. 288 ; and c/. A/, i. 387 ff.. iii. 203. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


453 


mum, beans or uncooked rice, 1,1 L to receive gifts of fish and meat, provided 
they observed the restrictions and safeguards of not receiving more food 
than their one begging bowl would hold ; 10 " of not eating more than once a 
day ; 103 of establishing that the fish and meat was “ pure ” ; and that it was 
not the meat of certain prohibited animals. 

But the broad principle remained whereby monks aroused no criticism 
or contumely if they ate meat. A variety of causes may have led to this 
leniency where we might have expected a greater stringency. For example, 

2 difference was made between oneself killing and oneself eating what an- 
other person had killed. Moreover Gotama advocated an adequate diet for 
his monks, and was as opposed to fasting and Ixxliiy mortification as he was 
to greed and luxury, for he saw in these no true way to achieve the highest 
goal, paramatla. Since cereals, in particular rice, with some meat, fish, fruit 
and daily products formed the staple foods of the population, these were 
most likely to have been bestowed by them upon monks. Monks, therefore, 
since none of these foods was prohibited to them, obtained sufficient “ to 
keep themselves going ” and did not go short of almsfood. And, in addition, 
by accepting an offering of food, by not rejecting it, they would neither have 
appeared rude to the donor nor would they have spoiled his chance to 
acquire merit by his gift. To have rejected an offering of food would more- 
over have opened the door to picking and choosing, not only between what 
went into the begging bowl, 101 but between the houses visited on the alms 
round. 103 This in its turn would have prevented some of the laity from 
setting up merit, and it would have given a handle to greedy and gluttonous 
monks to indulge their tastes and preferences. 1 00 

Again, it is possible that the habits of other sects were taken into con- 
sideration. There were, on the one hand, the Jains, ultra-scrupulous in their 
avoidance of taking life : and no doubt the bovine ascetics ate, 107 or affected 
to eat only grass. 10 '' There was, on the other hand, the important class of 
Naked Ascetics, called Ajivikas, and who apparently were not strict vege- 
tarians, 100 but who abstained from fish and meat now and again with a view 
to “ schooling their bodies ”, or “ making to become by bodily means ”, 
kayabhavana, rather than from humanitarian reasons or because they saw 
in such a diet anything intrinsically wrong. 

Yet perhaps the reason which weighed most heavily in the condonation 
of fish and meat-eating was the strong conviction that it was not material 
things which made or marred a man. Early Buddhism did not agree with 

101. M. i. 80. 102. Cf. Sekhiyas 28, 30, 32. 

103. Vin. iv, 85. 

104. Cf. Sekhiyas 34-36, where hoyever (in 34. 35) monks choose what they 
roost fancy from what is already in the bowl. 

106. Cf. Sekhiya 33. 106. Vin. iv. 88. 

107. M. i. 387. 108. MA. iii. 100. 109. M. i. 238. 



454 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the supposition that purity comes through food. 110 Purification comes, it 
held, by restraint over such bodily, mental and moral conduct as could defile 
a man, and with the possession of moral habit. 111 It did not consider it 
to be his outward signs : his wearing his hair matted in the braids of an 
ascetic, his birth or his clan which made a man a true brahmin. 112 It was 
not these things, nor his abstinence from fish and meat, which cleansed a 
man who had not crossed over doubt. 113 For it was not the eating of meat, 
na hi matfisabhojanarfi, which sullied him and was his defilement, dma- 
gandha , but any one out of a long array of wrongs which he might perpe- 
trate by conduct, thought or speech. 114 He was neither defiled nor purified 
by what he ate, nor was he cleansed by fasting. 11 " 

In conclusion, it need only lx; said that no clear picture of the world 
in which Early Buddhist monastic ism flourished can be obtained if the fea- 
ture of life taking is ignored. And nor can a clear picture of this monasticisin 
be obtained if its attempt to crush the desire to destroy life are left out of 
account. There was a strong movement to remedy, even to eradicate, what 
was regarded by several leaders of contemporary religious thought as an 
undesirable practice. The remedy was a life-sparing scruple. To the birth 
of this there is no historical clue. We only know that it was strong under 
Jainism, fostered by Early Buddhism, observed by some contemporary' sects, 
and that it then culminated under Asoka. 

Early Buddhism’s advocacy of non-injury cannot, I think, be attributed 
to any one* cause, for there were monks, laity, brahmins and other sects as 
well as the animals to consider. And no doubt a mixture of motives operat- 
ed. Such championship may have seen in non-harming a way to increase the 
moral welfare of the monks ; it may have been part of a disinterested social 
reform movement ; it may have been, as in the case of sacrifice, polemical 
in nature, anti-brahminical ; and it may have been due to tlie presumption 
that animals have as much right to their lives, and to compassion, as have 
human beings. 

Whatever the motives which led Early Buddhism to stand firm in the 
cause of non-injury, the results are in the main sufficiently clear. Some 
control was imposed over monks in the matter of meat-eating, but they 
were not made to give it up. Warfare and agriculture were however entirely 
ruled out as monastic occupations. Sacrifice, as ordinarily understood, seems 
never to have been practised by monks, for they had no gods to whom to 
make offerings : “Only within burneth the fire I kindle.” 110 Therefore theii 

110. M. i. 80. 111. A. i. 221. 

112. Dhp. 393, and cf. 141. 113. Sn. 249. 

114. Sn. 241-247. 115. Dhp. 141. 

116. S. i. 169. Cf. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Hinduism and Buddhism, p. 56, for 
this being the Internal Agnihotra of the Brahminical Aranyaka. 



EARLY BUDDHISM AND TAKING OF LIFE 


455 


discipline does, not comment on outward sacrifice one way or the other. The 
laky, on the other hand, continued in meat-eating, warfare and agriculture, 
although the killing of animals for human consumption was probably re- 
stricted. at all events on certain days, before Asoka’s reign. Agriculture could 
not be so strongly condemned as warfare, since in its operations creatures are 
not killed deliberately. The surprise is that not more opportunities were 
taken roundly to condemn lighting. It. is likely that no way to its eradica- 
tion was seen, that no tide was turning in this direction as it was to abolish 
blood sacrifices. The suppression of the great organised sacrifices had the 
popular support : the ordinary people knew that they were the losers and 
not the gainers through them. But any effective blow dealt to their trades, in- 
dustries and occupations would have spel t a blow to their livelihood. House- 
holders therefore continued to practise meat-eating, warfare and agricul- 
ture, and to indulge in many “ pleasures of the senses which, because of 
their different way of life, came to be denied to monks. 



THE LINGA CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA 
(Its proto- Indian origin and early development) 

By 

Dr. A. P. KARMARKAR, m.a., el.b., pii.d. 

Mainly on account of its close association with Siva, the phallic cult has 
assumed a significant role in the religious history of India. The Linga wor- 
ship has been of wide prevalence in the ancient world. We find the traces 
of it in India, ancient Egypt. Syria, Babylon, among the Assyrians, in Persia. 
Greece, Italy, Spain, Germany, Scandinavia, among the Gauls, and in differ- 
ent parts of Armenia, Mexico, Peru and Ilayti. 

In India itself the Mohenjo Daro discoveries have thrown a Mood of lighi 
oti the early prevalence of the cult of the Linga and Yonl. 

Diverse opinions have been expressed in regard to the origin and anti- 
quity of the Linga cult. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar expresses the view-point , 
that, ' the Linga worship had, it appears, not come into use at the time of 
Patazijali for the instance he gives under Panini v. 3.99 is that, of an image 
or likeness (Prakrti) of Siva as an object of worship and not of any emblem 
of that God. It seems to have been unknown even in the time of Wema Kad- 
phises, for on the reverse of the coins. . . .there is no Linga or a phallus.’ 1 2 3 

Creuzer represented it as, next to that of the Trinity, the most ancient 
religious form of India.- Stevenson is of opinion that it was originally pre- 
valent amongst the Dravidians alone. Some scholars point out that the cult 
must have first originated in the western nations and even among the Greeks." 

But. the curt manner in which the Rgvedic bards refer to the phallic god 
{Sisna-devfrh from the Dravidian word Sunni') clearly proves the non- Aryan 
nature of the phallic cult. The Mohenjo Daro inscriptions also corroborate 
this view point. 


The Linga in the Mohenjo Daro period. 

Both the Archaeological data and the Mohenjo Daro inscriptions point 
out the unique phase in the history of the phallic cult in ancient India. It is 
proposed to deal here with the main results below. 

1. R. G. Bhandarkar, V <Ufr,avhm, Saivism and other minor religious Systems , 
p. 115. 

2. Symholik . t.i. p. 575, 2nd Ed. 

3. Of. F.-Kittel, Ubei den Urspring des Linga Kullus in India, p. 46. 



THE t.INGA CULT IN ANCIENT IM>IA 


437 


Sir John Marshall distinguishes three types of cult-stones at Mohenjo 
Archaeological I>aro and Harappa, namely, the baetylie. the phallic and 

Data. the yoni ring stones. To say in the words of Marshall, 4 5 

“The first class comprises those of the type illustrated, in Plates XIII. 
3, and IV, 2, 4 and 5. Two of these (Pi. XIV, 2 and 4) are unquestion 
ably phallic, more or less realistically modelled, and for all of the fantastic 
theory that it was introduced into India by live Greeks or other western in- 
vaders. Further evidence on the same point is furnished by two realistic speci- 
mens of the same kind, one a linga or phallus (PI. XIII) and iho other a 
yoni or vulva CPI. XIII, 7), which Sir Aurel Stein found on the Cholco’ithie 
sires in Northern Baluchistan, the former at Mughal GhunrCii. the latter at 
Periano Ghuijdai. The other objects are, rather conventionalised in shape. 

“ Indeed, the only explanation applicable to them all is that they were, 
sacied objects of some sort, the larger ones serving as aniconic agalmata for 
cult purposes, the smaller as amulets to be carried on the person, just as mini- 
ature lingas are commonly carried by Saivas today. 

“ '17ie stones of the second class are like many of the Hugos seen in Siva 
kmples today. They equally resemble tin? bietylie stones which have recently 
been unearthed in the temple of Mekal at Beison- . . . The only reason, thexe- 
lore, for interpreting Mohenjo Daro examples as phallic rather than bietylie 
is that their conical shape is now commonly associated with that of the. linga. 

“ The third class of these stone objects comprises ring-stones of Ihe fyixss 
illustrated in Pis. XIII, 9-12, and XIV, 6 and 8 in large numbers at Mohenjo 
Daro and Harappa. An explanation of these, ring stones that Iras been sug- 
gested to me by Mr. llenry Cousens is that they were threaded on poles to 
term columns, but this suggestion leaves out of account the smaller sjrecimens 
some of which are no bigger than linger rings and obviously could not have 
served as architectural members. Nor can they lx* similar to the stone wheel- 
money in use on the island of Hap in the Carolines. 

Finally, he concludes, whether these three types represent three distinct 
cults is uncertain ; but it is not unnatural to suppose that linga and yoni 
worship may have been associated then, as they were later under the aegis 
of saivism. On the other hand, it is probable that they were originally quite 
distinct from bsetylic worship, which is found frequently connected with the 
cult of the Mother Goddess among the oldest tribes, whereas phallism is 
rarely, if ever, found among these aboriginal people.” 

Besides the archaeological evidence, the inscriptions of the period also 
supply us with an interesting data. We are here sum- 
ftvi^ence° na ' marizing the main results arrived at by Father Heras, 

which are still regarded as being of tentative value. 

t 

4. Marshall, Mekeujo-Daro and the Indus Civilization , I, p. 59 ff. 

5. Daily Telegraph, 13th April, 1929. 



458 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The inscriptions relate that the early worshippers of the linga were the 
Kavals and the Bilavas. The Bilavas evidently were the 
The early Bhils and the Kavals the same as the robber caste of the 

Worshippers. North and the South. 0 They were probably Kolerian in 

origin and they brought this cult from far-off Eastern Islands. 7 Their symbol 
consisted of the linga.* That the linga cult was originally in vogue among 
the Kavals and the Bilavas is proved by the following inscriptions : 

(1) “In the dark growing half of the moon, when the sun was ra 
high, the Bilavas pulled down the four houses of the Linga."” (According to 
this inscription the Linga among the Bilavas had houses the rent of which was 
used for fostering the cult}. 1 ” 

(2} “ The linga of the eight village? of the Velvet Bilavas (is) the high 

sun of the harvest. ” 11 

(',!) Kavals- “The old linga of the Kavals.” 1 * 


The inscriptions indicate, in the opinion of Father Heras, that the cult 
was first introduced in the Aloheujo I)aro region by lie: 
Its early Alina king. One of the inscriptions relates “ the ini 

introduction. prisoned illustrious ruler of the Linga." 1 '* Another ins- 

cription designates him as ‘Cunni Mina.’ 11 Probably 
on account of this the king seems to have been deposed and imprisoned by a 
popular rising. An inscription says “ (the object, of) the, hostility of the 
Almas is the imprisoned illustrious ruler (who is) a priest.."" Other inscrip 
tions describe, “the end of the. power of Alina” 10 and “of the. death ol 
Alina.” 1 '* loiter on an inscription carved after his death seems to commemo- 
rate the bitter feeling of the Minas towards their old king in a sarcastic way. 
“'Jhe tree of the canalized united countries of the Kavals of (dedicated to) 
all the gods, whom Alina who was in the house has reached. 1 * 

Some of the inscriptions relate how the Linga was identified with the sun, 
who was identified with At? originally e.g. (1) “The 
Linga and the Linga of the. eight villages of the Velvel Bilavas (is) 
151 the high sun of the harvest, '* " and (2) “The lustrous 

linga of the high sun.” 20 


6. Heras, ‘Religion of the Mohcnjo-Daro People acc. to Ins.’ /. U. B„ V. I. 

p. 16. 

7. Ibid. 

8. Cf. Heras, Mohenjo Dam, the People and the Lanf , Indian Culture, Vol. 
Ill, No. 4. 

9. Marshall, M. />.. No. 406. 10. Heras, <»/>. cit., p. 16. 

11. Marshall, Harappa. No. Of). 12. Ibid.. H., No. 118. 

13. Ibid.. M.D., No. 132. 14. Ibid., M.D., No. 40. 

15. lllHrtiaUtl Landau Men s, 4-10-24. 

16. Marshall, 11. No. 153. , 17. Ibid., H„ No. 127. 

18. Marshall, M.D.. No. 11. 19. Marshall, H., No. 99. 

20. Marshall, H., No. 45 ; Cf. Ibid, M.D. PI. XVI, No. 337 ; Ibid. H. No. 

99, etc. 



THE LINGA CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA 


459 


The cult seems to ‘ have been connected with a house divided on account 
c f the Tites of the two suns . 21 One of the inscriptions says “those (are) 
the high suns.” 22 As Father Heras observes : “At the present state of our 
knowledge, it is impossible to say how this sect originated, but it seems to 
have been the cause of division of a house or family, as the inscription avers. 
Perhaps this expression refers to an event similar to the revolution caused 
in MiniwJ by the introduction of the cult of the Linga .” 23 

Consequently, in the opinion of Father Heras, it was during this period 

alone that the Linga was identified with An. Ar.i was 

i iii supposed to be creator of the world. And when once the 

unci An, r , .. 

Linga was given the sublime position by its identification 

with die Sun it was but natural that it should be identified with ajj also. 

One. of the inscriptions relates : “ The moon 'is) over the white, mountain of 

Velan of the Linga of the divided house of the two high suns.'* The 

while mountain referred to in the inscription is the Kailasa mountain. 

Aisd Velan is the name of Subrahmanya or Murugai.i. Evidently, the linga 

must :-t:.!iul for An. Because, to whom did the Kailasa mountain belong?” :: 

Early References 

Side by side with the Mohenjo Darn period, the earliest reference made 
<> t! \t) Linga cult is in the Kgveda. The Vedic bards prayed that, 4 let not the 
enter their sacrificial pandal.' To quote the exact stanza itself ; 
“Na yatavah India Jujuvah nah na 
Vandana vi^istatvetynbhih, 

Sa sardhan Aryah visuinajya Jantoh ma 
Sisna-devftl.) asiguh rtam nah ” 2 * 

Ihe expression occurs once, again in the Rgveda . : ‘ 7 

But what should be the meaning of this expression ? Almost all the 
?cholars> up till now, interpreted the word as meaning 1 (those) who (have 
the) Phallus as their deity/-* But under the present circumstances, especi- 
ally in the light of the new evidence that has lxjcome available in Sumer 
'Khafaje) and Mohenjo Daro, we may definitely say that the above inter- 
pretation is wrong, and that the expression Sisna-devftk must mean those 
(Gods) possessed of a Sima (Sisna-yuktah-Devah ) , which is rather a curt 
manner of abusing the Gods of the indigenous people of India, whose Siva 

21. Heras, 1 The Vclalas in Mohenjo Darn/ Indian Culture , Vol. Ill, Ne. 4, 
p. 54. 

22. A. S. of l. Report , 1929-30, PI. XXVIII, No. 11466(4). Cf. Marshall, 
°P- tit., M.D., No. 490. 

23. Heras, op. tit., p. 54. # 

24. Photo, M.D., 1930-31, Dk. 10551. 25. Heras, op. tit., p. 54. 

26. Rgveda, VII, 21.5. 27. Ibid. X. 99.3. 

28. Cf. Vedic Index : Sayaga interprets the word as meaning ' ubrahma-cartnah' 



460 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


was perfectly nude. The standing figures of An are to be found in Khafaje 
(Sumer) also. That is an instance how the God of the Mohenjo Daro had 
later travelled there. 

This kind of interpretation is also in keeping with the learned scholar- 
ship of the Vedic singers. If they really wanted to refer to the iSi&na-worship 
pers then we may say that vocabulary was not wanting for them so as to use 
the expression in such a round about fashion -as the later critics and com- 
mentators want them to do. Further this also agrees with the version how 
the Rudras who were not. allowed to have any share in the sacrifice, were 
later on offered the share in the oblations. The story of Daksa and Siva 
also shows how mythology developed itself later on. 

That the word Rudra conveyed the meaning of a standing figure of 
Siva in an Ordhva-linga posture is directly conveyed by many of the Pura 
nic passages, which have tried to give the meaning of the word Sthanu. The 
word Stlianu occurs once in the Rgveda but in a different sense. But the 
expression as indicating Siva is of free and common occurrence in the Puninic 
period.-" 

The Atharvaveda describes the Skambha (pillar) as co-extcnsive viii* 
the universe and comprehends in him the various parts of the material uni 
verse, as also the abstract qualities, such as Tapas, faith, truth, and divi 
sions of time. It is further stated that, “lie is distinct from Prajapati, who 
founds the universes upon him. The thirty-three gods are comprehended in 
him and arose out of non-entity, which forms his highest memtxsr, as well 
as entity is embraced within him. The g(xls who form part of him dc 
homage to him. Where Skambha brought Purana Purusa (the primeval 
Being) into existence, and Skambha in the beginning sited forth that gold 
(Tliranya, out of which Ilininya-garbha arose) in the midst of the world. 
He who knows the golden reed standing in the waters is the mysterious 
Prajapati ."* 1 It. is interesting to note that the word Velas, which is used 
for the reed, has the sense of membrum virile , both in the Rgveda '’ 1 and the 
Satapatha Brahmarja. Gopinatha Rao makes a significant observation in 
this connection : 4 It is this same Skambha that has given birth to the Pura- 
nic story of Siva’s appearance as a blazing pillar between Brahma and Visou, 
when they were quarrelling about the sujxriority of the one over the other/ ' 
But, in our opinion, this idea even seems to be even of pre-Vedic origin. 

It is also pointed out that there are many phallic ideas and rites depicted 
in the Yajurveda-™ e.g. in the Mahabharata at the winter solstice, in the horsc- 

29. Karmarkar, * Fresh and Further Light on the Mohenjo Daro Riddle/ 
A. B. 0. /?. XXI, pp. 122-23. 

30. Atkarvaveda , X. 8 . 31. Rgveda, X. 95, 4-5. 

32. Gopinatha Ran, E. //. /., 11, i. p. 571. 

33. Cf. Vdjasaneya Samhita , 23, 19 ; Taittiriya SamlritS, Satapatha Brahma ya, 
13, 2, 8, 5 : Maitrayani Samhita. 3, 12, 20. 



THE LINGA CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA 


461 


sacrifice and even in the Soma sacrifice. However they are not really phallic 
rites but may be styled as obscene only ; and they very likely reveal some 
early fertility magic of the primitive Aryans. 34 

The Svetasvatara Upani$ad describes Rudra as the ‘ Lord of Yonis 35 — 
thus indicating the close association of Rudra-Siva with the cult of Yonl. 

The Mahabharata has supplied us with some interesting details regard- 
ing the Linga cult. In the Drona-Parva it is said that, ‘ Sthaiju is so called 
because the Linga is always standing (erect). 33 Further the expressions 
Urdhvalinga 37 Urdhvaretas 33 and Sthira-linga M as applied to Siva occur in 
the different portions of the Mahabharata. Best of all we find that Siva 
is designated at Mahaipho Nagno thus referring to his nude posture. 4(1 The 
Annsasana generally depicts t.he importance of the worship of the Linga.'" 

The llarivamsa. The llarivariisa emphatically identifies the Linga and 
the Bhagalinga with Tryambaka (Siva) and Umu, and states that there is 
no third entity as apart from these in the world. 4 - (See inira .) . 

Both the Mahabharata and the, Puranas have given fantastic accounts 
regarding the dose identification of the Linga and Siva. We are dealing 
with the problem below. 

Native Accounts of the Origin op Linga. 

The Puranas and the Epics have preserved many traditional accounts 
regarding die origin of the Linga-cult. These accounts are mainly mythical 
and fabulous. Before narrating a few of these stories, we shall just sum- 
marize the details wherein they actually vary. The Skanda P. narrates that 
when Siva went for begging alms in a naked fashion to Daruvana all the 
wives of Esis fell in love with him, and that the Rsis cursed him eventually 
ritat his Linga would fall down. 43 The Saura Purana corroborates the above 
account. 44 The Linga P. states that Siva wanted to know and examine the 
philosophical knowledge attained by the I?§is residing at Dtaruvana, and it 
tvas afterwards that the above facts happened. 43 The Padma P. gives a 
different story altogether : On the event of the second marriage of Brahma 
■with Gayatri, Savitrl cursed also Siva (because he attended the ceremony), 
saying that the R$is would curse him and eventually his Linga would fall 

34. Heras, ‘ Were the Mohenjo Darians Aryans ? ’, Journal of Indian History, 
XXI, p. 29. 

35. Svetasvatara Upanisad, 4. ,11. 5-2. 

36. Mahabharata, Drona, pp. 203, 133. 

37. Santi P., Adh., J46, 266. 38. Anusasana P., 4, 212; 17, 41. 

39. Ibid., 161. 11. 40. Ibid., 14. 15. 

41. Ibid., Adh. 45, 214 ff. 42. Harivamsa, II, 72, 60. 

43. Skanda Purana, Nagarakhanda, 1, 22 ff. ; also VII, i ; Adh. 187 . 28 ; also 
VI. Nagarakkayda, Adh. 258. 

44. Saura Purana, 69, 53. 45. Linga P„ Purvardha, Adh. 29. 



462 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


down. But later on, when appeased, she said that the Linga thus fallen 
down shall be worshipped by mankind. 16 

The Vamana P. on the other hand relates that when Brahma retired, 
siva installed the Linga (in the subtle form) in the Chitravana forest, and 
began to wander. 17 The Mahabharata relates a funny story how Siva 
forcibly thrusted the Linga in the ground, and how it stood erect we shall 
now quote some passages. 

Origin of the Linga. 

Vamana Puraqa.'* 

It is said that Siva being grieved at the loss of Satl began to wander. 
The story proceeds, “ Then 1 lara, wounded by the arrows of Kama, wander- 
ed into a deep forest, named Daruvana, where holy sages and their wives 
resided. The sages on beholding Siva saluted him with bended heads, and 
he, wearied, said to them, * Give me alms. ' Thus he went begging round 
the different hermitages ; and wherever he came, the minds of the sages’ 
wives, on seeing him, became disturbed and agitated with the pain of love, 
and all commenced to follow him. But when the sages saw their holy dwell 
mgs thus deserted, they exclaimed, “ May the linga of this man fall to the 
ground . ’’ That instant the Linga of Siva fell to the ground ; and the gad 
immediately disappeared . The Linga, then, as it. fell, penetrated through 
the lower worlds, and increased in height, until its top towered above the 
heavens ; the earth quaked, and all things movable and immovable were 
agitated. On perceiving which Brahma hastened to the sea of milk, and 
said to Vispu, ‘Say, why does the universe thus tremble?’ I lari replied. 
‘On account of the falling of Siva's linga, in consequence of the curse ot 
the holy and divine sages.’ On hearing of this most wonderful event. 
Brahma said, ‘Let us go and behold this linga.’ The two Gods then 
repaired to Daruvana ; and, on beholding it without beginning or end, Visr.ru 
mounted the king of birds (Garuda) and descended into the lower regions in 
order to ascertain its base ; and for the purpose of discovering its top, 
Brahma in a lotus car ascended the heavens ; but they returned from their 
search wearied and disappointed, and together approaching tire linga, with 
due reverence and praises, entreated siva to resume his linga. Thus pro- 
pitiated, that God appeared in his own form and said, ‘If gods and men 
will worship my Linga, I will resume it, but not otherwise ; and Brahma 
divided its worshippers into four sects, the principal one of those, that which 
simply worships siva under the symbol of the Lingam ; the second that ol 
PaSupati ; the third of Mahakala ; and the fourth, the Kapila ; and revealed 
from his own mouth the ordinances by which this worship was to be regu- 
lated. Brahma and the Gods then departed, and Siva resumed the Linga.” 

46. Padma Parana, 3 Srstikha?j<Ja, 17. 

47. Vamana Parana, Adh. 6, 93. 48. Cf. Kennedy, op. cil., pp. 298 ff. 



THE LINGA CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA 


463 


Mahabharata. 

The MahSbharata gives an interesting account in connection with the 
origin of the linga. Kpsna is described to have related to Yudhisthira : 
" Brahmadeva once told Sankara not to create. Whereupon Sankara conceal- 
ed himself under water for a long time. When, therefore, there was no creation 
for such a long period, Brahmadeva created another Prajapati, who brought 
into existence a large number of beings. These beings, being afflicted with 
hunger, went to Prajapati to devour him. He being afraid, went to Hiranya- 
garbha, who created two kinds of food for those beings and then they were 
quieted. After some time Mahadeva rose out of the water, and seeing that 
new beings had been created and were in a flourishing condition, he cut off 
his organ of generation as no more necessary, and it stuck into the ground. 
He then went away to perform austerities at the fcxit of the Mujavant 
Mountain.” 1 " 

Bhavitya-Piiraqa. 

The Biiavisya-Purana gives an altogether different description of the 
version. It relates “ The eighth Kalpa is known as the Linga-Kalpa. Dharma 
was the Supreme Being. From Dharma was born desire (Kama), and from 
Klima (or on account of Kama) the Linga divided itself threefold i.e., 
Puliinga (Male), Strilinga (Female) and Kliba-Iinga (Neutral sex). From 
the Puliinga was born Visnu, from Strilinga was bom Indira, and from the 
third Sesa (Serpent). Later proceeds the story of the creation of the world 
through Brahma etc.” 50 

Some Aspects of the Linga Cult. 

During the Mahabhurata and the Puranic periods we find that almost 
all the functionings of Siva were attributed to the Linga. Besides, the cult 
of the Linga had assumed different forms according to the nature of wor- 
rtiijipers. It is projxiscd to deal here with the main aspects of the problem. 

We have already observed that the cult of the Linga and YonI as sym- 
bolising the generative and reproductive aspects of na- 
and Yonf ture, had come into vogue during the proto-Indian 

period. Moreover both these elements were identified 
with the Supreme Being Siva and Amma, the mother Goddess. These aspects 
arc represented in the Puraijas and in Indian art also. The Purapas speci- 
fically state that all that is Puliinga (male sign) is siva, and all that is 
bhagalinga (female sign) is Parvatl. 

Marshall has referred to several other curious stone discs, three of which 
were unearthed from the Bhir Mound at Taxila belonging to the Mauryan 

49. Cf. Quoted by R. G. Bhandajkar, Vaisnavhni, Saivism etc. Collected 
works of Sir. R. G. Bhandarkar, Vol. IV, p. 61. 

50. Bhavisya Puro»ia, 3, 4, 25. Vs. 124 ff. 



464 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Period, one from inside the structure uncovered near the foot of Hathial 
(Taxila) and one at Kosam. A fragment of a similar object was recently 
found in course of excavation at Rajghat near Benares. Marshall describes 
that, tire Hathial disc is of a polished sandstone 3J" in diameter adorned on 
the upper surface with concentric bonds of cross and cable patterns and with 
four nude figures alternating with honey suckle designs engraved in relief 
around the central hole. 51 Recently Banerjea has described another instance. 
It is a partially broken reddish stealite circular disc about 2\" in diameter, 
found at Rajghat, which contains on the outer side of its top surface a very 
wdl -carved decorative design. The decoration consists of a palm-tree with a 
horse by its side, beyond which is a female figure holding a bird in her out 
stretched right hand ; then follow in successive orders a long and short-tailed 
animal, a crane, the goddess again with her hands this time stretched down- 
wards, some object which is broken, a palm-tree again, a bird, a circular disc, 
the goddess again with the circular disc near her left shoulders, then a winged 
mythical animal and lastly a crane with a crab-like object near its legs. 5 -* 

Marshall observes that, ‘ AH things considered, however, a more reason- 
able and adequate explanation of these ring-stones is to be found in the 
magical properties which they possess and in the universal awe in which they 
are held in India, whether as fetishes or as actually imbued with a divine 
spirit. 53 Crooke gives some illustrations in this connection . * There is the 
Srigundi stone at Malabar Point, near Bombay, which is supposed to purify 
those who crawl through it of sin or sickness. It was through this stone that 
Sivaji crept to purge himself of the murder of Afzal Khan, and others of 
the Marafha Peshwas followed his example. Again, at Satrunjaya, the hole 
in it being known as Muktadvara (door of absolution), through which any- 
one who can creep is assured of happiness. These and other stones of the 
same class are definitely regarded as YonTs or female symbols of generation, 
the idea being that those who pass through them arc, as it were, bom again, 
while in the case of the smaller stones of the same form the mere passing 
of the hand or finger through them is an act of special virtue or significance. 54 

Instances may be added. Banerjea points out that all the above discs 
can justifiably be regarded as cult objects comparable with the prehistoric 
ring-stones on the one hand and the Cakras and the Yantras of the iSaktas, 
the Vi$pupattas of the Vaisnavas and the Ayapafas of the Jains on the other. 55 

The joint representation of the Linga and the Yonl can be very easily 
perceived in the case of all the installations of the Linga e.g. * there is a spout- 
like projection from which the Pujabhaga of the Siva-linga rises upwards 


51. A. S. I. A. R 1927-28, p. 66. , 
53. Marsliall, op. cit,. I. p. 62. 

55. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 138. 


52. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 138. 
54. Crooke, op. cit., p. 322 if. 



THE LINGA CULT IN ANCIENT INDIA 


465 


and which serves the purpose of ndld or drain for the easy outflow of water 
usually poured on the top of the emblem by the worshippers/ 


We have already detailed the account of the Lingodbhava of Siva, when 
actually a quarrel for supremacy liad arisen between 
Lin®ad^)hava. Viwu and Brahma. This story is clearly invented for 

showing and enhancing the importance of Siva and much 
more so, that of the Linga. The story of the Lingodbhava is also described 
in the legends of Markandeya, who was saved by Siva from the clutches of 
Yama, and of Kapnappa. The former is of free and common occurrence in 
the Puranas. The latter may be briefly narrated as follows : 


‘ The hunter Tinnen, while chasing a wild boar one day, reached the banks 
of the river Ponna mogaliar . A small Siva temple had been built near the 
spot Tinnen, with another hunter Kadden, visited this shrine. Living 
always in the forests, he knew nothing of religious matters, but his friend 
Kadden explained to him that the god head was incarnate in the Lingam. 
Tinnen felt within himself a burning devotion. Daily thereafter he offered 
the god water, flowers arid even meat, since he knew not the rules of the cult. 
One day he saw the drops of blood flowing from the eye of the god. Young 
Tinnen thinking that wicked persons had broken it, tore out one of his own 
* yes to replace the one which Siva had lost. Next day Tinnen saw drops of 
blood flowing from the other eye, so he wanted to cut out his only remaining 
one, with a knife. Both his hands were required for this operation, for, after 
losing his eye sight he would not lx* able to find the eye-socket on the Linga 
in order to put his eye into it. Pie therefore put his sandalled foot on the 
spot and was just going to insert the knife into his own eye when Siva com- 
ing out of the Linga, stayed his arm/™ 


In accordance with the system of polarization prevalent: amongst the 
Dravidians the idea of destruction and fertility were 
S^r^cnt 11 * 3 brought together in the case of the Linga also. A snake 

is often found enclosing the Linga in Hindu mythology. 
In some southern temples, two erect serpents have their heads together above 
the Linga, or they may appear on either side of it as if in an attitude of 
worship. Monier Williams observes that he had seen images of serpents 
coiled round the symbol of the male organ of generation. In some cases 
five-headed snakes formed a canopy over the Linga . 57 In the temple of Vis- 
vesvara in Benares, there is a coil of a serpent carved round one or two of 
the most conspicuous symbols of male generative energy . 58 It is also worth 
noting that the Phoenicians entwine the folds of a serpent around the cosmic 
*Rg. M 


56. G. Jouveau Dubreuil, Iconography of South India . p. 16. 

57. Murray, Religious Thought ctnd Life in India , (1833), p. 327. 

58. Ibid, p. 439. 59. Scott, Phallic Worship, p. 82. 

31 



466 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The Puranas have given details regarding the early devotees of the Linga 
e.g. The Traipuras,®" Mahi$asura, 61 Rama (DSsarathi),®- 
Early Devotees. . . Bana, 03 Sakalya (a Rajar§i), 84 Vasumata.® 5 Krgjja,®* 
Sudhvamukha,® 7 Karttavirya,® 8 Viraketu,®* Ravana and others. 


The most important places of Linga worship arc : KedareSvara-linga on 
the Himalaya, the Vaidyanatha at Deogarh (or Parali) 
plac~.' tant the ^ r ^ v *'^ vara ^’ n 8 a * n Benares, the Mahakala-linga and 

Amaresvara-linga in and near Ujjain in Malva, the 
Qrhkara- linga on the Narmada, the Somesvara -linga at Somnath in Surasfra, 
the Tryambaka-linga near Nasik, the Bhlmnsahkara-linga near the source of 
the Bhima in Mahanistra, the Mahabalesvara-linga at Gokarna in Kanata. 
the Mallikarjuna-linga at Sri-Saila in Kamul, the Rama-linga at Ramesvaram. 
The location of Gautamesa linga and NageSn (Darukavana) is not known. 
It is said that * the South of India has five holy lingas representing the five 
elements earth, water, lire, wind and air (dkas>a) respectively, at Kanchf or 
Conjeeveram, Jambhukesvaram or Tiruvanaikaval between Trichino(X)iy and 
Srirangam, Timvannamalai or Arunacala, Kalahasti and Cidambaram.'-' 0 


The Linga at Tiruvarur in Tanjore also claims to be the Akasalinga, 
The Skanda P. gives interesting information regarding the Kumaresvara-ling.: 
at Khambayat (Stambha-tlrtha). 71 

Crooke has made some interesting observations in this connection : ‘ The 
old ritual directs that all who return from a funeral musi 
The Linjra on touch the Lingam, fire, cow- dung, a grain of barky, a 
g.oui«_. grain of sesame and water, “all,” as Prof. GuberncL. 

says, “symbols c>f that fecundity which after the contact with a corpse might 
have destroyed.” 72 

The Linga as a symbol of fertility is installed on the Samadhi of saints 
and it is also regularly worshipped. To quote an instance : the Linga on the 
Samadhi of Pundallka, who was responsible for the installation of the imago 
of Vifthala at Parxtharpur, is worshipped by all the visitors to this pilgrim 


60. Skanda P. Antnacahi Aid., ,10. 57. 

61. Ibid, Utlaidrdha. Adh. 19. 

62. Cf. Rdmdyana Rama installs the Linga at Ramesvaram. 

63. Malay a f‘„ 187. 8. 

64. Skanda P. Prabhdsa-k^i'lra Ala., 74.2. 

65. Skanda P. Prabhdsa-khaipla, 11. 21. 

(56. Mhh. Drona P. Adh. 202. 101. 

67. Skanda P. Ptabhasa-k^el^a Ma. 15. 16. 

68. Ibid, Avanli-khaydu, CalurasUi Aid., 11, 23. 

69. Ibid. 5. 2. 73. 40. 

70. Cf. Kittel, Linga Kaltus, pp. 5; 6 ; I. A. II. p. 15. 

7JL. Skanda P. Kaumdrikd-khamla, Adh. 14. 

72. Crooke. op, cit., II, p. 58. 



THE LINCA COLT IN ANCIENT INDIA 


467 


centre. It is interesting to note that some of the famous centres of the Linga 
worship (Jyotir-lingas ) arc said to have been cemeteries originally. The 
Skanda P. narrates that the following places were originally divine Smasanas 
itiivya-sma&cina) : Mahakala-vana, Avimuktaka, Ekamraka, Bhadrakala, 
Karavfra forest, Kolagiri, KiasI, Prayaga, Amarc&vara, Bharatha, Kedara and 
Rudra-mahalaya.” 


It is worth noting that ‘ in Phoenicia, in Greece and among the Ettruscans 
piialloi were often placed over the tombs .’ 71 

Tradition has it that fourteen crores of Baija-lingas are found in eight 
different parts of the world, one crore each in the Amara- 


Kinds of 
Lingas. 


pati ksetra, Mahendra mountain, Gantjaki in Nepal, 
Kanyakubja and TTtliaranya, three crores each in Srigiri 


(ssl-:?aila), Linga-saila and Kaligarta. Besides it is said that the Gaijdaki 


supplies six varieties of linga stones, which are called respectively, Sivanabha, 


Aghora. Sadyojata, Vamadeva. Tatpuru$a and Isana — of which the Aghora 


alone is unfit for worship .' 75 


The origin of the lingas in the Narmada is ascribed to the Asura liana. 7 * 


The Laksrm-Narayajia-Saihvada gives some interesting details in regard 
*o the worship of the Linga. It is said that, different lingas should be wor- 
shipped inside and oulside the houses. Those used inside by householders 
should be made of gold, or precious stones, or quick-silver, or other similar 
material. There exist twenty two various kinds of such lingas. The Brahmin 
householders should use lingas made of rock-crystal, Ksatriyas of silver, 
Vaisyas of bdl-metal, Sudras of earth and Raksasas of gold. Further, in the 
ritual of Pancayatana are mentioned various kinds of lingas which can be 
worshipped, as the Narmada or Bana-linga, an artificial linga, a Panipitha- 
linga. an earthen linga, one consisting of a jewel, or one made of butter, or 
one of gold, silver or copper, or one which representing life, is drawn a?, it 
were from the heart .. 77 We need not. however, enter into the other details. 


It is interesting to note that the main philosophical tenets of the Linga- 
yats centre around the cult of the Linga. Besides, tire small images of this 


73. Skanda P. Avanti-k?elra Md., {Avanti-khanda) , I, 1. 32. It should 
also be noted that the oft-quoted twelve Jyotir-lineas are : 

Saurdflfc Somandtham ca Sn-saile Mallikdrjunatn | 

Ujjayinydm Mahakdlam Ohkaram-amtilesvaram |( 

Paralyam Vaijanatham ca pakinyam Bhtmasankaram \ 

Setubandhe lit Ramesam N&gisam Ddrukavane || 

Vdriinasydm tu Visvesam Tryamhakatn Gautamitafe | 

Himalaya tu Keddiam Gkrsnesam tu sivdlaye || 

Etoni Jyotir-lingdni || 

71. Heras, MS. : Cf. also Scott, Phallic Worship. 

75. Oppert, Original Inhabitants of India, p. 382 f. 

76. Ibid. 

77. Lak$mi-Ndrdyana-Sam vdda, Ch. 18 ; Oppert, op. cit., pp. 382 ff. 



468 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


emblem, carved in ivory, gold or crystal are often worn as ornaments about 
the neck. The pious use them in prayers and often have them buried with 
them. Devotees of Siva have it written on their foreheads in the form of a 
perpendicular mark. The maternal emblem is likewise a religious type ; and 
the worshippers of Vi$pu represent it on their forehead by a horizontal mark, 
with three short perpendicular lines. 78 


78. Westropp and Wake, Symbol Worship, p. 19. 



SOME SOURCES OF BUDDHIST ICONOGRAPHY 


By 

Dr. ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY, DSC. 

The five notes following are intended to collate a number of texts 
which can be regarded as the original prescriptions or sanctions that underlie 
and serve to elucidate the corresjxmding narratives and representations in 
Buddhist literature and art. 

1. The Buddha as a Pillar of Fire. 1 2 3 

In tlie Mahd Ummaga J at aka (J. VI. 330) a certain King Vcdeha (the 
“ Disembodied ” ) has four great Pandits who are his teachers of Dhamma. 
He dreams a dream foretelling the birth of the Bodhisatta Mahosadha* 
(“Great Herb ”, or “Big Medicine’’), who will be his fifth and greatest 
Counsellor, lie sees in this dream four fires burning in the four corners of 
his courtyard, and then in its centre a flame like a firefly, which little flame 
forthwith over steps ( atikamitvd ) the others, and extends through all the 
world-circles to the Brahmaloka. The king’s four Pandits who interpret 
the dream explain that this fifth Branstock ( aggi-khando V that sprang up 
as “an incomparable chariot- pole ” ( asama-dhuro ) 4 and is “without its 
like ” (asadiso) in the world of men and Gods, betokens the corning of the 
tilth Teacher. 

This vision is closely related to the description of Brahma as the Burn- 
ing Bush, Branstock or 'Free of Life in Maitri Up. VI. 30 and VII. 11 
whore he is manifested within you as the Single Fig (eka asvaitha) that 
embodies the Fiery Energy ( tejas ) of Fire, Sun and Spirit, and is called 
the One Awakoner {eka sambodkayitr) and everlasting support of the vision 

1. Sec my Elements of Buddhist Iconography , 1935, pis. II, and I IT, fig. 10. 
U is possible that these types are representations in particular of the Bod hi, -vat tv a 
Mahosadha ; in any case they are entirely appropriate to the Ruddha-naturc of 
all Bodhisattas. 

2. Skr. osadhi (“herb”, '‘medicine”) is literally “^support of light” (o?a, 
from us, to bum or shine) ; the word itself thus imports the notion of a “ Burn- 
ing Bush". Cf. Vedic ruk$a and Pali rukkha (tree, especially a sacred tree), from 
Vruc, to shine (see Gray in JAOS. 60. 367) ; and in the same connection tux 
flight) and lucus (grove), and the two ssenses of the one English word “beam”. 

3. Khandha ~ skandha, ” stem ”, “ stock ”, “ trunk ”, etc. rather than 

“mass'"; cf. AV. X. 7. 38 vjksasya sk mid hah. “Vcdeha” is the embodied King 
of the world, his courtyard the four-cdmtred world, and the five fires are the 
four pillars! of the Universe and its central axis ; they correspond at the same time 
to the four elements and their quintessence. 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


470 

( dhiyaUtmba ) of Brahma ; and this Fiery Energy awakens from its ground, 
ascends and suspires, proceeding ( utkramya ) like smoke in a draught, 
branching forth in space, stem after stem (skandkat-skandham ) . This, 
again, reflects RV. IV. 6 where Agni, “the new-born, self-sprung (svarult), i 
the early-wake, uplifts his pillar of smoke, as it were a builder, and sup- 
ports the sky ”, or as in X. 45. 7 “ with his bright flame attains the sky 
Analogous to Vedeha's dream foretelling the* birth of Mahosadha is Tisala’s 
dream of a great Fire, of which " the tips of the quivering flames touched, 
as it were, the very sky” (ambaram va . . . payantam, Kalpa Suha 46).° 

To return to Buddhist sources : Dabba the Mallian, who had become 
an Arhat at the age of seven, and having thus already “ fulfilled his task " 
served as the major-domo of a monastery, in charge of guests : whenever any 
guests arrived late -and it often happened that guests arrived late on pur- 
pose, so as to be able to witness his “miraculous-exercise of power” ( idhi- 
palihariymn ) — he used to “become a flame ( le.jo-dhulum samupajjiivd),' 1 
and by that light show them to their lodgings ; sometimes he would make 
his finger flame, and walk in front, followed by the guests” ( V in. II. 76). 
In the same way the Buddha himself is described as an “ export in the ele- 
ment of fire ” ( tejodhalum-kusalo ) and wc are told that in Iris conflict with 
Ahi-naga (the Vedic Ahi-Vrtra, Namuci etc.) he “becomes a flame” (tejo- 
dhdlum samapajjitv/ipajjali) and so “masters fire with fire” ( iejasa tejam 
pariyddiyeyyan, Mahdvagga I. 15. 6, 7). An even more explicit prescription 
for the representations of the Buddha at Amaravati as a Pillar of Fire 
will be found in Dlgha Nikdya III. 27 where the Buddha says that after the 
delivery of a discourse “ I became a flame ( tejo-dhdlum samapajjUvit) and 
rose into the air to the height of seven palm trees, and produced and made 
a flame to bum and smoke to the height of another seven palms In this 
transfiguration the Buddha was surely assuming his own most "authentic 
form” ( svarupa ) ; and one cannot doubt but that the representations as 
a Pillar or Tree of Fire supported by a lotus are ultimately based on the 
unique and archetypal birth of Agni Vanaspati, the thousand-branched, 


4. Dhur has several pertinent senses, as “ support ", " pole of a chariot ", and 
" that which is pertinent In Vedic ritual the chariot-pole is very closely con- 
nected with Agni. Identification of the Buddha with Agni (usar-budh, etc.) and 
Indragni is discussed in my Hinduism and Buddhism, lc*43. The identification 
of both with the Axis Mundi lias its equivalents in the Islamic qutb and Christian 
stauros doctrines. 

5. Svaruh, “ self-sprung ", qualifies here the sacrificial-post (yupa) made 
from a tree growing on its own roots, and planted as if in the same way growing 
naturally ; it is in the same way that Vedeha’s newborn fire springs up of itself. 

6. See the reproduction in colour, from a Western Indian MS., flSOA. IV, 

1935, plate facing p. 130. * 

7. Literally, "becomes, or enters into or coincides with, the element of Fire”; 
in other words, is “ transfigured ”, 



SOME SOURCES OF BUDDHIST ICONOGRAPHY 471 

• bom in the lotus” (jatafy . . . pufkare), told of in RV. VII. 33. 9-14— he 
who a vo gacchati being, in fact, the Tatha-cgufc. 

2. The Kindling of the Dry Wood. 

The prototype for the Buddha’s victory in his dispute with the Jatila 
Kassapa whose sacrificial firewood would not burn, while the Buddha’s pile 
lakes fire immediately (Mahdvagga I. 20. 13). is to be found in Taittiriya 
Samhila II. 5. 8 : “Nrmedha and Paruchepa engaged in a rheological dis- 
cussion ; ‘ Let us generate lire in the dry wood '. they said, ‘ to see which 
of us the more of a Brahman’ ( brahmtydn ) . Nrmedha spoke ; he generated 
(only) smoke. Paruchepa spoke: he generated live”. If this had been 
embodied in a Jataka, we should have found the Buddha saying : ‘‘I, 
Bhikkhus, was then Paruchepa, and Nrmedha was Kassapa 

3. The Flame on a Buddha's Head. 

Of the flame on a Buddha’s head, so often represented in Sinhalese 
■■I’d Siamese images, the. question is asked in llu: SaJdharma Pundcnka (text 
p . ■':■() 7 ) . “By reason of what gnosis (jndna) is it that the Tatixigata’s 
e-aniai protuberance (niurd hny-u snlsa ) shines (vibhdli) ? " The answer to 
this is to be found in the Lalila Vistara (Lefmann, p. 3) where we are told 
that when the Buddha is in samddhi, “ A ray, called the ‘ Ornament of the 
Light of Gnosis’ ( }mmlokala»kdram ndma rahnifi), proceeding from the 
opening in the cranial protuberance ( usnisa-vironlardt ), moves above his 
head ’ (uparisifin -murdhnah. . .cacaui). A more general explanation can be 
found in likagavad Gild XIV. 11, “ Where there is gnosis, light springs forth 
(ptakdsa upajdynte jtuinam yada ) from the orifices of the body”. 8 9 

4. The Mara Dharsana. 

The Bodhisatta’s conflict with Mara,' 1 immediately antecedent to the 
Great Awakening, of which the defect of Ahi-naga in the Jatila lire- temple 
is only another version, is a reflection of Indra’s Vrtrahatya. One may 
observe first in connection with the episode of the “ temptation by the 
daughters of Mara ” that the connection is already suggested by the fact 
that in the Vedic tradition the Dasa (Vrtra, Namuci, etc.) is said to have 
used “women as weapons” (RV. V. 30. 9), and again, that Indra’s fix: is 
said to have “warred against the Bull with women” (RV. X. 27. 10). It 
is. however, in connection with the fact that the Bodhisatta is deserted by 

8. For other parallels see my “Lila” in JAOS. 61, 1941, p. 100. As re- 
marked by St. Thomas Aquinas, bodily refulgence is natural in a glorified body, 
but miraculous in a natural body (Sum. Theol. Ill, 45. 2). 

9. Mara, i.e. Mrtyu, Death, is sometimes also referred to by flu* Vedic name 
o( Namuci iS. I. 67), and is also described as “footless” (apada, A. IV. 434, 
M, I. 160), i.e., as a Serpent, an Ahi, cf. SB. I. 6. 3. 9. Mara also appears as a 
hissing NagaiSja (S. I. 106). 



472 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the terrified Gods and fights his battle “ alone ” that a profounder parallel 
can be drawn. 

In the Mara-dhar$ana ( julaka I. 72 f.), as Mara’s army is approaching, 
we are told that the Great Person “sat there alone ( ckako ).” lie consider- 
ed, “ This assembled host is putting forth its mighly effort. and force against: 
me who am all alone . . . But these ten cardinal-virtues ( paramxyo ) have 
long been unto me as a retinue whom 1 support (pufi ha-parijanasadisd ) ; 
and so, making them my shield, let me smite this host with the sword of ca r 
dinal virtue and shatter it by my own strength.” The (heat Person is 
“alone,'* and yet protected by a “bodyguard" ( pari jam ) ! This is our 
clue ; and we shall inter that this retinue really consists of the regenerate 
powers of the soul, assembled in samddhi , K * 

Then ten paramxyo correspond to the “ skilful habits/’ or 44 functional 
virtuosities” (kusald dhammd) of Mil. 33-8, where they are five, but with 
their subdivisions many more than live : we are told that 44 none of these 
will desert” (vm parthayanti) him who makes the first of them, right con- 
duct (sllam) the basis of all, and that 11 composure ” or 44 synthesis ” (sartuh 
dhi) is their “culmination ’ ( pamukha ) to which they all incline and tend, 
just as the rafters of a domed roof “ rest-together in” (sam o-setfarm) 11 the 
roofplate ( kuta ), which is called their “top” (agfftm); 12 or, again, just as 
when a king goes into battle the divisions of his army “surround” (/mu 
pariydyeyyum ) him. This analogy, in turn, derives from AUareya Aranycka 
III. 2.1 ( — SA. VIII) where “ the Breath (immanent solar Self ) is a pillar : 
and just as (in a domed building) all the other beams are composed 
(samdhildh ---- 4 are in samddhi \) in the king-post (sdla-vamsa) , so in thi.. 
Breath the powers ( indriydni ) of eye, ear, mind and voice, body and whole 
self are composed ” ; in other words, the Breath is the “ agreement ” or “ con- 
junction” ( samyoga . AA.II.1.5) of the powers, and they are unified in it 


10. The Adversary is* sometimes described as Abhimati, e,g. in RV. Ill, 51. 3 
where lndra is ahhlmati-hun. The conflict is thus, from the beginning, with Self- 
will or egotism, ah him ana. ahamkura ; Philo’s wests, or self-affirmation. 

11. Iri the same way the Buddhist 44 takes refuge (saranam) " in the Buddha 
as his resort. The root is sri. and it is noteworthy that in the Brahmana contexts 
the powers of the soul (pratidh, indriyani) are said to “resort” (siiyanti) to the 
Bieath, and arc described as its “glories” (sriyah) ; and uiat as the indriydni are 
collectively Indrani, so these “ glories 44 are. collectively Sri, “ the kingdom, the 
power arid the glory" of Hie true king in command of all hial resources. This is 
also the basis of the symbolism of divine and royal crowns and glories (nimbus), 
Vsri and its intensive Vsri implying both to lean against, converge towards and 
unite in, and a being radiant. Beams radiate from their common centre, and one 
could express the whole idea in English by saying that the King is surrounded and 
supported by the beams' of his glory just as the roofplate of a dome is surrounded 
and supported by a circle of 44 ribs ”, which are also 44 beams The root plate i9 
their 44 penchant.” 



SOME SOURCES OF BUDDHIST ICONOGRAPHY 


472 


(ekadha bhavanti , Kaus. Up. III. 3, jlJB.IV.22.10. etc). It is already 
clear in what sense the Bodhisatta is 44 alone ”, and at the same time sup- 
ported by a bodyguard : he has “collected his forces.” 

Indra, too, in his battle with Vrtra was left all alone : “ All the Gods 

who were thy friends deserted (ajahuh) these, flying in terror from Vftra's 
snorting ; so Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts ; in all these battles 
thou shall be the victor” (RV. VIII. 96. 7). It was “only when, shout- 
ing, they had joined with India in the arduous battle they (the Maruts) 
won their sacrificial names ” (RV.I.97.). The story is retold in Aitarcya 
Bmhmana III. 16 and 20, where it is further explained that “the Maruts 
are the Breaths ( prrhidh ) , the Maruts are his ‘own men ’ (sviipayah ) ; it was 
the Breaths that did not desert him (tarn ndjahuh ).” 

In us, that is to say, the Maruts are the Breaths, the sensitive, powers 
of the soul. In divitiis, they are the commons (visah) in relation to Indra 
w: Rigp.um ( ksrdui ) : Indra, as remarked by Sri y ana on RV. V. 2. 3 being 
“Agni as Supreme Overlord ” ( indrah paramaiivarya ' gnih) % cf. RV. V.3.1 
and Ail . III. 4 and fV.22. They ate India’s “own” and take their name 
from him who is the Breath (prana), just as the indriydtji , as these powcis 
ate also called, take their name from him whose powers they are. “ He (tiic 
soinr and immanent India) is just the Breath (prana), lor it is he who leads 
forth ( prancyati ) all these children ( prajd ). These Breaths ( prdndk ) are 
his ‘own’ (svdh) ; 1: ‘ and when he ‘sleeps' ( svapili ), thai these Breaths that 
are his 4 own ' unite with him (apiyanli) ; and that is why 4 sleep r (svapna) 
is called metaphysically ‘union with one's own’ (svdpyaya) ... for they 
aie then ‘imbibed' ( tadupUa bhavanti . satapaika Brdhmana X.5.3.14,15.- 4 
So again in Chdndogya Up. VI. 8. 1 44 sleep is a 4 coming into one's own' 
( svapiti ~ svam apilo bhavati) 

12. In this connection it should be noted that agga-dvura [J at aka V. 132 and 
263-4), l hie doorway through which the Bodhisatta escapes, is by no means as 
seme translators have suggested a .s'idc-door ”, but the “ lop-door,” i.e., roof- 
plate of the domed house, through which those depart who, like the Bodhisaltas 
these contexts, have the ixxwer of levitation and flight. Stic further my “ Sym- 
bolism of the Dome ”, 1HQ. XIV, 1938 ; “ Pali kanwka ”, JAQS. 50, 1930 ; “-Eck- 
fttin ”, Speculum , XIV, 1939. This ag&a-dvttm is the architectural equivalent of 
ihc; Sundoor through which one '* escapes altogether ”. 

J3. A regiment of the “ King’s Own.” 

14. The unification of the Breaths in the Breath is termed the 41 all-obtain- 
ing in the Breath ” ( prune survdpli , Kaus. Up. II1.4). It is highly significant that 
this absorption of the faculties or powers of the soul is called a ” potation.” It is, 
in fact, India's “stimulating draught of Soma” {dpania-manyus ... somah, RV. 
X. 89. 5): the rit ual imitations ( pratimdndni ) of the reality do not deceive him 
who must have, not what men drink here, but ” what the Brahmans mean by 
Soma” ( %b . and X.85.4), i.e. the BreatJVcJ {soma prana vai, Matin Up. VI. 35), 
in which one sacrifices metaphysically (Msu paroksam juhoii, TS. 1. 6. 4. 5 etc). 
See further my “ Atmavaiha ” in HJAS. VI. 1942. 



474 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


This elaborate hermeneia ( niruktanv ) 1:> develops the connotations of “good al- 
lies ” ( svapayah , su \/ fip) in terms of sva , " own " combined ( 1 ) with apt \f i t 
to enter or merge into and (2) with a-pa, to drink in. What is, then assert- 
ed is that lndra, the solar and real Self that sees, hears, thinks, etc., in us 
(JUB. 1. 28, 29, etc.) is only in full possession and command of his own mili- 
tant powers when these are withdrawn from their objects and concentrated in 
himself. 

This state of continence , self-possession and composure (svadki 7, $va- 
fthtifl, svatanln/m, svamj, etc.) is often termed a “sleep'’ (svapno) The 
immanent person is said to be “ asleep ” when, reclaiming the functions of the 
Breaths, he is at rest in the Ik art and restrains i grhndti ) them, and he is 
then, as it were, a great King in full possession of all his powers ( Hrhadcr - 
anyaka Up . 11. 1. 17) ; this is a state of 14 self-illumination " ; and being thus 
"asleep, he over-steps ( atikramati ) these worlds and the shapes ( rupdni } of 
Death” (ib. IV. 3.7, 14). 

It is. then, just because he is "collected” and “composed," “asleep 
or “ in samudhi, ' 5 or to express the same in other words is exhilarated by the 
draught of Soma, the sacrificial life-blood of the outer self, that lndra, now 
undistracted by any aesthetic experience, can count upon the Maruts, the 
Breaths, as his own loyal subjects, and though otherwise “alone.” is able to 
overcome Vrtra, the Evil ( pdpman ), Death t mrtyu ) . He is the Conqucroi 
who has overcome himself. -These? conceptions of Royal Power and of Vic- 
tory survive in the Arthasastra, where "the whole of this science (of Kingly 
Rule) pertains to the victory over the powers of perception arid actio:: ” 
( Arthasdstra I. 6). 

Let us repeat that it is in 44 sleep M that one overcomes, the forms of 
Death, and that this deep 44 sleep ” is not the irrational slumber of this world’s 
waking consciousness, but the sleeplike and deathlike composure (sum fid Id) 
of the contemplative that is really a being wide awake, with the cvcr-open 
eyes of the Immortals who never sleep. These inverted values are well known ; 
that our presently active life is a 41 dream ’’ from which we shall some day 
awaken, and being awake shall seem to be asleep, is a conception that occurs 


15. Not to be confused either with an etymology in tiie narrow sense of the 
word, or with a purnvng for the sake of punning, expk Nations \n this kind, based 
on the hypothesis of intrinsic connections of sounds with meanings, are of great 
value in the exegesis of ihe connotations oi a given term ; we furl her my " Ninikta 

Hermeneia ” in Visvabharan, NS. II, 193(5. 

16. This is by no means only an Indian conception. Cf. Hermes Trismegistus 

Lib , I. 1 44 Once when in contemplation of the realities while my bodily powers 

of perception had been restrained ( katasche.thein . implying also 4 possession ’) by 
sleep, '■ — yet not such sleep as that of meij weighed down by repletion or by bodily 
weariness, ” and sec alsio Plato. Republic 476, 520, 521, Timaeus 52, 71, Theatetus 
158. 



SOME SOURCES OF BUDDHIST ICONOGRAPHY 


475 


again and again throughout the metaphysical literature of the world . 17 So 
; n the Bhagavad Gita (II. 69 and III. 41, 43) we find : “ When it is night for 
all beings, then is the Controller (samyanri, i.e. of the sensitive powers) 
awake : and when other beings are ‘ awake then it is night for the silent-sage 

who verily sees Controlling the sensitive powers in their source 

iindriyani adau niyamya), do thou repulse the Evil One ( papmanam pra- 

jffhi) the Adversary in the shape of Desire ( kdmarupatn ). This last 

exhortation, which would be altogether in place in a Pali Buddhist context, 
where Mara, Papimant is identified with Kamadeva, is addressed in fact by 
Krishna to Arjuna, i.e. Indra ! The inverted senses of sleep and waking are 
also found in Buddhist contexts ; the exhortation is generally to awaken from 
the sleep of this world’s dreams (S. T. 4, Ilivullaka p. 41, etc.), but we are 
also told that “the Wake is asleep ( buddko soppati), with him. O Mara, 
what hast thou to do?” (S. I. 107. The. Bodhisatta’s impassibility is his 
invulnerability ). H 

3t has now, perhaps, been sufficiently shown that Indra’ s and the Bodh- 
isatta’s conquests of Death are versions of one and the same Mythos ; that 
the Mara Dharsana is not. in its Buddhist context a fanciful enhancement of 
the historical legend but a restatement of the essential and long known 
(ruth that he only can say “Get these behind me, Satan” who, having re- 
collectcd himself in “ sleep ” or “ contemplation ” (or however we may ex- 

17. 'This whole bad dream, whatever it be, whether of garlands or gold” 
(RV. VIII. 47.5). “The dream state, whether a man be asleep or awake consists 
pi just this, the mistaking of appearance for the reality" (Plato, Republic 476). 

" Would that you too, my son. had passed out of yourself, so that you might have 
.•.Yfrt, not as men see dream figures in their sleep, but as one who is awake (Her- 
mes Tiismegislus, Lib. XIII. 1). “So long as thou art engaged in the conversa- 
tion of wakefulness, how wilt thou catch any scent of the conversation of sleep ? Cod 

sent a drowsiness upon ‘ Omar he dreamed that a voice C3me to him from 

God ; his spirit heard that voice which is the origin of every cry and sound ; that, 
indeed, is the Voice, and the rest arc echoes” (Rumi, hlalhruiwi I. 569,2104 f.). 
“Thy will be done’ : the primary meaning is, that we should be asleep to all 
tilings, unaware of time and shapes and creatures. The doctors say that being 
' right asleep ’ [ >= Skr. susupta ] a man might sleep a hundred years, unware of 
creatures, time or shapes, and yet aware of God at work within him. So saith the 
soul in the Book of Love ‘ I sleep, but my heart waketh. ’ So when all creatures 
1 = Skr. bhutani \ are asleep in thee, then mayest thou know what God is woiking 
in thee” (Master Eckhart, Pfeiffer pp. 207, 208). The Indian “deep sleep” doc- 
trine is nothing uniquely or peculiarly Indian ! 

See also P. Amnachalam, “Luminous Sleep” in Studies and Translation*, Co- 
iomlio. 1937 ; and my “ Recollection, Indian and Platonic," J AOS. Supplement, 1944. 

18. The Buddha ds, to Mara’s worldly eye, asleep in his cell, but actually 
“ recollected, mindful, considering his rising up again,” or “ resurrection. The 
"lion rest” (sihaseyyam) , viz. lying orv the right side, with one foot above the 
other, is actually the pose assumed in the Parinibbana, and the context throws light 
on the distinction between this “ death ” and an “ annihilation.” 



476 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


press it) is from the very fact of his emancipation from all predilections and 
disgusts, immune to every shape or weapon that Death can assume or wield. 

5. Mara’s Heauless Troops. 

M. Hackin has reproduced a stucco sculpture from lladda, representing 
a demon, a member of Mara’s army, in the act of raising his hands and re- 
moving his own head. 10 Such a representation reflects the statements of the 
Mahdvastu (Senart, 2. 410) that of Mara’s troops “ some were headless 
trunks"’ (anye asir$aka kabandhah) anti the Lalita Vistara (ch. 21, Lefmann 
p. 306) that “some were headless" ( kecid asirsdh ) . As shown above, the 
Mara Dharjana is itself a recension of Indra’s older light against Vftra- 
Namuci-Mjtyu ; and that there are headless warriors in the host of the 
Gandharva Soma-Raksasas who oppose him appears already in Albania Veda 
IV. 18. 4 where unnamed Gods are. invoked to lay low the “crestless and 
headless (visikhan vigil turn) sorcerers", and Kgveda VII. 104. 7 where Indra 
is invoked to “let the headless ( vigrivasah ) followers-of-inert-gods perish".- 1 ' 


19. J. Hackin, Im scutpluie iitdietme el libel ainc ait Musce Guimet. Paris 1931, 
p. 9 and pi. XIV. 

20. I have dealt with the subject of the other-worldly magicians who can play 
fast and loose with their own heads more fully in “Sir Gawain and the Green 
Knight, Indra and Namuci ” in Speculum XIX, 1944, pp. 104-25, and in “ Headless 
Magicians; and an Act of Truth’’ to appear immediately in JAOS (1944). 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 
By 

Dr. A. B. KEITH, m.a., d.litt., lljx, D.C.L., I.O.S., Bar-at Law. 

The age of the Arthasastra depends essentially on the relation of the 
work of Megasthenes to the Arthasastra. It is necessary therefore to exa- 
mine this question in some detail with a view to ascertain how far the facts 
recorded by Megasthenes accord with those reported in the Arthasastra. 

There is no doubt that in many respects Megasthenes is adequately in- 
formed with regard to events in India, but there are undoubtedly numerous 
matters in which he shows himself not to be master of the situation. It is 
apparent from the combined evidence of Arrian, Diodorus, and Strabo that he 
did not appreciate the full importance of the village and of its officers. Nor 
does he show any appreciation that the essential ground of the desire for child- 
ren lay in the honour paid to the dead through sacrifice. Further, in giving 
the philosophers the first place, the agriculturists the second, the warriors 
the fifth, and the counsellors of the king the seventh place, he expresses him- 
self, not from the point of view of an Indian, but from the standpoint of a 
Hellene educated in philosophy. No Hindu would ever have placed the 
Ksatriyas fifth, nor the royal counsellors seventh. Elsewhere he seems to 
generalise the habits which were practised in Brahmanical circles, as when 
he mentions the failure to drink wine . 1 * Perhaps too his essential declaration 
that no Indian could be a slave is due to the same cause.- 

In some cases he appears to introduce into India facts and customs 
which were familiar to him in other lands. This is one way to account for 
his assertion with regard to milestones, for which in India no word can be 
found ; the idea may have been derived by him from Egypt or Persia.'* On the 
other hand the matter would be one of personal observation ; the statement 
that milestones existed would be very strange if made without justification ; 
and it is more probable that the practice was known under Candragupta as 
a device introduced from Persia. At the same time it seems more probable 
that he borrowed the measurement of the land ascribed to India from the 
actual measurement made in Egypt to determine the boundaries of property 
which were obscured by the rising of the Nile . 4 There is no contemporary 
reference to any such measurement made in India, and the process was not one 
which was necessarily seen by a stranger. It is also possible that lie borrow- 
ed from Egypt certain terminology with regard to officers charged with the 

1. Stein, Megasthenes , pp. 90-2. 2. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 109 ff. 

3. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 18-21. 4. Stein, Megasthenes , p. 22. 



478 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


division of land. On the other hand his account of the board which dealt 
with the care of foreigners, watching their mode of life, escorting them out 
of the country, and sending their property to their relatives in case of their 
death, was presumably a matter in which he was concerned officially. 

In other respects we may ascribe misunderstanding to Megasthenes. He 
asserts that the horse and the elephant were reserved for the king, clearly 
exaggerating the position. In other places he idealises. 

In many respects the accounts of Megasthenes agree with the facts re- 
corded in the Arthasastra. Megasthenes tells us of the royal way which is 
the merchant high road of Kautilya, the watering of the fields by canals, 
but sluice doors are mentioned by neither,' and the fruitfulness of India 
Kautilya lays down the confluence of two streams as a good place for a for- 
tification and authorises its formation as four -sided. Megasthenes ascribes 
both these, characteristics to Palimbothra. In other particulars they perhaps 
agree. They agree also in extolling the merits of the elephants of the Pra- 
cyas. They concur also in the height of the elephants, and both record the 
use of foot-fetters, pillars, and female elephants to win over and tame the 
elephants. The moans of healing these animals mentioned by Megasthenes 
are probably correctly given. The praise of polygamy and the anxiety to 
have children are fully attested by the Artha'-astia The many notices of 
the king are in part paralleled in Kautilya, especially with regard to massage 
There are some other details in which the accounts agree, but these arc not 
numerous, and they lack particularity. In certain matters there is a simila- 
rity between the acxount given by Megasthenes regarding the people of the 
land and the spies, but the similarity is only general and lacks all precision. 
For the warriors on the other hand Megasthenes’ account appears to be cre- 
ditable. With regard to the Amatyas there is only a general similarity, and 
in the account given of the self-governing cities one can only work out. a 
certain parallelism. 5 6 

On the other hand there are great differences in many details. There 
is nothing in the Arthasastra regarding milestones, but it is uncertain whethei 
any value lies in this contrast. The measurement of water is not recorded 
in the Arthasastra, which recognises the existence of private water streams. 
The Arthasastra forbids the use of wood for a fort, and requires stone work, 
while the discoveries in 1899 revealed portions of the old wooden walls of 
the city described by Megasthenes. 7 Moreover Kautilya requires the forma- 
tion of three moats round a fort, while in the account of Megasthenes there 
is mention only of one, and there are differences in the measurements that 
are given. Building in stone is established in the Arthasastra, building in 
wood is hardly known. 

5. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 25-26. " 

6. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 224-32 ; Cf. Timmer, Megasthenes, pp. 231, 232. 

7. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 28-47. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 


479 


The Arthasastra has a longer list of masters and servants with regard 
to the elephants, and gives a longer list of the food which is suitable for them 
in comparison with the grass referred to by Megasthenes. Megasthencs al- 
leges a monopoly of horses and of elephants in the king : the Arthasastra 
knows nothing of this, and we may legitimately ascribe the assertion to an 
error of Megasthenes. 8 Megasthenes again is far behind the Arthasastra in 
his account of the wealth of India in metals. The technical and chemical 
knowledge for working the metals, partly for ornament, partly for use. is dis- 
tinctly greater in the Arthasastra. The management of the mines is reserv- 
ed entirely to the state which gives concessions to private persons only at a 
rent or for a share in the produce. The many officers who were, appointed to 
look after these questions, mine controllers, controllers of useful metals, con- 
trollers of money, controllers of salt, controllers of gold, goldsmiths, and the 
conditions legally developed of private use, justify the conclusion that a higher 
state of culture existed in the time of the Arthasastra than in the notices of 
Megasthenes. 

In his account of the king Megasthenes omits all notice of such matters 
as the women carrying bows in the palace, which reminds us of the practices 
of the classical drama. He is equally ignorant of the presence of eunuchs 
and of Kiiiitas." They appear to have been appointed iu later times to those 
tasks. The picture given in the Arthasastra is of a fuller and more imposing 
ceremony than is envisaged in Megasthenes. It is noteworthy also that the 
term Yavana or Yavani is not mentioned by Kauiilya, who if minister of 
Candragupta must have come into political connection with the Greeks. 

Megasthencs records a shutting otT of the king s road by means of cords. 
The Arthasastra on the other hand knows of other occasions and of other 
means of clearing I he way for the king. Megasthenes also ascribes to the 
king the practice of going out to perform a sacrifice, which is unknown to 
the Arthasastra, and also to the law books. Megasthenes also in his account 
of the exit of the king gives a description of music being played, and des- 
cribes his escort of women and the punishment of death, which is prescribed 
for those people who press forward towards them. 10 

Megasthenes recognises the devotion of the king to the decision of legal 
cases which are brought before him. 11 In this respect there is a marked dis- 
tinction between him and Kaufilya, who gives no direct prescription for the 
activity of the king in deciding cases brought before him. Moreover he has 
left little time to engage in such occupations by reason of the programme of 
his daily toil. In any case Kautilya differs entirely from Megasthenes with 
regard to the manner in which he performs his duty. We may admit that 
the attention given to legal questions by the king according to Megasthenes 


& Frag. XXXVI, I. 

10. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 78-87. 


9. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 74-7. 



480 B. C. J«AW VOLUME 

exceeds his usual practice, but there is no doubt that the king in the Altha- 
ea stra makes a good deal less of his legal work. 

The Arthasastra treats of the king as practically doing little judicial 
work, and it also draws a distinction between civil suits and police business. 
The Arthasastra distinguishes between three Dharmasthas and three Pra- 
desirs. while Megasthcnes in iiis account of the matter follows rather the 
account given in the Dliarmasastras and like them allows the king the duty 
of deciding causes himself. His position is much more simple and natural 
than the division of functions envisaged by the Arthasastra, which implies 
a later date . 12 

The sources of income of the king are given by the Arthasastra in much 
greater detail than by Megasthenes. Megasthenes knows nothing of other 
taxes than a quarter which he asserts was paid by the owners of the whole 
land to the king, and he maintains that the whole land belonged to the king.' : 
The Arthasastra 14 shows a distinction between the lands assigned to the king 
and the land in general, and suggests that there is no question of a consistcn! 
amount of taxation levied on the royal land, though the usual sum was 
obviously a sixth. 

The financial business of the state is differently conceived by Megas 
thenes and the Arthasastra. Megasthenes contemplates a collegial manage- 
ment by guardians of the treasury, the Arthasastra has no proper treasurer, 
though in a certain sense the Sannidhatr serves for this purpose. Equally 
there are no Tamiai to be masters of the treasury in the Arthasastra. The 
Kosadhyaksa is only subordinate to the Sannidhatr and has only the rank 
of an inferior. The Samfdiartr has no place as responsible for the hand'd! 
out of treasure. The treatment of finance therefore differs essentially bet- 
ween Megasthenes and Kautilya ; the system is fundamentally differently 
organised. 

Megasthenes assigns liturgies of the hand workers to the king in accord- 
ance with the views of the Dharmasastras, representing the practice of an 
older date than the system of taxes which is prescribed in the Arthasastra. 
Similarly Megasthenes shows little knowledge of the organisation of the army, 
of the higher officers, and of the administration, which according to the Artha- 
Sastra was distinct from the leading of the troops. What is far more im- 
portant however, there is little sign in the Arthasastra of any organisation 
which would correspond to the control of the great forces necessarily to be 
assumed as required by Candragupta. It is interesting that we have no full 
account of the forces by Megasthenes, but the account given by the Artha- 
fcastra is obviously incompatible with the magnitude of an empire. 

12. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 79, 80. 13. Frag. I. 44-6. 

14. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 127-9. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 


481 


There is a considerable distinction between the account of the higher 
officials given by Megasthenes and by the Arthasastra. Megasthenes appears 
to pass over the Mantrin of the king in personal concerns, or to reckon him 
with the other Mantrins. The whole system in the Arthasastra is more 
elaborate ; there is a greater division of functions, as wc have seen in the 
case of police officers and of those who decide civil causes. The function- 
aries in the Arthasastra are far more numerous and of varied character. 
What is remarkable is that Megasthenes contemplates the existence of boards 
of five in charge of various concerns, in contrast to the single overseer who 
is assigned functions by Kautilya. The Agoranomoi ir * are rather controllers 
of land than market functionaries and possibly Megasthenes’ account may 
have been influenced by Plato’s Laws. The distinction between Megasthenes 
and the Arthasastra on the collegiate principle is decidedly remarkable. 
Smith 10 considers that the Pentads are an official development of the un- 
official Pancayat, but that is not probable, for a Pancayat is essentially a 
private institution which has specially the function of deciding disputed cases. 
It is important to note that in the Arthasastra there is no provision for the 
working together of any officials as a Synarchy. Any connection between 
officials does not exist. 

Tire account of Megasthenes is noteworthy for the absence? of a head of 
the six Pentads and the division into six groups of five. 17 Whereas the Artha- 
fcistra knows of a head of the town, the Nagaraka, with four subordinate 
Rthanikas, and a number of Gopas, whose occupations were partly of a fiscal 
arid partly of a political character. The distinction between the thirty magis- 
trates of Megasthenes without any presiding body is remarkable. The func- 
tions of certain Pentads are not even recorded in the Athasastra as in the 
assignment of places of stay, the burial of the dead of strangers, and the 
imposition of tenths. There is no connection between the Nagaraka and the 
overseer of weights ; according to Megasthenes the fourth Pentad functioned 
within the body of officials of the state, and the shrines were the common 
business of the Synarchy. It is clear that there is a complete difference in 
the structure of the magistracies between Megasthenes and Kautilya, and 
the question does arise whether Megasthenes is trustworthy in reporting what 
he has seen. It is difficult to see the source from which he has taken his 
facts. There were five Astynomoi for the state and the Piraeus in Athens, 
but the parallelism is very far from close. There is a further consideration 
that there arc six Pentads assigned to the military officials. lie gives a 
Nauarch and five officials ; an overseer over the cattle, and five officials ; five 
officials over the foot, over the horse, over the chariots, and over the ele- 
phants. His notice of a Nauarch is a remarkable fact, for there is not the 

15. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 233, 234, suggests agronomoi. 

16. Ind. Ant . XXXIV, (1905), 200. 

17. Stein, Megasthenes , pp. 264-6. 



482 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


slightest hint in the Arthasastra of a fleet serving military purposes, nor a 
fleet commandant. He knows of course a Navadhyak?a, but he assigns to 
him fiscal and business activities only ; he raises harbour duties, charges for 
voyages, and ships ; he watches the trade done in journeys and collects the 
monies due ; his duty is to drive away pirate ships and ships passing enemy 
boundaries, and those which disturb the peace in the harbours. 13 There is 
no question in the fourth century B- c. of shipping being known to India, 
and the very restricted functions of the Navadhyaksa are quite incompatible 
with sea fighting. Kautilya shows no affection for shipping, though he knows 
of the use of ships as helping to bridge over a river. 

The overseer in charge of cattle and the five officials assigned to him in 
Megasthenes’ account are not known to the Arthasastra, and the use of cattle 
for the purpose of carrying goods is apparently rare in war time. The oc- 
cupations assigned to the officer in charge of cattle include oversight of musi- 
cians which is a curious prescription. Tie had also charge of the men em- 
ployed with regard to the horses, a function assigned in the Arthasastra to 
the charge of the master of the cavalry. Similarly the care of the machines 
is put down by Kautilya to the Ayudhagaradhyak§a, and the bringing up of 
the machines was in the Arthasastra assigned to the charge of labourers, who 
were under the command of the Prasastr. The practice, of foraging was in 
the view of Megasthenes accompanied by music, which was obviously un 
suited to a warlike undertaking. The collegiate command of the foot, the 
horse, the chariots, and the. elephants is quite unknown to Kautilya, who 1m- 
an overseer chiefly devoted to administrative duties for each section of the 
army. Megasthenes also appears to assign administrative functions to his 
Pentads, but the numbers are somewhat suspicious and suggest that there 
may be some confusion in his mind. The same remark applies to his asser 
tion that they made use of horses and elephants without bits. 19 

His account of the land workers, the herdsmen and the hunters, differs in 
Megasthenes to a considerable extent from the descriptions given in the Artba- 
Sastra, but there is nothing of essential importance. In the account of traders 
the Arthasatra proves the existence of an extensive handwork industry, to some 
extent a great industry, as is shown by the existence of merchants of establish- 
ed and considerable positions in comparison with the descriptions in Megas- 
thenes. The spies are developed elaborately in the Arthasastra ; some groups 
are also found in Megasthenes, but there are many more mentioned. Accord- 
ing to Kautilya they come from all castes and occupations, while Megasthenes 
treats the whole body as a single dement of the state. 

The description given by Megasthenes of religious practices is too meagre 
to allow of any real comparison with the Arthasastra. It is possible that the 

18. Stein, Megastheties, p. 287. 

19. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 266-77. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 


4 S3 


beginning of the rainy season, when the new year of the Mauryas fell, there 
were festivals, at which prophecies were derived from signs, or from the mouth 
of spiritual persons, of which the Arthasastra tells us nothing. Megasthenes 
bears testimony also to a great meeting,-' 1 but of this we have no information 
at all in the Arthasastra nor in other sources. Megasthenes also records no- 
thing of the work of the three, spiritual authorities, Ijttvij, Acarya, and Puro- 
hita ; the Phrohita evidently played a political part and he had servants under 
him. It is suggested that Megasthenes tells us nothing of these three, because 
he knew the king rather in the camp than in the palace, but the Purohita must 
have been present also in the camp. 21 

From these points of difference Stein concludes against the contemporanei 
ty of the Arthasastra and of Megasthenes, and he doubts the genuineness of the 
ascription of the Arthasastra to Candragupta’s minister. The similarities 
which are visible between the two authorities depend on matters of a general 
character which are equally valid today. This can be said safely of the water- 
ing of the land, of the double crops which it bears, the position of the forts, 
which depends on the condition of the surrounding ground, the embrasures, 
the carrying away of the water, or the training of elephants, or again poly 
gamy, or the eagerness for children, the life of the king and the spies, which 
is common form in oriental kingship. On the other hand the differences be- 
tween Megasthenes and the Arthasastra often touch on essential facts, and 
point essentially to a distinction in date between the two authorities. 

The arguments for asserting the similarity of the Arthasastra and of Me- 
gasthenes given by Mr. N. N. Ghosh, Lecturer in Ancient Indian History, Al- 
lahabad University, presented in the University of Allahabad Studies History 
Section, 1942, do not seriously meet the points urged by Dr. Stein. He cites 
die statements made by Megasthenes about the king leaving his palace to judge 
cases, and compares a passage of Kautilya. 23 without noting that the passage 
refers only to the attitude of the king towards petitioners, and not specifically 
to seekers after justice. Similarly Megasthenes’ reference to the king having 
no time to sleep during the day doubtless agrees with the assertion of the 
Arthasastra, according to which, the whole of the day and the greater part of 
the night arc fully occupied in various kinds of work ; but there is no similari- 
ty in the two passages. Again Megasthenes records the necessity of the king's 
changing his couch from time to time with a view to defeat plots against his 
life, but Kautilya speaks of the mechanical contrivances of the royal house. 
He says that the king’s residential palace 23 should have an elusive chamber 
provided with secret passages, an underground chamber connected with many 
secret passages for exits, and an upper story provided with a staircase hidden 

20. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 283, 284. 

21. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 286-90.’ Cf. Winternitz, Sir Asutosh Memorial 
Volume, p. 34. 

22. 1,19. 


23. 1,20. 



484 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


in a wall. There is common to this account with that of Megasthenes only 
the desire to escape dangers to one’s life ; the details of the ArthaSastra are 
lacking in Megasthenes. The king according to Megasthenes has wo- 
men to care for his person, but nothing is said of their being armed with 
bows, as is duly recorded in the Arthasastra, 5 ' a practice which appears to be- 
long to a definitely later date. 

Similarly Megasthenes devotes attention to elephants as kept by the king. 
He asserts that a private person may not keep either a horse or an elephant, 
which is not repeated by Kautilya.” The Arthasastra has much information 
regarding elephants which agrees closely enough with Megasthenes, but the 
facts are all commonplace and present no ground for believing in contempora- 
neity. 

Megasthenes’ account states also the existence of superintendents who en- 
quire into births and deaths, with a view not only to levy a tax, but in order 
that births and deaths among high and low may not escape the cognisance ol 
the government. Kaufilya refers to the enquiries made by the Gopas and 
Sthanikas, but he refers only to the fact of the number of tax payers, a dis- 
tinction of considerable importance. 

Megasthenes’ reference to superintendents of trade and commerce, and 
persons having charge of weights and measures, and those who supervised the 
manufactured articles, is said to have a corresponding picture in fuller detail 
in the Arthasastra (II. 16 ; IV, 2). Unfortunately the distinction between the 
account given by Megasthenes and that of the Arthasastra is very great, and 
the fuller detail marks a definite distinction between the two accounts. 

There is a like distinction between the account given by Megasthe- 
nes of a class of officers who collect taxes and superintend the occu- 
pations connected with land, as those of wood-cutters, carpenters, blacksmiths, 
and miners, and the detailed account given by Kautilya o{ the arrangement 
of revenue collections under the Samahatr, under whom a large number of 
superintendents worked to collect taxes from different sources. Megas- 
thenes mentions mines, wood-cutters, and the construction of roads, but 
Kautilya gives a much fuller picture with details of mining operations and 
metallurgical manufactures under the superintendent of metals, called Lohadhy- 
ak$a. Here again the distinction in detail marks the differences between the 
two accounts. 5 * 

In l\ke measure Kautilya adds details on the subject of irrigation not found 
in the records of Megasthenes. In connection with the water rates paid by the 
cultivators he speaks of four methods of irrigation, and in other places adds 
another two. Similarly he describes a fine levied cm those who let out fire- 
water or hinder its flow. The point here of course is that the details given 


24. 1.21. 

26. Stan, Megasthenes, pp. 260 ff. 


25. Stein, Megasthenes, pp. 58-60. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASaSTKa 485 

are foreign to Megasthenes, and therefore are valueless for establishing the 
simultaneity of the accounts given by Megasthenes and in the ArthaMstra. 

It is suggested that book two of the Artha&astra, giving information about 
details of the administration, gives a full picture of which a partial one is ob- 
tained in Megasthenes’ account, presenting interesting points of similarity. But 
as a matter of fact that the points of similarity are few and far between. The 
Arthasastra names the Senfipati as capable of leading the four arms of the 
force-infantry, cavalry, elephants, and chariots. This corresponds to the divi- 
sion of Candragupta’s forces given by Megasthenes- But the comparison is 
confined to the members of the army, which are common form in India, and 
Megasthenes expressly mentions that each section of the forces was in charge 
of a distinct Pentad of officers. The difference is essential. Megasthenes again 
mentions the admiralty, but the admiral has no real resemblance to Kautilya's 
Navadhyakga as we have already seen. 

Megasthenes speaks of counsellors and assessors to deliberate on public 
affairs, and who form the smallest class, but are most highly respected. This 
no doubt corresponds to the account given by Kautilya of the Mantrins and the 
Mantripari$ad ; but this is common to all accounts, and the fact that Kautilya 
knows a Mantrin specially attached to the person of the king, who is ignored 
by Megasthenes, is passed over. 

Megasthenes’ failure to recognise the character of the Indian castes and his 
division of the people into seven classes, (1) philosophers, (2) husbandmen, 
(3) herdsmen and hunters, (4) traders, (5) warriors, (6) overseers, (7) 
counsellors, and assessors, are accepted by Mr. Ghosh, and it is suggested that 
it may be inspired by his knowledge of Egyptian conditions. 

The security of life and property in the time of Candragupta is attested 
by Megasthenes’ reference to theft as a very rare occurrence, and to houses and 
property being generally left unguarded. Kautilya’s reference to the cus- 
tom of some parts of the house being left open, excluding the parts used by the 
women-folk, has clearly nothing to do with the times of Candragupta. The 
familiarity of Megasthenes with the marriage dowry of a yoke of oxen 2? cor- 
responds no doubt to the Arsja form of marriage mentioned by Kautilya, but 
there is no real parallelism between the two passages. Megasthenes treats 
the matter as a dear case of purchase and knows no other. 

It is contended that Kautilya was a mere pandit, as endless hair-splitting 
discussions in the book show, and could not be a statesman, as the traditional 
Kautilya was supposed to have been. I>r. Wintemitz 28 in special stresses the 
point that the book gives proof of the pedantry of a pandit, and he denies the 
hall mark of an experienced administrator or the stamp of a statesman. He 
docs not believe that an Indian minister could have found time or inclination 


27. Tunmer, Megasthenes , pp. 270, 271. 

28. Calcutta University Readership Lectures, 1924. 



486 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to write a formal treatise of this type. It is admitted Jiat Kautilya was un- 
doubtedly a pandit, and that the style of the book is scholastic, conforming to 
the recognised literary form, and to the conventions determining this kind of 
composition. It is objected, however, that, as argued by Professor Jacobi, the 
book displays uncommon administrative experience such as one would expect 
in the work of a versatile and learned man. The point, however, is that there 
is no trace of a commanding intellect in the actual work before us. It is an 
interesting and valuable production, throwing light on many subjects, but 
there is no proof that it is the production of a man who has lived the active 
life which is assigned by tradition to Kautilya. There is no objection to an 
administrator having inclination, or being able to find the time, to expound po- 
litical theories in the light of administrative experience. Har§a, Bhoja, and 
Krsijadevaraya are decidedly doubtful examples, but more value attaches to 
Frederick the Great. Madhavacarya, Todarmal, Richelieu, Warren Hastings, 
Woodrow Wilson, Lenin and Churchill, but the point is that the Arthasastra 
does not exhibit any qualities of the type indicated. 

Professor Winternitz’s argument that the Arthasastra contemplates merely 
a small state, and not the affairs of a great empire, cannot be removed- Mr. 
Ghosh argues that there are a number of passages in the text, which easily 
lend themselves to the interpretation that the author had in mind the policy of 
a big empire when he built up his theories. Unfortunately this is hardly bore; 
out in the passages cited. In I. 5, there is merely a reference to undisputed 
sovereignty in the world, and the same thing applies to a citation in 1. 6, 
and the reference in IX. 1, to the extent of the territory of the Raja Cakra- 
vartin from the Himalayas in the north to the sea, does not contradict in the 
slightest the essential characteristics of the work, which deals with states ol 
small size. That he had the conception of a large state is by no means proved 
by his recommendation of the number of members for the Mantiiparisad. He 
assigns the number to be as many as is required for the circumstances in oppo 
sition to Manu, Brhaspati, and usanas, who recommend the number to be only 
12, 16, and 20 respectively. That he contemplated a bigger state than that 
which Manu. Brhaspati, and Usanas had in view may be clear, but it does not 
mean that he contemplated a large state, and the view receives no additional 
support from the reference in I. 15, to the assembly of Indra consisting of a 
thousand sages. We are certainly not carried beyond the magnitude of a com- 
paratively small state. The suggestions in V. 3, regarding the amounts pay- 
able to government servants are decidedly moderate. Dr. Ghosh’s view that 
the salaries are meant to be monthly depends on the interpretation of a pas 
sage which yields no satisfactory sense. 2S 

Further, it is a matter of importance that there is no reference to Kautilya 
in the record of Megasthenes. It is of course true that Megasthencs is not 


29. Meyu, Das Arthasastra, p. 384, n. 5. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASAsTRA 


487 


preserved intact, but it is decidedly remarkable that he should be totally silent 
with regard to Kautilya, if he played the part which is ascribed to him by 
later Indian tradition. The silence of later Greek writers is a strong support 
for the view that nothing was said of Kautilya by Megasthenes, and that he 
was not credited with an important part in the achievements of Candragupta. 
It is argued that Megasthenes did not write a history, hut merely recorded cer- 
tain conditions which specially interested him. He was not interested in in- 
dividuals but in institutions, and apart from Candragupta, to whose court he 
was an accredited ambassador, he hardly spoke of any other prominent indi- 
vidual of the court or country. A parallel is cited in the failure of Yuan 
Chwang to mention in his records the name of Harsa’s court: poet, BanahhaUa. 
But the parallelism is completely lacking. Yuan Chwang had no occasion 
whatever to mention Banabhai.la, who formed no part of the essential cha- 
racteristics of Harsa's work, and was not even a Buddhist. 

Professor llillcbrandt i0 held the view that the work arose in the school 
of Kautilya in whose name the views of the alleged author are cited in oppo- 
sition to other teachers. The expressions iti Kautilyah, and neti Kautilyah, 
which are found about eighty times in the work suggest strongly that the 
Arthasastra could not have been a work of Kautilya himself, but must have 
arisen from a school of his. To this contention it is objected that the usage was 
a literary etiquette observed by ancient Indian writers, especially when they 
had to criticise the views of well known previous writers and to assert their 
own views. This is illustrated by a citation from Visvarupa, the great com- 
mentator on Yajuavalkya, but obviously his authority is of no value for the 
time of Kautilya. The same remark applies to a like assertion made by the 
commentator, Medhatithi, on the Manusmrti, I. 4. A more relevant example 
is the fact that iti Vatsyayanah is used in the Kamasutra, and it is suggested 
that this remark is inserted by Vatsyfiyana himself. It must be admitted 
that Vatsyayana's actual authorship of the Kamasutra is open to grave doubt, 
nor is the date at all convincing. 31 

It is objected that reference to early authorities, which are made in the 
Artha&astra, would not have been inserted by a follower of the Kautilya school, 
long after the death of the founder, reproducing his doctrines which by that 
time had evidently gained general recognition. Who would have taken interest 
in exploded theories after Kautilya’s theories had gained recognition for ccn- 
Un ies? A follower of Kautilya who accepted him as his guru would not have 
referred to his opponents as acaryas, for his only acarya was his guru ; while 
h was quite reasonable for Kautilya himself to refer to previous writers, whose 
theories he had to meet and explode, with the deference that he did and to 
call them acaryas. It is to be feared that this is not a satisfactory conclusion, 

30. Das Kautiliyasaslra , p. 10. 

31. Keith, Sanskrit Literature , pp. 467-9. 



488 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and we can set off against his view the opinion of Professor Jolly that the 
whole work is likely to have been composed by a single person, probably a 
pamdit belonging to a school of polity and law, who, to render a dry subject 
interesting, introduced debates in which the Purvapaksa is put in the mouth 
of eminent sages, or of deities, whose names he got from the Mahiabharata or 
from tradition, while the Uttarapaksa or Siddhanta is reserved for Kautilya. 
It is of course possible that there were works called Arthasastra ascribed to 
sages of the past such as Brhaspati and ViSalSk§a, extracts from which have 
been found in the commentary on Yajnavalkaya by Vi^varixpacarya. 32 But 
it must be regarded as frankly doubtful whether all the authors cited by the 
Arthasastra were actually writers of works, and still more whether any of 
them were as old as the alleged date of Kautilya. The fact that the order of 
precedence to which he assigns the authors is probably not the chronological 
order, but was the order of merit determined by the convenience to the Artha- 
i&astra of discussion, is probably true enough, but there is not the slight;- 
proof that the order was not possible to anyone except a great master. Nor is 
it at all convincing to claim that the remark that the contents of all previous 
masters have been compressed in the Arthasastra is proof that the ArthaSas- 
tra was not the product of a school, because, if it were the product of a school, 
it would in that case have appealed to the traditions of the school itself, and 
not to older teachers who would have been looked upon as the leaders of rival 
schools. All that the Arthasastra really says is that the doctrines set forth 
by previous authorities have been made into the Arthasastra by condensation. 

That the opinions of Kautilya are only given at second hand is suggested 
by their discussion ascribed to Bharadvaja in V. 6 ; the idea that Kautilya, 
writing at first hand, should have contrasted his view with that of Bharadvaja 
is frankly improbable, not to say unconvincing. The fact appears to agree 
with the consideration that under the explanation of Apadesa in the last 
book is cited one of Kaufilya’s sentences, from which the prima facie conclu- 
sion is that Kautilya is quoted as an authority, not as an author. 33 

It is argued further in support of the theory of Kautilya’s authorsliip 
that there is evidence of the anxiety of the author to strengthen the position 
of the king in the time of confusion and turmoil, and to make his king an 
accomplished, efficient, and virtuous ruler of men. Though he has followed 
the traditions of the Dhaimasastras, his book is free irom their metaphysical 
speculations, and is solely concerned with the science of polity and adminis- 
tration. In his anxiety to establish the undisputed authority of Candragupta, 
he could not tolerate the existence of any other ruler but his king, resembling 
Richelieu in his anxiety to secure Louis XIV absolute sovereignty over 
France. Referring to the existence of republican states, e.g., Ramboja, Su- 

32. The passages are modern in type. 

33. Meyer, Das Arthasastra, p. 665 admits the fact. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHA§ASTRA 


489 


ragtra, Licchavika, Vrjika, Mallaka, Madraka, Kurupancalas, he goes on to 
prescribe the means of destroying them by sowing seeds of dissension among 
them. The Arthasastra, however, does not contemplate the complete destruc- 
tion of these tribes, and it is perfectly obvious that the author did not believe 
in the establishment of an undisputed sovereignty for his royal master. 

The identity of Kautilya is maintained from the combined testimony of 
the Vayu, Matsya, and Brahmanjda Puragas, the date of which is suggested 
to be as early as 250 a.d. That date however is purely conjectural, and is 
probably a century at least too old. His name as Cagakya is attested about 
the middle of the fifth century A.n. in the Ceylonese Chronicle, the Maha- 
vashsa. The Ceylon tradition gives further particulars of Oanakya, that he 
was a learned Brahmin, a native of Taksasilia, devoted to his mother and im- 
placable to his enemies, that he had a grudge against the last Nanda who had 
publicly insulted him, that he was the prime mover of the revolution against 
the Nandas. and that he continued to be a minister of Candragupta long 
after his accession. It is suggested that Kautilya was tire name he assumed 
as tlie best suited to the theme of his book ; such assumed names were not 
new in Indian literature. What were the names like VStavyadhi, Kaunapa- 
danta, or Pisuna of the previous writers mentioned in the Arthasastra but 
assumed names ? It must however be admitted that tills doctrine of assumed 
names accords much better with the theory of a school than with the actual 
writing of the text of the Arthasastra by Kautilya himself. 

Another name of Kautilya as the servant of Candragupta is Vigpugupta, 
which was altered to Kautilya after his destruction of the line of Nanda ac- 
cording to the Mudraraksasa. The date of the Mudraraksasa is doubtful. 
It has been assigned to the time, of Candragupta Vikramaditya, but that seems 
to be extremely improbable. It is, however, probably later than the Raghu- 
varhsa of KaiicMsa, and has been variously ascribed to the seventh, eighth, 
and ninth centuries. 34 The value of the mention in the Puranas is far from 
great, for the contents thereof are very far from being verified day by day 
in the light of epigraphic evidence. The Pancatantra is of course of no value 
as evidence. The same condition applies to the remarks of Kamandaka, who 
really writes at second hand. It is important, however, to note that DanxJLtn 
in the Dasakumaracarita seems to use language, which recognises the exist- 
ence of the Arthasastra but hardly its antiquity. 

In opposition to these facts we have the statement in XV. 1, that the 
iSfetra has been made by one, who from intolerance quickly rescued the scrip- 
tures and the science of weapons and the earth ruled by the Nandas. A refer- 
ence has also been seen in II. 10, dealing with the mode of royal writs, which 
says that the rules have been made by Kautilya narendiartham ; the term 
Narendra has been used in the Bratyrnanda Purana for Maurya and there 


34. Keith, Sanskrit Drama, p. 204. 



490 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Narendra is another name for Candragupta. 1 " It must be admitted to be 
curious that Narendra should be found here in the ArthaSastra for Candra- 
gupta, and that throughout the rest of the work he should be treated with 
absolute silence. It is, to tell the truth, very difficult to accept this interpreta- 
tion of Narendra. Still less likely is it that in I. 4, Gupta should stand for 
Candragupta. 

The name Kautilya, which is doubtless chosen from the suitability of 
the meaning, has been read as Kautilya by T. Ganapati Sastri, but it may 
be feared that this correction is of no great value. The omission of all refer 
ences to PaPaliputra, stressed by Professor Jolly, is decidedly singular, for it 
was the capital held by Candragupta, and it is at least remarkable that there 
was no context for il in the Atthasastra. It is further to be considered that 
the Arthasastra has largely borrowed from the Yajnavalkyasmrti, and as the 
date of the latter is later than the third century a.d., the Atthasastra must 
have come after it. Tins argument has no weight in the eyes of T. Ganapati 
Sastri. The date of Kautalya having been fixed as the fourth century u.c , 
it naturally follows that Yajnavalkya. from whom Kautalya has borrowed, 
should be anterior to the latter. Besides the word Yajnavalkya is mentioned 
in the Gargadigana from the sutra of Pain ini. From this it is clear that Pa 
nini knew of a Yajnavalkya born of the Yajnavalka Gotra. Probably the 
same Yajnavalkya was the author of the Smrti and therefore earlier than 
Rbrini. It is to be feared that this evidence is inadequate. Pajnjni clearly 
cannot be asserted to have known of a Yajnavalkya, and there is no proba- 
bility that the Yajnavalkya Smrti is earlier than the third century A.D. 

The suggestion that the Arthasastra, covering as it does several branches 
of human knowledge, could not possibly be the production of a single author, 
but a composition by several authors, is certainly not disproved by the asser- 
tion of Kamapdaka in the preface to his Nitisara. It is unnecessary to sup- 
pose that Ivamandaka, whose date is certainly later than the first century B.c, 
is to be credited with more accurate and reliable knowledge about Kautilya 
than we of the present day. Professor Jacobi suggests the similarity between 
the text and Jainism, with special reference to the fact that the Nandlsutra 
and the Anuyogadvarasutra of the Jain canon mention the Kautiliyas. Hi-; 
view is that redaction of the Jain canon and of the Kautiliya fell to- 
gether. Jainism declined after the period of the Nandas, so that tlic canon 
must be dated about this period. It is, however, to be noted that the lan- 
guage of the Jain canon is far later than the time of the Nandas, and, if the 
language could be changed, then the content, also was far from secure. We 
know the Jain tradition reveals early losses, and we have no right to hold 
that in substance or in detail our present canon goes back to the fourth cen- 
tury b-c. Professor Jacobi further contends that there existed only three sys- 


35. hid. Ant. 1918, 55. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 


491 


terns of philosophy at the time of the ArthaSastra. This is quite unfounded. 
The Anvik^ikS of the Arthasastra merely denotes logic and dialectics as 
methods of investigation, and not any metaphysical teaching like the Adhyat- 
mavidya ; 3ft there is no assertion that it constituted the whole of philosophy. 
He is wrong also in denying that Jayanta is a Brahmanical god, for he is 
found in the Sutras, and the view that in the third century a.d. the worship 
of the Asvins was antiquated totally lacks all evidence. 

The evidence of the Kamasastra does not tell in favour of the antiquity 
of the Arthasastra. But Vatsyayana certainly knew the Arthasastra, and 
it is very probable that he took its form for the model of his work, which, 
like the Arthasastra, consists of prose discussions, with occasional verses, 
each chapter terminating with one or more slokas. In both the definitions 
and discussions are relieved by references to ancient tales and the device of 
quasi-debate betwen ancient sages. It has been suggested by Dr. Radhaku- 
rnud MookherjP 7 that the author of the Kamasastra may have been the 
Pine as that, of the Arthasastra and of the Nyayabhasya, but this view has 
no probability whatever. That the Kamasastra is much later than the Artha- 
sistrn, which is claimed by Professor Jacobi, as is equally improbable. Pro- 
fessor Jolly has disposed of all his arguments in this regard ; the knowledge 
of the Vai&$ika philosophy, which is found in the Kamasastra, is irrelevant, 
because the Arthasastra had no reason to mention the Vai&sika, if it con- 
sidered it to be of no value. Again, if the Kama&istra knows Greek astro- 
logy, the Arthasastra mentions (II. 24) two of the planets and disapproves 
(IX. 4) of the belief in the stars as influencing human destiny. 

It must be noted also that in the Arthasastra (X. 30 are to be found 
two verses cited which apparently are taken from B!iasa. ::n If the borrowing 
is genuine, this would accord fully with a date not before three hundred a.d. 
for the Arthasastra. This would agree well enough with the absence of any 
early evidence of the existence of Canakya as a writer* The Maliabharata, 
though it is elaborate in its account of kingly duties, does not mention him, 
and the Mahabhasya of Patanjali, though it knows well Candragupta and 
the Mauryas, is equally silent with regard to him. On the oilier hand there 
is plenty of evidence from about four hundred a.d. of the existence of the 
Arthasastra, which was clearly made use of by the Tantrakhyayika, 40 which 
perhaps falls about four hundred a.d. 

There are other evidences of comparatively recent date of the Artha- 
*3astra. The geographical outlook is wide. It is very doubtful whether the 

36. Sir Asutosh Memorial Volume , p. 28, 

37. Studies m Ancient Hindu Polity , pp. XIII, XIV. 

38. Sits. Bui. Akad. 1911, pp. 961 f ; 1912, pp. 841 ff. Vatsyayana’s actual 

authorship isi speculative. • 

39. Jolly, Intr. p. 10. 

40. Keith, Sanskrit Literature , pp. 247 f. 



492 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


term CIna could have been used before the advent to power of the T’sin 
dynasty in China, and, if Vanayu denotes Arabia as a source of horses, 41 it 
is unlikely that the term occurred in a work written under Candragupta ; 
similarly the word Suvaroakudya is unlikely in a period of that date. More- 
over the Arthasastra presumes the existence of a considerable technical litera- 
ture on such topics as agriculture, architecture, chemistry, mining, mineralogy, 
veterinary science, the treatment of trees, and the Su 1 badhatu&astr a. In a 
case of alchemy we are told of the conversion of base metals into gold, and 
we find the use of the term rasa of mercury, which has hitherto not been 
traced further back than the Bower manuscript of the fourth century A.D., 
and in the works of Caraka and Susruta, the text of which is of very dubious 
date. The impression of a late date, which is thus given, gains confirmation 
from the fact that alchemy appears clearly to have been imported into India 
and not to be of independent origin there. If we assume a Graeco-Syriac 
origin, we must tend to place derivation in the early centuries of the Christian 
era. With this accords well the use of the term suranga or surungd in the 
Arthasastra in the sense of “ mine ”, if its source is, as is most probable, the 
Hellenistic Greek syrinx. The number of chemical substances mentioned in 
the Arthasastra is longer than that of Susruta and other works, and it points 
to a later stage of the development of chemistry in the period of Kaufjlya 
than at the time of Susruta. This is an unquestioned fact, and the argument 
is that Susruta dealt with only a small number of chemicals because his was 
a purely medical work, while the Arthasastra was not limited in scope, but 
concerned itself with a variety of subjects such as the manufacture of gold 
and other precious metals, the preparation of poison etc,, and consequently 
refers to a good number of chemical substances. The fact how r ever points 
rather to the posteriority of the Arthasastra. 

There is also evidence of considerable literary knowledge. The chapter 
on Tantrayuktis presumes a long refinement in methods of exposition and of 
argument. AnvIksikT is defined to include Sairnkhya, Yoga, and LokSyafca,, 
which reflects the period when Samkhya and Yoga had established themselves 
as distinct schools, and when Lokayata had won a place for itself. It is also 
certain that the use of technical grammatical terms in 11. 10, probably sug- 
gests knowledge of Planini’s Astadhyayi. The Arthasastra knows also other 
Arthasastras and Dharmasastras, as well as treaties on Varta ™ d DaindanSti. 
He shows full knowledge of writing, attested by his rules regarding registra- 
tion, the wording of documents including royal edicts and letters, and the 
use of written contracts, a point in which he differs distinctly from Megas- 
thenes. He knows the main story of the Mahabharata, and the accounts of 
Rlavana and Dairfakya can be traced to the Ramayapa. Many of the 
authorities on Arthasastra, which are c 4 ited are also recorded in the great epic. 


41. Ptersia is suggested by Meyer, Das Arthasastra, p. XLVII, 212. 



THE AGE OF THE ARTHASASTRA 


493 


where Kapika for instance appears as the counsellor of Dhjtanastra, and is 
given sayings for which parallels can be found in the Arthasastra. It is also 
recorded (III. 7) that the Suta and Magadha of the Pu lianas are not to be 
confused with the ordinary Suta and Magadha, the product of mixed marria- 
ges, which is precisely the Puranic doctrine. The form of the work, which 
is asserted to include a Sutra and a Bha$ya according to a verse appended 
to the work, is not clearly defined, and does not give any impression of early 
composition. The language has been alleged to be early. We must of course 
distinguish two different things, in the first place the presence in the text of 
a large number of unusual words and meanings, in the second place the ex- 
istence of forms which can really claim to be archaic. The former words 
are of course undeniable, but they have nothing to do with the antiquity of 
the text ; they are merely the outcome of its unique character. The archaic 
nature of the forms in the second category is extremely doubtful. T. Gana- 
pati sastrS 42 gives a list which includes the following forms ; irregular genders, 
rajjuna, arala, amitrain, sarpanirmokam ; irregular formations, as in khadi- 
rabhih, anyatamasmin, paraneikam, margayuka : irregular compounds, such 
as jaradguh, dasatiraksa, ubhayatoratra, varsaratra, pascahna ; irregularity 
of mood, as in adeyat, cikahksota, jdhyatam ; of form, as in prasvapayitva, 
nistarayitvS, apakrantavyam. anuvasitam ; of usage, as in pratipatsyami, 
apavyyate ; and of syntax, as in dapayet with two accusatives. It is not 
necessary to examine the correctness of reading, or the possibility of finding 
defences ; for example dapayati with two accusatives is found in the epic, 
apavyayate in Manu, pratipatsyiami has parallels, pascahna is analogical ; 
there are other post- Pan inean parallels for the other passages, while the form 
adeyat is probably like paraneika a mere error of the text. In any case none 
of the passages can he said to be in any genuine sense of the word archaic. 

With this position as regards language, the metrical condition of the 
work corresponds entirely. In the first place the sloka is handled with great 
care to make it conform to the developed rules of the metre ; it is far more 
accurate than the Sloka of the Mahabliarata, or of that of the Brhaddevata, 
and this suggests that the Sloka belongs to a later date than the time of 
Candragupta. In the second place we find seven trisfubh stanzas which are 
either of the Indravajra or the Upajati type. This is extremely significant, 
for whether the verses are original or are merely quoted they establish this 
form of metre as existing at the time of the composition of the work. It is 
significant that the practice of assimilating the four verses of a trislubh stanza 
is decidedly late. The Vedic texts and the early epic show clearly that the 
practice had not yet come into force, and. when it is found, it must be re- 
cognised that artistic canons had come to affect the metre. Ih accordance 
with this are the elaborate rules given in II. 10, regarding the preparation of 


42 . Part III, Appendix, III. 



494 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


edicts, which betray acquaintance with the principles of the Alamkarasastra. 
It should also be noted that we find an example (II. 12) of the Aupachanda- 
saka metre, which, though not an early form, is found in the later epic. 

It is impossible to find any support for an early date for the ArthaSastra 
in the Hindu Polity of K. P. Jayaswal. In his opinion Megasthenes and the 
Arthasastra are contemporary. He accepts further the posteriority of Yajfia- 
valkya to the Arthasastra, holding that his code is based for law proper 
mainly on the Arthasastra. The date of Yajnavalkya 43 is determined by the 
punishment provided for the forgery of coins, styled Nanaka. The period 
would therefore be about 150 to 200 a.d- It must be remembered of course 
that the date of Yajnavalkya is uncertain, as the Smrti is made up of various 
parts, and a definite date is hard to assign. 4 * But it is perfectly clear that 
Yajiiavalkya is a late author, and the fact that he was used by the Artha- 
sSstra has been definitely proved by Professor Jolly. Professor Jolly’s 45 
evidence that the Arthasastra borrows from the Smrti text and not vice 
versa, is conclusive evidence that the Arthasastra belongs to a comparatively 
late date. 

Equally unavailing are the arguments urged by J. Meyer. 45 The at- 
traction to him of the supposition of the writing of the work by the Chancellor 
of Candragupta has blinded him to the facts of the case. He ignores the 
argument of Kialidas Nag 17 that the diplomacy of Kautilya is not that of a 
centralised empire, and docs not show any trace of the centralisation of 
Candragupta’s imperialism. Yet the fact was obvious to Mr. Monahan, 43 
and drove him to the conclusion that the work must have been ootm posed 
before the imperial system of Candragupta was started. 

Nothing also is to be gained from the contentions of Dr. Radhakumud 
Mookcrji, who seeks veiled references to Candragupta in several passages of 
the Arthasastra, and argues that the verse added to the end of the book, 
asserting the conquest of the Nandas, was due to the author, and is an essen- 
tial part of the Arthasastra. It is the only passage which refers clearly to 
the delcat of the Nandas, and there is no reason to believe that it belongs to 
the original work. There is already a metrical conclusion. 

B. C. J. Timmer’ 9 has given a valuable comparison of the work of 
Megasthenes with the information which can be obtained from Indian texts. 
In her opinion the Arthasastra is not to be ascribed to the minister of Candra- 
gupta, but is a compilation, the theoretical production of a school. Owing 

43. Manu and Yajnavalkya, pp. 58-61. 

44. Losch, Die Yajnavalkyasmrti. pp. XIV-XVII, LVII, LVIII. 

45. Z. D. M. G. LXVII. 49 ff. Intr. pp. 12 ff. 

46. Das Arthasastra (1926). 

47. Les theories diplomatique de VHde ancienne el V Arthasastra, p. 115. 

48. Early History of Bengal , p. 31. 

49. Megasthenes en de Indische Maatschappij (1930). 



THE A® of the arthasastra 


495 


to Megasthenes’ habit of mixing theory and fact, his failure to grasp the 
essential facts, and his lacking a general view, his work cannot be decisive in 
questions of history, though he often gives to us a realistic description of 
matters of which we have no accurate information from Indian sources. The 
reference in Diodorus to the terms on which the ground is cultivated by the 
people is due to a mistaken reading of Megasthenes’ text. He has confused 
the contract- -workers on the domain and the agriculturalists, who are in 
hereditary possession of the land. She rejects the view of Breloer that agri- 
culture was socialised. As a matter of fact, the views of Breloer," 0 who is 
in favour of the traditional ascription of the Arthasastra to Candragupta’s 
chancellor, lack any serious justification. 


50. Kaufaliya Studien, I-III, (1927-34). 



HARSA, THE AUTHOR OF THE ANKA-YANTRA- 

CINTAMANI & HIS RELATIVES 

* 

By 

Prof. G. V. DEVASTHAM, Nasik. 

No work of the name of the Ahka-yantra-cintiamani (AYC) has been 
noticed by Aufrecht. in his monumental work, though he has mentioned the 
Alika- mantra-cintainani 1 whose author, however, is not noted, and the Ahka- 
giantha, 2 3 the Anka-yantra-vidhi," and the Mantroddhiara-kosa 4 or simply 
(Jddhara-kosa composed by Han?a DIksita or by Har?a. It is not. however, 
clear whether any one of these works is identical with our AYC or even 
whether Har$a the author of these works is to be identified with our Har?a. 
As little seems as yet to have been said about Harsa, the author of the AYC, 
I propose in the following lines to record detailed information regarding this 
author and also try to arrive at a tolerably approximate date for him. 

In the introductory verses of his AYC Ilar?a has given some valuable 
information about himself which heli>s us a great deal in not only identifying 
him, but also in fixing his date with tolerable certainty. Though from the 
colophon 5 6 and also the chronogram’ 5 at the beginning of the only available 7 
MS of this work, the name of the work seems to be AYC ; yet from the 
third verse 8 9 in the introduction one may say that the name of the work 
could also be Ahka-yantra-vyakrti or Ahka-sloka-yantra-vyakrti. while from 
the word uddhftya occurring in the same verse one may even lx? tempted to 
declare the name of the work as Afika-yantroddhara or simply the Yantrod- 
dhara. Coming to the name of the author himself we find that according 
to the colophon 0 it is simply Hansa while in one of the introductory verses 


1. Aufrecht , C. C. I, p. 4b. 

2. Loc. cit. Also cf. Op. cit., p. 763 b. 

3. Op. cit. Ill, p. 2b. ;ind p. 157b. 

4 . Op. cit . III, p. 93a and p. 157b. 

5. The colophon is ‘ Sslf *TJ5J%?T!ITfiT: SW1H: I 

6. The chronogram is ‘ 6T*T 'Vf SRWT: I* 

7 . This is MS. No. 25*16 of The Bhadkamkar Collection of MSS. presented 
by Prof. H. D. Velankar- my Guru to the Bombay University Library. In my 
Descriptive Catalogue this MS. is described under No. 1719 . 

8. The verse reads : ‘ I 

n* 

9. The colophon is : ‘ I’ 



HAR$A AND HIS RELATIVES 


497 


it is £ri-Har$a. But in view of the fact that our author prefixes the letter 
Sri to the name of his great-grand- father, Srfdhara and calls him Srl-Srldhara, 
it would not be wrong to conclude that the real name of our author is Har$a 
rather than Sri-har$a. 

The introductory verses 10 of the AYC are important for our purpose 
since they give us the names of all the relatives of our author and thus help 
us to fix up his identity. From these verses we know that srldhara, a resi- 
dent of Malava, was the great-grand-father of our author ; and that the 
names of his grand father and father are Sivadasa and Siuyadasa respec- 
tively. We also learn that our author had two elder brothers whose names 
were Rama and Laksmana respectively. Little as this information would 
seem to be in itself it is yet of great importance to us, for it is this informa- 
tion that helps us to establish our author’s identity as a younger brother of 
a great writer known as Rama Vajapeyin who also in several of his works 
has stated his ix-digree which is exactly identical with the one stated by our 
author. 11 It is, therefore, possible to reconstruct the genealogy and set forth 
full information about these relatives of Harsa on the strength of the mate 
rial supplied not only by himself but also by his brothers Ramacandra and 
Bharata. 

And we begin with the oldest ancestor that is mentioned by them. 
Harsa tells us that in the. land of Malava there lived a very learned man 
named Srldhara. Ramacandra, however, not satisfied with such a plain 
statement, has described his great-grand -father in rather glowing terms 12 in 
his Yantra-prakasa (YP), from where we learn that Srldhara was an adept 
in Vedic lores and that he bdonged to the Vatsa Gotra. Next comes Siva- 

10. The verses are : — 

rRqp: tew ( r. « ) I 

<3% tfoter 5Rcfi *rrarte#W: II II 

aw 3?* fcRPTI: | 

ffe^H-iiPi ( r. 3 ) gfiran ( r. ) ii \ ii 

etc. Sec note 8 above. 

11. This will be dear from the various quotations from works 

given below. 

12. Read : %- 

—Peterson, Report IV, p. 55. 


33 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


498 

dasa who has been described by Har$a as Sarvajna-cudamaiji ; and Rama- 
candra also satisfies himself by declaring that he was a man of wide fame. 

Suryadasa is the son of this Sivadasa and the father of our author, who 
describes liim as atmavid and samrat : Ramacandra in his YP does not apply 
any epithet to his father, but in his Samarasara adds one more viz. agnicit.' 5 
Tire significance of these epithets is very well explained by the authors 
younger brother, Bharata who states that Suryadasa was called Samrat be- 
cause he had performed the Vajapeya sacrifice including the Brhaspati sava : 
and agnicit, because he performed the Suvarnaciti. 11 

Ilarsa does not give us any clue to the name of his mother. But 
Ramacandra very clearly states it to be Visalak.% 15 He also calls himsdf 
VisalafcsI-tanaya, 10 and even where liq has called himself Vaisalak?eya wc find 
the colophon calling him Visalak$I-sunu. ,J There can, therefore, be no doubt 
that the name of Suryadasa’s wife was Visalak$I and not Visalaksa. 

Though we can’t be sure as to the exact number of sons that Suryadasa 
had. we can trace at least four of them.. Har$a speaks of two elder brothers 
viz. Rama and Laksmaiia : and we know of one more younger brother of 
Ramacandra. This is Bharata who not only declares himself to be a 
younger of Ramacandra, but also owns him as his Guru. 1 ® Rama, Laksmana, 


13. Read : # SRflgjfoRPf 

Eggeling, I. (X Cat., Na 3117 

14. Read : ‘ W1 3RPK: SRI?, ?SPTict*lt ( r. 3 ) , 

Eggeling, I. O. Cat., No. 3117 

[The original fgFlfcfa# given by Eggeling is for obvious reasons emended 
to 

15. Read : f&it 3$ 5 JJ^ I. O., No. 3117 ; 3154. 

16. Read : folRrsfttFRf II Peterson, Report IV, p. 55. 

17. Read : <R£«J ( r. 

tr=iT II I. O., No. 427. 

Here the colophon is : fftl ft cfgKWIW W R3tlh3J$fapt <.l*W*4* 

?l ^R f «f : tTOtfaWR I I- O., No. 427. 

18. arforaj I 

Rsoflfa ajanufir ( r. fa ) 11 

[The emendation into cl<tfa is mine.] 


SRI 1 

The introductory and ‘the oemduding verses of RtT’s R3T on 
imm. [I. O., No. 3117.] 



HAR§A AND HIS RELATIVES 


499 


Har?a, and Bharata would therefore, appear to be the four sons of Suryadasa. 
Of these Rama is oertainly the eldest as it is implied in the statement of 
Harsa. Presumably Bharata is the youngest not only because he is not 
taken note of by Har§a, but also because he owns Ramacandra as his Guru 
which shows that there is a great difference between the ages of these two 
brothers. Of the two that remain Lak§matja is admittedly the elder. The 
names of these brothers as given above are, therefore, al 9 o in the right order 
from the point of view of their ages. 

Of these four sons only the eldest seems to have acquired a great name 
for himself by composing several works. Here again Harsa simply tells us 
that all the sons of Suryadasa commanded great respect from all and had 
performed several sacrifices. But we can get a good deal more about Rama- 
candra from his own works. Tlius at the end of his YP ho tells that he 
was an adept in both the mTmafmsas, Patjini’s grammar together with the 
Mahabhasya of Patanjali, Sahitya, Sdmkhya, Nyaya, Purana and the 
Vodilngas . 1 '■* He has also several works to his credit. Karma-pradlpik'i 
(KP),-° Kunda nimtana or Kundakrti,- 1 together with a big commentary, 
Samara-sara, 2 - YP with a commentary, 23 Nddl-prabhodha or Nadi-prakasa, 21 
and Kaana-cintamani- 3 are the works which Ramacandra is known to 
have composed. 

There is some variety about the name of Ramacandra. In YP he 
styles himself Kavi Ramacandia. 215 But commenting on the 8th verse of 


19. Read : 

#: Efl =T II 

Peterson, Report IV, p. 57. 

ritowMWT seems to be the correct reading in view of the metaphor running 
through the whole verse. 

20. Thisi work consists of several sections, two of which have been noticed by 
Dr. Eggeling in his India Office Catalogue under No. 427 (the Vajapeya section) 
and No. 446 (the Praya&ritta section). 

21. This is also otherwise called the Ku£cja-maijdapa-lak§aiia, Cf. Prof. 
Velankar, BBRAS . Cat . of Sk. and Pk, Mss. } p. 140a. For another Ms. see I. O., 
No. 3154. 

22. Sec I. O., No. 3117 where this work is accompanied by STC35T, *KcT’s 
commentary on the i&me. 

23. See Peterson, Report IV, pp. 54-57 where are given copious extracts from 
the text as well as the commentary. 

24. See Haraprasada Sastri, Cat. of Nepal Mss., p. 198. 

25. This work is mentioned by Dixit in his STRcflftr in a 

foot-note on page 476. * 

26. Read : $dfcl I 

Peteraon, Report IV, p. 54. 



500 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the same work he gives his name as Rama only. Hai$a as we have already 
seen gives the name as mere Rama. But in the Prayascitta section of his 
KP RSmacandra styles himself agnicit, 27 while though in his Samarasara he 
calls himself mere Rama, 2 * his younger brother. Bharata, commenting on the 
work refers to him by the name Ramacandra and also calls him Rama 
Vajapeyin. 21 ’ Thus the real name of the eldest son of Suryadasa would 
seem to be Ramacandra, shortened afterwards into Rama, and again after- 
wards enlarged into the popular name Rama Vajapeyin. 

There are two more things worth noticing about this Rama Vajapeyin. 
The first is that he v/as a resident of the Naimisa Aranya. This fact he 
lias repeatedly stated in his works. 20 In this connection it must be noted 
that it was not he who was honoured at the court of king Ramacandra of 
Ratnapura. A protege of this king had once gone to the Naimi$a aranya 
to celebrate the marriage ceremony of some relative of his. This protege, 
named Jatama and belonging to the Bharadvaja gotra, was a Rg-Vcdin. It 
was he who requested Rama Vajaiieyin to compose a work on Kunda-pad- 
dhati, in response to which was composed the Kunrja • ni r mana . :! 1 The next 


27. Read : Ijqqqsft 

wq-. tfograflCT *i3 : snfem: u 

otjhf ii i. o.. No. 446 . 

28. rr*Tt grrqfflT I I. O., No. 3117. 

29. Read dq etc. I 31? RJRJSlifcft qffJfaiWli 

etc. I. O., No. 3117. 

30. e.g. Read : ( i ) dfii r 4 HUi(qra: | The con- 

cluding ver* of the 1 1* O, No. 446.) 

(ii) H Utff qntffaq I The concluding 


verse of the HqpiR [I. O., No. 3117.] 

(“i) ^ 5^pnSfJlIJlli|l^ faJTfW 

Comm, on one of the concluding verses of the 3>v<si$(tt I 
II. O., No. 31541. 


31. Read : iT%cT: ?TRW^W qj 

l^qqSV^qTTrTfSjft TJ155ql 

iR?rr *p*ji n 




qs%qR?>qT ^gqftgq: 

ftqRoq ftAqpqqW 155 f|q ^ S O gWlfo lW l feft 

frtjffof sq^qquj. |One of the concluding verses of the 5°SF?lfcf and the author's 


commentary on the same. I. O., No. 3154]. 



HAR$A AND HIS RELATIVES 


501 


thing that we have to observe is that Sri-Bharatl is not the Guru but may 
perhaps be the Dik$a-Guru of Rama ; while his Gum’s name is Hira-svamin. 
Introducing the sixth verse of his YP Rama tells us that in that verse he is 
paying obeisance to his Gum and stating the name of his mother ; and in 
the verse itself wc find him paying obeisance not to sri-BliSratl but to Hira- 
svamin. 32 In the concluding verse of the YP., however, we find Rama re- 
ferring to Sri-Bharatl not as his Gum but in connection with the Dik$a, so 
that one may be justified perha|>s in concluding that Sri-Bharatl was his 
Dik$a Guru only. 11 

The 8th verse in the YP. and the commentary 14 thereon have a peculiar 
interest attaching to them. There Rama tells us that the verse contains 
covertly the name of the author and gives us a clue to it. Following the 
clue as given in the commentary we find that the visista name thus obtained 
is -<rrfpr; fipKTJ? ; and one is naturally inclined to ask as to what the exact 
significance of the epithet fara might lx*. Does it mean that Apsaras 

was the name of his wife? But we must leave this surmise here only for 
want of any further corroborative evidence. 

Having thus put together all available information about Rama Vaja- 
peyin we now pass on to his younger brothers. Next in order to Rama is 
La ks man a about whom, however, our knowledge does not go beyond the mere 
name ; and that too wc get from the solitary reference made to him by Harsa 
in his AYC. There, can, however, be no doubt that he is younger than Rama 
and elder than Harsa. About Bharata again we do not know much beyond 
the fact that he was very probably the youngest brother of Ramacandta and 
that he was also his disciple. 33 This Bharata commented on the Samarasara 
of his eldest brother, Rama Vajapeyin. I larsa, as we have seen above, stands 
between Lak§mana and Bharata so far age is concerned. So far he seems to 
have remained in complete oblivion, for though Harsa is the name owned by 
several authors, yet none of these had been till now known as a descendant 

32. Read : m 35 JPWR SRRJPt 5TPT HWPFC. srffaFfft I 

fis«T II [Peterson, Reports IV, p. 55). 

33. Read : ffaRtsfo ^ 

II [Peterson, Report IV, p. 571. 

34. Read : I 

fltfcg ftnn ^3^ fjfafaegfa: II 

g*n gjRRTTRre- 

snfIRt I [Peterson, Report IV, p. 56]. 

35. Sec Note 18 above. 



502 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of the famous man of MBlava, (Sridhara ; nor has any one bearing the name 
of Han$a been as yet noticed as a brother of the famous Rama Vajapeyin. 
The same is true of the AYC of our Har§a, for that also does not as yet seem 
to have been brought to light* 

Having thus recorded a detailed account of Har§a, the author of the 
AYC, his brothers and also his ancestors up to the great-grand-father let us 
now try to fix his date as far as possible. In this connection the statements 
of Rama Vajapeyin are highly useful to us. In two of his works Rama has 
given us the date of their composition. Thus we know that he composed the 
Nadl-prabodha in 1446 a.d. ; 30 while his Kmxlakrti, we are told, was com- 
posed in 1450 a.d . S7 This work, as we have seen above, was composer! by 
Rama at the request of a protege of King Ramacandra of Ratnapura. Sup- 
posing, therefore, that he was only middle-aged at the time we may assume 
that he must have been bom some time about 1410 a.d. ; and if this assump- 
tion be accepted there would be little difficulty in concluding that our Har$a, 
who is the third of the sons of Suryadasa in order of seniority, must have 
been bom about 1415 a.d. At any rate since Rama composed some of his 
works about the middle of the fifteenth century his younger also may safely 
be said to have flourished about the same period. We may, therefore, with- 
out much hesitation say that Har§a must have lived and composed between 
1415 and 1500 a.d. 

We may now put together in the form of a genealogical tree all the in- 
formation that we have got about Harsa, the author of the AYC and his 
relatives as follows : — 


36. Read tfitaSRfafqfaRf I 

(Prof. Velankar, BUR AS. Catalogue of Sk. and Pk. Mss., p. 132, where is also 
found stome discussion regarding the date of the composition of the of 


]. 

37. Read : I 


[Prof. Velankar, BBRAS . Cat. of Sk. & Pk. Mss., p. 140]. 



HARSjA AND HIS RELATIVES 


503 


[ of a resident of *nas»T ]. 

Intacta 

I 

*l^rcr [ snRif^L, sws , srfiTf^c.]. 

( wife fEftir«r«jft ). 

I 


( wife i ) ; author of 

1 SE$5F$frsr 

with £[?£[. composed in 1450 A. D. 


T 

[ between 
1415 & 1500] 


author of 


W [ pupil of *TO 

author of 
a commentary on 
W’s HIRHR. 


at the request of a protege 
of king of 

3 WR^PC 

4 ^a^RI with atei 

5 sn^tir^T ( =*rstsreRi ) 

composed in 1446. 

6 3Rorf^cH*rfk; 
pupil of 



GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 


By 

Mr. ADRIS BANERJI, m.a. 

It was in the Gupta age that a separate school seems to have originated 
at Benares, that city which lay so close to Chunar, where Asoka had estab- 
lished his quarries. The germ was already there, but it required that factor 
— time to play its part. Why did Benares succeed so magnificently with the 
heritage of the Guptas when it failed to grasp what the Mauryas had offered ? 
The answer is probably to be found in the fact that being devout Hindus the 
Guptas were probably able to attract more the cultured and the intelligentsia, 
than the convert Asoka, whose immortal attempt for the propagation of the 
newly established Buddhist Church left the population cold except the masses 
with whom the social organization of Brahmanism had not taken such a 
deep rooted habit as is the case today. Secondly by the third century A.D. 
Benares had become a greater stronghold of Hindu faith, a position it has been 
able to maintain through the succeeding ages in spite of sack, loot and plunder. 

The first quarter of the 4th century a.d . 1 has left for us three images 
which enable us to appreciate the development of the school. Exactly when 
the Gupta school started in its immense career, is a question, which will re- 
main a moot point for considerable time yet. As already stated it could not 
have commenced before the early Gupta emperors had been able to consoli- 
date their gains in Oudh. Yet, exactly which emperor first annexed this 
territory to Gupta kingdom is another undecided point. In the Allahabad 
Pillar Inscription, Samudragupta is more concerned with the northern and 
western princes. Therefore we may pardonably conclude that this may be 
the work of Chandragupta I. Nevertheless it would be natural to assume that 
it was not till the glorious conquests by the Indian Napoleon, that arts and 
crafts came to receive systematic patronage. This is clear from the two ear- 
liest specimens of the Gupta school at Benares. 2 The earliest of these are 
B(b)l in which, we find a mixture of Kushana and new Giipta idioms. The 
next stage is reached in B(b)3 where the treatment of the body and what is 
more important the drapery is totally different from B(b)l though the at- 
tempt at giving a three dimensional effect shows that Benares Sculptor had 
yet to free himself from the trammels of the great Kushana studios of Ma- 
thura. Next we come to the specimens which belong to the latter part of 

1. Cf. Sahni-Ctftafo^, p. B(b) J. A.R.. AJSJ., 1906-7, p. XXVIII, fig. 2. 

2. B(b)l and B(b)3. 



Mf£Af> t>F A BUJOHA iMAfiK. 
Sarnath Museum ( r. 500 a.t>. i 



Jamb of the (iri*TA Period. Saknath. 
Kxamplt* of di-coratif sculpture in r. 500 a.d. at Beiutrc 



GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES — A STUDY 505 

the 4th century A.D., and beginnings of the fifth century of the Christian era. 
These are B(b)4 to B(b)9 of the Samath Museum. 

The definite contributions made by the images of the 4th century A.D. 
seem to be the gradual development of those iconographic and plastic pecu- 
liarities which herald the dawn of a new thought eixxh in representation and 
portraiture. The gradual transition from Kushapa tradition to new idioms 
of plastic expressions being more than discerned. Thus B(b)l of the Sarnath 
Museum has completely broken itself away from the traditional method of 
representation of the Mathura school, which we will find copied by the 
hybrid artists of Central Asia and Chinese Turkestan till 8th or 9th century 
A.D. The image is smaller and has more decided leanings towards uni- 
facial attitude. The legs are not placed apart a style of representation that 
we find as far as Kyzil. if The halo is typically Kushana. With the excep- 
tion of the scallop design on the border, tile whole surface is left plain. Yet, 
the mass, modelling, the flowing hems of the s anghali in depicting which the 
Scythian school of Mathura took the keenest delight are totally and signifi- 
cantly absent On the other hand the edges of the sahghaii, have been rais- 
ed in no negligible fashion, like the headless Bodhisattva figure of Lucknow 
Museum (O. 71). Many people, due to its damaged condition, forget to take 
this intruding factor in their consideration, but in fact, here we have an op- 
portunity of noticing the beginnings rtf the eggshell formation of the drapery ; 
which becomes later on the most significant contribution of the Benares School 
in Gupta age ; and enable us to determine the influences of the school. It is 
this factor which being present in the Lucknow Museum image of the Bodhi- 
sattva takes it. to the period between the Kushanas and the Guptas. 11 Pos- 
sibly the period in which the Benares school had commenced to influence the 
Mathura school. 

The second most noteworthy contribution of these images is the total 
absence of the indications of the folds of the drapery either below the 
shoulder or on the whole body which were such favourite methods of Mathura 
artists, in early Kushana times and even upto the Gupta period. 1. Here 
too, the Benares artists were able to free themselves from tradition and con- 
tributed new methods of depiction. The conception of a design is totally 
different from giving practical effect to it. In the heyday of its glory the 
style created new idiom, new plastic expressions original to itself ; and extant 

3. A. von Le coq —Buried Tresures of Chinese Turkestan, London, 1928, sketch 
feeing p. 117. 

4. Elsewhere I had jftated that O. 71 belongs to the late Kushana period. 1 
am glad to find that Dr. J. Ph. Vogel has also ascribed it to the transition period. 
It may justly be regarded as a primitive of Jamalpur Buddha. Sculpture de Ma- 
thura, Are. Asiatica, vol. XV, pi . XXIX, .p. 108. * Cette de dimensions collosoles 
mature une transitions du style Kugana cel in de 1’epoquc Gupta ’’ Cf. also p. 37. 

5. A feature shared in common with Pafaliputra School. 



506 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


evidences go to show that this diaphanous drapery without folds was trans- 
planted in distant places like Ajanta (Cave No. XIX) and Siam. The 
folds of the drapery was a Hellenistic heritage, and when Hellenistic art came 
in contact with Indian-Buddhist it was already decadent. Therefore the 
Gupta artists did very well by doing away with it. 

The third new factor in this image is the head which is totally different 
from the shavenheaded monkheads 0 of the Scythian art of Mathura or the 
silken wavy curls of the Indo-Hellcnistic School of Gandhara. Here also a 
new innovation was introduced, but where this change took place, at Muttra or 
Samath, we are at a loss to explain. The primitives have yet to be found. 
Conventionalisation always dogs the footsteps of a mature art. The same 
was the case with the Scythian art of Mathura or shall we call it Indo-Scy- 
thian art to distinguish it from the Scythian ait of Mongolia, South Russia 
etc. The innovation introduced here happens to have taken the form of 
screw like curls turning to the right {dakshimvarila) covering the whole head 
and the ushntsha (the protuberance of the skull). This particular feature 
no longer has the snail like appearance, found on Kuslutna images or the slight 
conical protuberance of the Mankuwar image. Inscribed specimens like 
B(b)3 of the Sarnath Museum play a great factor in determination of sty- 
listic peculiarities which arc so engrossing and vivid. 

The beginnings of the fifth century of the Christian era heralded a new 
dawn. With gains consolidated and recognition of the military prowess of 
Bataliputra by neighbouring Scythian and Indian princelings, the subjuga- 
tion of the former at a later date by the Sassanides and appearance of that 
formidable power, whicli shook the Roman empire to its very foundations, and 
took one Ceaser prisoner, gave that respite to Gupta monarchs, which enabled 
them to make their time the classical age of Indian antiquity. Herein lies 
the difference between the Guptas and the Mauryas. The Mauryas rose 
over the charred remains of Perscpolis and prostrate Iran ; while Guptas en- 
joyed their sovereignty while ancient Iran had again found its soul to take 
the lead in challenging a halt to the victorious Roman legions with various 
vicissitudes. The little Scythian princelings of Kabul, the Punjab, Sind, Mak- 


6. Three varieties of depicting the head of Buddha or Bodhis&ttva have been 
found in the Indo-Scythic School of Muttra. (1) Compjeiely shaven headed as in 
Bala image and the Katra Bodhisattva. (2) In which the hair is not indicated at 
all but the area immediately above the forehead is left little elevated whose latest 
example is probably Mankuwar image. (3) In schematic waves, not in curls, but 
in several waves of incised crescent shaped waves of lines. In Gupta period sche- 
matic curls probably came into vogue as logical development of this mode of re- 
presentation. A.R.AS* 1930-34, pt. II, pp. 252 pis. CXXI (a and b) CXXIII 
(a, b and c). 

7. It is Goomaraswamy who coined the term Indo-Hellenistic, Cf. Catalogue of 
Ind . Collections Boston Museum of Fine Arts Boston, 1923. p. 6. Pt. I and III* 



GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 


507 


ran, Turan, and Siestan (that is the ancient Sakastan) acting as buffer states 
between the Gupta and the Sassanide empires. Paikuli and Allahabad were 
their charters of existence. s 

B(b) 2, 4, 9, 10, and 21 of Samath Museum belong to early 5th century. 
B(b)4 8 9 and 9 are probably the best specimens to study the further development 
of the Gupta art at Benares. For suave modelling gathering in strength with 
experience, and swagger in style they are remarkable, just as their lithe grace 
and calm and serene beauty. The Gupta art has justly been praised for its 
vivid appreciation of form and pattern, their poise and balance in repose. But 
what has not been grasped is the development in the style of representation and 
simplification of design. It was an abstract art. Realism by illusion, and faith- 
ful representation of nature as is found in occidental art cannot be expected 
here. Joined to a forcible plastic expression and under the magic of new forms 
they created of which any art in the world could have been proud of. This is 
not high praise for the masters whose contribution in plastic production is in- 
deed amazing. Probably in an aeon such inspiration comes to a generation and 
when that inspiration is lost and men set themselves to copy when cannon throt- 
tles the life out of art then we realise that baroque has set in. Yet it must not 
lx- forgotten that baroque and classic are indistinguishable. Before we conclude, 
we would draw attention to certain other images which not being noticed in 
Sahni’s Catalogue are lost sight of in discussions : 

1. ( 63 E ). A standing image of Buddha ( lit. 6'3J") with a circular 
halo behind the head, completely lost. Nose, lips, forehead damaged, ushniska 
missing. Right and left forearms lost, with edges of sanghati. A tendency to- 
wards slimming is noticeable. Dowel and clamp marks suggestive of ancient 
ltpairs are found on the proper left side of the image. This side seems to have 
been neatly cut with flat chisels for repair of the damaged parts, a feature it 
shares in common with certain images of the 6th century A.D. Pedestal and 
major portion of fee missing. 

2. ( 150E ). Standing statue of Buddha in the abhaya mudru. (Ht. 
3T1£"). A circular halo at the back of which approximately one fourth is 
missing. Halo decorations consist of : — scallops at the extreme edge, followed 
by circular beads within groove (16 small beads to one spacer). Next foliage. 
Nose seems to have been damaged in ancient times and was repaired with iron 
dowel, which is still in position. Eyes half shut (nas = agra-baddha drishti). 
Portions below ankle lost. Traces of red paint on both palms. Found in the 
area to the east of the Main Shrine at Samath 5'8" below the surface in 1914-15. 

8. Banerji — Side-Lights on Later Kushanas. I. H. Q. Vol. XIII, pp. 106-116. 
For Sassanian influence on art of N. VV. India Cf. Sir A. Stein — A rchaological Re- 
connaissances, London. 1937. p. 61, pi. 1. t 

9. Sahni — Catalogue p. 42. Cf. also A.R., .4.3./., 1904-5, pi. XXIX, fig. d., 
for B(b) 4. 



508 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

3. ( 178 E ) . Fragment of a Buddha image consisting of head and torso. 
Legs, arms lost. Drapery covers both the shoulders. An interesting feature of 
this image is the indication of the folds of the drapery with almost fading lines 
on the left shoulder blade and indication of the right end of the smghati which 
was placed on the left shoulder. A feature which it shares with R(b) 10 and 81. 
Lower lips full and protruding upper lip triangular with an almost imperceptible 
bow like curve. Large eyes, directed towards the tip of the nose and shaped 
like lotus petals. Eyebrows almost tangential but has a curve near the temples. 
Tip of nose damaged but repaired in ancient times. A small almost pointed 
projecting chin, found in the area to the north of the Main Shrine at Samath 
5' 2" below the surface. 10 

All the heads have schematised curls covering even the ushnisha, turning 
to the right, but no urrta. 

The images of the 5th century A.D. are distinguished by certain qualities, 
a charming feature of the Benares school of Gupta art. Yet this school is not 
without its faults if they are judged as realistic art instead of abstract. Repre- 
sentation of the human figure is not always perfect. The first of these quali- 
ties is the pointed representation of the knee bone, which show a peculiar appre- 
ciation of the principle of optic illusion. O. 72 of the Lucknow Museum, a Jain 
tirfhahkara collosus has stumpy knee joints. In the Benares School however 
we find the knee almost chiselled to a point which observed from a distance 
creates an illusion. The other important features are the palm in carving whose 
various lines and to give it a soft cushion like appearance the artist took con- 
siderable pains. The slender lingers with the matrix of the stone left uncut 
to give them an additional strength by forming a bridge with the back slab, 
which possibly gave birth to the myth of webbed fingers (jalavaddhatiguli) in 
later times completes the picture. The mongoloid head with slight circular eyes 
bring out totally different featuies, which were hitherto unknown, and which 
will enable us later on to determine the interaction between different schools as 
well as to judge the influences of this school. The lips were always full and 
the lower one always represented as protruding. In one specimen (178 E.) 
the upper lip is definitely triangular which in early (5th century A.D. came to 
have a bow like appearance.” It is generally assumed that the ears were elon- 
gated but this erroneous impression stems to have been created by ear-rings 
( kurulalas ) . In the Jain collosus at Lucknow Museum iO. 72) tlie same treat- 
ment is met with, whereas the large Buddha head ( No. 464 ) kept in the Bud- 
dhist gallery of the Provincial Museum (Lucknow) has all the features of the 

10. Progress Report of the AS./., North Circle, Hindu and Buddhist Monu- 
ments, Lahore, 1914-15. pp. 16. 18 and 19. 

11. This is not tme of all cases \ see 178 E of Samath Museum. Banerji— - 
The Age of the Imperial Guptas p. 164. The eyes of 178 E as well as the eyebrow 
are similar to Head No. 464, of Lucknow Museum which went as far as Siam. 



HkAI) Ml' ANCIT1IKK KlHhllA r.VIAi. 

Sarnath ( <\ 500 a.d. ) 




509 


GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 

Benares School with the exception of mongoloid face and conventionalisation 
of ears. The head with large almond shaped eyes are daintily covered with 
screw like curls with a prominent protuberance of the skull. The large nose 
below the forehead has almost an aquiline appearance. The ridges of the 
eyebrows remind us of the sculptures in Siam and so the curved lips. 13 

The reign of Kumaragupta I truly represents the climax of the Gupta 
period. 

Kumiaragupta succeeded to a brilliant heritage. Decline set in from his 
reign. Already the Sassanide monarchs had suffered decline at the hands of 
the Huns. Bactria, Kabul and the lower reaches of the Kabul river had been 
lost to them. In distant Europe the mightiest empire the ancient world had 
seen was made to totter by them. The same fate overtook the Guptas in India. 
The whole land was laid waste, the places of worship and the cities were looted 
and burnt ; and the people carried into slavery. With them disappeared the 
the only central authority in northern India, like of which the country 
was never to sec. The decline of the ancient world was complete. 
As in the case of the Roman and the Sassanide empires the Gupta 
empire did not completely disappear. Mortal blow, no doubt, had been 
struck at its existence ; but, the foundations were hx> well laid to allow it to 
decay so soon. It survived, disruption and disunity sapped it. Then it de- 
cayed and degenerated. Ultimately unnoticed by any it passed away amongst 
its decomposed etc, surroundings. To this period of Kumaragupta belongs 
B(b)5. 8 and 181 13 of the Sarnath Museum noticed by Sahni. No account 
of the Gupta School at Benares would be complete without a discussion of 
R ( b) 181 - the Dharmma chakra — pravdirttana-ratta Buddha-bhattaraka, 

Krshna holding Govardhana found by late Mr, V. N. Mehta, I.C.S., at a place 
called Arab in Bakariya Kund within the municipal limits of Benares, origin* 
ally in the Sarnath Museum and now in the Bharat Kala Bhavan. 51 Particularly 
the last specimen is all the more important, because so little is known of the 
Hindu sculpture at Benares during the Gupta period. It is doubtful whether we 
shall ever have the good fortune to find any other images as both Bakariya 
Kund and Rajghat are being built upon ; particularly the Rajghat plateau lias 
proved itself a desert as far as stone sculpture of the period is concerned. 15 

The image of Buddha in the attitude of preaching the first sermon at 
Sarnath is remarkable not so much for its aesthetic interests as much for certain 

12. Annual Report of the Provincial Museum, Lucknow, for the year end- 
ing 31st March, 1940 p. 1. 1. Compare this with 13 E of Sarnath Mus. This is also 
of red stone, and shows that as late as 5th Century Muttra images continued to be 
dedicated at Sarnath. Cf. also 113. E. of Sarnath Museum which is also of red 
sand stone. 

13. Sahni — Catalogue, pp. 42, 43 and 70 and pi. X. 

14. A.RASJ. 19, 26-27 to p. 218 pi. XLVI ( d ). 

15. The image of Gahga and Yamuna* transferred to the Kala Bhavan belongs 
to tlie late Gupta period. 



510 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


plastic and iconographic expressions found in it. In this we find Gautama- 
Buddha seated in dhyimasana on lotus seat with the body covered by sang- 
ha& and hem of his antaravasaka spread in fan ship design below the legs. 
His hands are held on the chest in the attitude of preaching. 1 0 The back 
slab has been converted into a throne but above the shoulders its shape be- 
comes circular and on extreme upper edge we find two vidyddharas flying in 
the sky. In fact this is a stele depicting a single incident of the Buddha's 
life and not merely a sculpture. Schematic curls cover his head and the pro- 
tuberance of the skull, the most remarkable absentee being the wr#5, a 
characteristic feature of the Gupta art at Benares. The success of the mo- 
delling which is suave lies in the bewitching smile, which has lit up the whole 
face, requires certain explanations. The broad chest is supposed to be that 
of lion and the waist slender which apart from creating an impression of 
youthful charm in the figure, has made possible the fine display of linear 
rhythm within a prescribed space. The half opened eyes 1, looking towards 
the tip of the nose suggest concentration which annihilates all consciousness 
of the moribund world. w Yet, that smile that infectious twitching of the 
facial muscles, a contradictory factor which being present, indicates that 
the master who had found the way for the salvation of the soul 11 ' and because 
of his extreme consideration for the suffering beings had condescended to 
teach his path to the less fortunate even in this semi-conscious stage had not 
forgotten the frailties of the mankind. This smile would henceforth become 
the most characteristic feature of all Buddha images in the subsequent ages, 
in undoubtedly a contradictory factor in this trance like stage. But the 
unknown master by this masterly stroke sums up the whole conception of 
Buddha, admirably. 20 I have noticed that many feel that the shortening of 

16. This nmdra may be compared with those found in Indo-HcIIenistic School 
of Gandhara to realise how the artists there failed to give a proper representation to 
the position of the fingers. Cf. Nos. 4837 and 4838 of the Indian Mus., M.A.S.L 
No. 61 ; pi. IV ; fig. 2 and Majuindar’s - Guide to the Sculptures in the Indian Mu- 
seum pt. II, pi. 1 and frontispiece. 

17. In a note on a contribution by the late Rai Bahadur R. Chanda, Dr. C. L. 

Fabri suggests that 4 AH the images of Buddha show him with eyes open " 

A. S. 1. 1 pt. II. 1930-31, p. 252, fn. 3). This is not at all convincing. Dr. 
Fabrics remarks may hold good about the images of the Indo-Hellcnistic, Indo-Scy- 
thic and Indo- Afghan schools but in Gupta period all the images show eyes fixed 
to the tip of the nose. The present image shows that Dr. * : abri is wrong in think- 
ing that only sculptures depicting enlightenment and demise possess such eyes. The 
same tradition we find continued in Siamese sculpture. 

18. Sammd samadhi . 

19. The tathagata bretlircn he it is who doth cause a way to arise which 

had not risen before ; who is the knower of a way who understands a way, who is 
skilled in a way ” Samyutta Ntkdya . 

20. He is neither a deva nor a gandharva . nor a yakska , nor a man, but mere- 
ly a Buddha. Who was this Buddha*? He wa9 * an unborn, unoriginated, un- 
created and unformed/ Udana VIII. 3. 



GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 


511 


the pedestal by which the back and the thighs in the seated posture have 
lost all realism is an intolerable incongruity. The average man forgets that 
this is a religious ait— an art which was more concerned with form, an appre- 
ciation of the form that did not take into consideration the materialistic 
aspect of the object created. 21 It would have cost little to extend the breadth 
of the pedestal but tire master thought and he was right in assuming that by 
this surrender to mundane realism he would be sacrificing his point of views 
of art and form. 

The Kpsna holding Govardhana is a high relief ; and is a Hindu 
mythological scene. This image is a fragment, because lower portion with 
ankles are missing. It is 8' 3" in fit. The palm of the left hand still adheres 
to the rock. The round head with heavy cheeks is about V 4" in height 
from head to chin ; and 11" in breadth. The nose is missing and eyes are 
damaged, but sufficient remains to show that they were shajjed like lotus 
petals. The neck is short and thick and on the left shoulder are found some 
unruly locks of hair curved almost on sillchoutec (kakapaksha) . The broad 
chest bears tin: wheel ( sudarsana-chakra ) , the kauslubha-mani and tiger's 
nails. 2 -’ Two other images of child Krishna holding Mt. Govardhana, to 
shield his friends from the wrath of Tndra are known to us. One was found 
amongst the ruins of ancient Mathura and the other was found by Rao- 
Bahadur K. N. Dikshit in the ruins of ancient Somapura Vihara at Paharpur, 
in Bengal. Certain differences in the monographic details are noticeable in these 
three. The Paharpur Kpsna has four hands, two of which hold the rock, 
one of which, the left upjier hand uses merely a finger to indicate the super- 
human prowess of the hero of the popular cult. In the Benares example we 
find tlie palm employed. In the Muttra example we find the same represent- 


21. Tlie same was the case in Byzantine Art where forms were significant, a 
tradition which mediaeval Christian church art followed till the days of Giotto. 
“Giotto was a master but he was capable of sacrificing from drama to anecdote. 
In many respects Giotto went higher than Oimabue but often he aimed lower. 
Compare his Virgin and Child in the Accademicia with that of Ciniabue ; in the 
same gallery, and you will sec how low his humanism could bring him. The coarse 
heaviness of the form9 of that woman and her baby is unthinkable in Cimabue ; for 
Cimabuc had learnt from the Byzantines that the forms should be significant 
and not life-like.” (Clive Bell-Art. Phoenix Library edition, London, 1928, pp. 
145-147. Roger Fry however holds exactly opposite view Cf. his Vision and Design 
London, 1923, pp, 131-77. *For one coloured reproduction of the painting see Carlo 
Carra — Giotto, London, 1924 pis. CXVI, CXVII. These paintings were kept in 
the IJffizzi gallery before the war). The aesthetics of Indian as well as all Asiatic 
art differs from the European. In these arts the forms played the main part and 
they need not be life-like. This was the attitude of Indian art till 5th century 
because after that the road declines no mechanical copying, without a soul. Art 
was throttled in preference to Canon. 

22. This object is even now used by* credulous mothers of northern India to 
ward off evil spirits from their children. 



512 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

ation. The finger is mentioned in the Pauranic texts. In that pose the posi- 
tion of the Benares artists becomes untenable. The best explanation seems to 
be that the image belongs to the Gupta period and the mediaeval iconographical 
details do not seem to have been so much developed in those days as we 
had occasions to notice at Bhumra and four avatara reliefs found on the 
Rajghat Pillar of 157 G.E. in the reign of Buddhagupta which the writer 
found in the year 1941. The Gupta genius at Benares perceived, and rightly 
perceived too, that to use the finger in a specimen remarkable for its volume, 
and mass would not only be an incongruity but ludicrous, a plastic absurdity, 
lie was a worshipper of forms but unlike the craftsmen of later date he 
had not learnt to sacrifice plastic uniformity and equilibrium to canonical 
needs. He divined that to create an equilibrium a different treatment was 
necessary, and it is in this master stroke lies his greatness** So remember- 
ing the mass overhead and Wow he used the palm and not a finger. It is 
the only stone sculpture, which can be? placed in the latter half of 5th 
Century A.n. found within the confines of ancient Varnnsi (Benares). 

What strikes an observer most is the extreme grace and poise of the 
sculpture. The body is in equilibrium on a single leg. One feels instinc- 
tively that the centre of gravity is adequately supported. It is not the figure 
of a grown up man but a child. The muscles are therefore just so 
much in tension as is required in maintaining the perfect poise and balance 
in repose that the artist wanted to show. Throughout, it was his aim to 
preserve the simplicity of planes. This method of representation is specially 
noticeable in the successful modelling of the torsal plane. In holding the 
heavy mass over the head the strained muscles have come out and these have 
been admirably carved in. their different and several minor planes. 'Hie solt. 
fleshy belly including the navel has been delicately treated. Three deft 
horizontal strokes were sufficient to delineate the contorted mass above the 
hip. 24 Hero we have in larger scale every muscle (which are not 

23. This' possible explanation was suggested by my friend Miss Alice Boner. 

24. Here we may instinctively try to find the principle of contracted masses 
amongst simple planes. But the treatment here U totally different from the treat- 
ment we find in the figure of Illysscc at Parthenon or Michael Angelos 4 Day ’ in 
the tomb of Giulano de Medici at Florence (Vernon Blake Relations in Art. 
London 1925, plates facing pp. 172 and 176.) Not only the material was different 
but because the Indian artist belonged to a metaphysical and abstract school while 
the Greek tradition on Michael Angelo made him seek the concrete and faithfulness 
to nature by illusion. What is more both were the products of their age. Michael 
Angelo belonged to an age when " A breath of martyr! sm had swept across the 
world since the fair days of Greece. Self-mortification had been preached. The 
athletic god like joy of life was no longer the ideal” (Blake -Op. cit . pp. 174-75). 
But these ideas had already been preached and were then being practised in India 
as mere traditions, when this unknown ^artist engaged to wrought this stone with 
his mallet and chisel. Long long ago, a prince who had renounced the luxury of 




BODH 1SATTVA PaDMAPA.VI. 
Sarnaih Museum { Bd. ) 1. 


Standing Image of Buddha ( 178 K). 

I-( n^ r lace with shallow clucks, sanghati covering both the 
shoulders and incised lines indicating its folds. 


GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 513 

portrayed according to the consistent oriental tradition 2 *) as if bursting forth 
with superhuman energy, yet the feeling of ease with which the mount is 
held is abundantly made clear/ A piece of cloth curled up like a rope 
passed just below the navel, and is found tied up in a knot, with one end 
flowing down over the left thigh. The rock is represented schematically by 
rectangular pieces in low relief .- 0 

“ The nimbus/’ says Coomaraswamy, 44 might have originated in 
Persia or India.” 14 The disc of the gold placed behind the lire altar may 
well be the origin of the later prabha-nmidala or six as- chakra ( nimbus) . 
Radiance is predicated of almost all the devas is indeed one of the root 
meanings of the word and most of them are connected with their origins with 
the Sun and Fire ”.- 7 In another place we are told by the same authority : 
“ It is hard to believe that nimbus could have originated outside the classic 
area of Sun worship . ...” The earliest examples of halo are found on 
the coins of Hermaios and Maues- Transformation of the idea of this 
divine radiance into stone played a: distinguished role in the different schools 
of art in India. In the Indo- Hellenistic School of Gandhara the halo was 
merely a circular disc behind the head which confirms Coomaraswamy’s sug- 


ihe palace and had taught that it is not by punishing* the body- by mortification 

of the flesh (practiced by the Jainas) that one amid obtain emancipation from 

the cycle of re-births the ultimate salvation of the soul (nirvana). Since 600 
RC. that message had been reverberating in the Indian atmosphere, crossed all moun- 
tain and racial front iei s and had taken in its* fold people belonging to differing 
ethnic, social and philosophical elements. In India, it had gathered strength, was 
respected, declined, rose again to decline. But under the enlightened despotism 
of the Guptas was to find a catholic support, which was to be denied to it in the 
untunes that followed. Over and above all. new religious revival CR. D. I3anerji, 
The Age of the Imperial Gupta*, Benares'. ,11133 pp. 102-129) brought in the new 
philosophy of the Kpuja cull which taught men universal love, neither passionate 
nor violent, free from all ego ; a more humane and tolerant outlook on life, freed 
from the grip of ever lasting fear of sin which would make possible a series of 
rebirths, a philosophy which taught, to appreciate and to understand nature with 
their individual needs and shortcomings. How then shall the sculptors' language 
try to fit itself with the new mode of thought - the placid cqulibrium of sane 
balanced life/ A glance at the figure will convince u$ that wc are in the presence, 
of a new aesthetics in spite of the undoubted influence ol the plastic traditions of 
i he. age just gone by. The eclecticism of the Kushanas*. That this was the spirit 
pervading the whole Guptif age i* clear from the lower portion of a female figure 
Jourid in Mathura, M. 9 of the Indian Mucfcum. 

25. Sec Sumerian sculpture of Gudeas time, as veil as Chinese sculpture ol 
Wei Han penod. 

26. The same is the case with 29|1917, of Sarnath Museum in which wc 
-nd the Vajrasatia represented. The- bonding is noteworthy. 

27. A. K. Coomaraswamy History of Indian and Indonesian Art , I-ondon, 
1927, pp. 22, 41, and 57. Cf. also Sir Au/el Stein Zoroastrian divinities on Indo- 
Scythic Coins 7. A., vol. xvii, pp. 89-98. 

34 



514 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


gestion regarding its possible origin. In Mathura school we find cusped 
marks of varying size, proportionate to the image introduced, indicating the 
rays. IIow the Scythians succeeded in giving this new orientation to the 
nimbus is a question which still remains uncertain. In the Sassanian art 
which is later than the Indo-Scythic, the rays were represented by arrows 
arranged in a circle around the head. The artists of Mathura never in- 
dulged in utilising the intermediate space between the head and the edge of 
the halo with various naturalistic motifs. This transition as has already 
been remarked serves a great deal in determining the transitional specimen 
between the Kushana and the Gupta periods.- 51 Thus in B(b) 1 of Sarnath 
Museum we find a mixture of old Kushana traditions and new plastic idioms. 
Simplification of the drapery and general design is the keynote of the whole 
piece. Yet the central tassel which had such elegance in Bala's image to- 
gether with the futile effort at creating a third dimensional effect by sketchy 
lines at the back, similar to the Bodhisattva image of Bala and its debased 
copy (B. a. 2) with the plain halo merely consisting of conventionalised 
cusped marks, show undoubtedly that in spite of the fact that the crafts- 
man had succeeded in introducing many innovations admirably, he had not 
the nerves to throw off obsolete Kushaina practices to which he meaning- 
lessly adhered to. It shows that in the fourth century the craftsmen of 
Benares had yet to find their soul and were leaning heavily on tradition, 
which liad already become ancient. It was soon after this, probably after 
Samudragupta s conquests that they carried further the process of simpli- 
fication of the Buddha image, which is not unique in Indian art but does 
credit to their original ideas to extreme. Unfortunately no specimen of thi^ 
period has survived and we are suddenly thrown on B(b) 4-9 of Sarnath 
Museum. In the next paragraph we propose to investigate the question of 
Gupta halos more closely. 

B(b) 4 of Sarnath Museum has a large Gupta halo, which were found 
broken into several fragments and have been recently repaired. It con- 
sists of almost indistinguishable scallops at the border followed by circle of 
plain beads- 0 (9 small beads to one spacer) on a slightly raised plane hollowed 
out at the centre. 'Hie next band consists of ornamented stalk 30 with square 
rosettes at regular intervals, which is followed by foliage. B(b) 256 of 

28. The fragment of a rod sandstone halo with larger scallops than Bala image, 
probably indicates the dedication of another image other than the only one wc know. 

29. This motif continues throughout Gupta period. Many people call it bud 
and reel border, which is a mistake. For reels sec Indo-Bactrin issues' of Eukratide; 
and Heliocles ; for this cf. V. A. Smith, cat. of coins in lnd . Mus. vol. i, pt. II, Nos. 
5 & 7 pi. Ill, fig. 1 see also (g) 25 of Sarnath Museum. 

30. The stalk is not found on any early halo but occurs on 22E. found in 
1914-15 which was dedicated in the* reign of Kumaragupta II. It first occurs 
on the umbrella of Bala image of 81 a.d. But rosettes are circular in this instance. 



GUPTA SCULPTURES OF BENARES— A STUDY 515 

Sarnath Museum is probably the best fragment as far as nimbus or halo is 
concerned. It belonged as the surviving fragments show to a fairly large 
sized image of the master, probably bigger than B(b) 4. Its various deco- 
rative elements are almost the same as those of 38 E which belongs to late 
5th century, if not 6th, and has typical smile, like B(b) 181 of Sarnath 
Museum and S. 34 of the Indian Museum Calcutta. The bead border had 
9 beads to one spacer bead. But the representation of the foliage is delight- 
ful. The style of carving is similar to Dfi) 123 of Sarnath Museum. It 
may also be compared v/ith D(g) ID, 12 and an unnumbered capital as sur- 
vival of this particular style. 38E :u is an image of standing Buddha with a 
broad smile on his face. The smile we first meet with in B(b) 181 of 
Sarnath Museum has broadened here and would be used ad-museaum in 
the following centuries. If however we consider B(b) 4-9, 63.E., 150. E., 
178. E., 110. E, 151 E., we. find that they have all grave faces. These aie 
the earliest attempts of representing the perfectly enlightened one. It is 
therefore deducible that the smile was added at a later date when the icono- 
graphy of the Buddha image had made sufficient progress. The halo or 
nimbus of 38. K, has scallops at the border. A circle of beads within raised 
edges (11 small heads to one spacer) followed by foliage depicting Champaka 
flowers. The circle of beads arc again repeated this time consisting of 11 
small beads to one sixicer. This is an additional evidence that this image 
is closer in date to B(b) 181 in which also we find that the circle of bead 
and spacer repeated twice. 

Before however we go to consider image no. B(b) 181, we have to dis- 
cuss B(b) 9 belonging to the earlier part of 5th century A.D.; because it 
shows a new type of treating the back slab or the halo. In this image the 
halo has been converted into a back slab ellipsoid in shape from which the 
main figure stands out in high relief. As decorations wc have almost in- 
distinguishable scallops at the border, within slightly raised edges circle of 
beads consisting of 13 beads to one spacer. 3 - This conversion a new factor 
in Gupta art opened unlimited possibilities to the craftsmen and ultimately 
the halo lost almost all its original significance. At first we have two dis- 
tinct types of back slabs from this conversion. One is ellipsoid as has 
already been noted and other is a rectangular piece, with a circular top with 
little or no decorations and is generally used with a standing image of 
Buddha e.g. the images dedicated in G. E. (expired) 154 and 157 by Abhaya- 
mitra. The beginning of this type is S. 34 of Indian Museum Calcutta. 
The next stage of development is readied in B(b) 181 in which the backslab 
is converted into a makeshift throne with a semi-circular halo above the 

31. The ‘ E ’ numberings are excavation numbers of the year 19.14-15, and 
imply that they were found to the east oJ the Main Shrine at Sarnath. 

32. Compare with B(b) 6, 20, 22 and 149E. 



516 B. C. LAW VOLUME 

throne. This motif became very favourite with the artists of later ages and 
ultimately the circular halo is completely lost in typical thrones of the 
baroque period. The halo or nimbus of B(b) 181 of Samath Museum con- 
tains at first insignificant scallops, then a circle of beads (11 small beads to 
one spacer,) foliage with blue (?) and red lotuses then again the bead border 
repeated (11 beads to one spacer). The throne is upto the height of the 
shoulders. Two crocodile ( makara ) heads emerging from foliage surmount 
the ends of the horizontal bars which arc supported by rampant leographys 
(vyMakas) with long wavy tails. 33 

In another direlction the type of B(b) 181 was one of the everlasting 
contributions made by the Gupta school at Benares. This is the beginning 
of those brilliant series in BenaFes and in Eastern India which has come to 
be known as the ‘single incident images which partake the character of a 
bas-relief.’ “They am images of the Master, but at the same time, they 
represent particular incidents in the life of the Master. In the older schools 
we are familiar with such incidents in regular bas-reliefs, while tltcre are 
also images of the Buddha or of the various Bodhisattvas. So far as our 
knowledge goes no images have been discovered in India belonging to the 
earlier schools which represents a particular incident in the life of Buddha. 
These images are really a transformation of the bas-reliefs. In the GandhRra 
and Mathura Schools, there is a tendency to represent Buddha as being 
larger in size comparatively, than other human or divine beings. This ten- 
dency is also noticeable in some bas-reliefs of the Benares School. In the 
latter, this particular tendency, transforms the Main figure into an image 
and makes the specimen loose the general characteristics of a bas relief. The 
adjuncts necessary to represent a particular incident of the master’s life are 
then depicted either on the pedestal or on the backslab of the images. The 
introduction of this new class of images is therefore, one of the peculiar 
characteristics of the Gupta sculpture.” 31 This transformation became a per- 
manent feature of later arts. The larger size of the Buddha image referred 
to by late Mr. R. D. Banerji is an interesting Asiatic custom and is tracea- 
ble to Iran, Assyria, Babylon and Sumer. In every one of these countries 
the divine kings were given disproportionate size to defeated foes and sub- 
jects. Any Iranian reliefs such as we find at Naksh-i-Iustam, Nakshi-i- 
Rajab, etc. may be consulted. The statues and reliefs found by Layard in 
Ashur will also bear me out We may also refer to Lue lime stone slabs of 
Ur-Nina of the Lagashite period, or the famous stele of Naram-Sin, in which 
divine kings are of larger proportions. 35 The question of origin, develop- 

33. A. R., A. S. t. 1903,-01, p. 216. This makara and vyalaka throne also be- 
came very popular with later artists and enable us to determine the source of ins- 
piration of the same type of throne in the art of Java, 

34. R. D. Banerji- TAe Easterti Indian School oj Mediaeval Sculpture, 
pp. 14-16. 




Child Krishna moldin', Mt. Covardiian 
Now in Bharat Kala Bhavan. 

Suppleness of modelling in spite of inclination towards 
volume and mass. Portraiture pi lorsal plane; is noteworthy. 








■tr 171 m»I* 


Sarnath Museum. Oval face both shoulders draped. ( 15 ()K ) 
>ofe the soft cushion like palm with hastarekha. 


517 


GOPTA SCULPTURES OP BENARES— A STUDY 

meat, migration and survival of this interesting custom require to be dealt 
with in a separate memoir and does not lie within our present compass. 
Before we conclude our discussions about early Gupta sculpture one im- 
portant point requires to be determined, it is the character and content of 
Bib) 181. 

Scholars have vied with one another in heaping encomiums on it. Only 
Ananda Coomaraswamy has stood aloof from it. He thought that it was 
less vigorous." 0 It is a weak piece, not a product of the Gupta genius at the 
best. The concern for the detailed treatment, an inclination towards real 
naturalism over decoration of the halo and realism of its motifs, by which 
I do not mean that the design is overbalanced indicate that the artist in spite 
of the form had lost in facile expression and was conscious of it. They prove 
at the worst tliat the height had been reached and the declining slope had 
begun." 1 Henceforth there is a slow, long degradation with its routine like 
repetitions of dull designs (for example, images and architectural fragments 
of the 7th to 12th centuries of the Christian era), with its occasional re- 
action simulating revival. Coomaraswamy ’s fine jjerception made him appre- 
ciate in spite of the magic of form, in spite of the spiritualised and super- 
human conception of Buddha— the signs of weakness in it. Let us read 
that in this piece the ominous signs of decay has made its appearance. It 
is not a decadent piece but it ushers in the dusk as it did with Giotto in 
mediaeval Italian arL :is 

In conclusion we might be permitted to notice one pleasing fact about 
Samatli sculptures just when all free expression in art was throttled by 
canon, factor which has not so far been noticed in any other school in 
India. A consideration of the Buddha images of Samath lead to the in- 
evitable conclusion that the typology of heads and faces differ indicating a 
freedom enjoyed by the artists. It would be remembered that the figure 
of Buddha was conspicuous by its absence in early Indian art. It first 
occurs on the Scythian coins of North-West. 90 The Bala image is that of a 
Bodhisattva proving a disinclination to regard them as the image of the 
master. It is in the Mankuwar image (?), that we first meet with the term 
Buddha. It would therefore be not illogical to assume that the full fledged 
Buddha image came to be dedicated in the Gupta period only. The Katra. 

35. Wooley — The Development of Sumerian Art. London. 1935. Pis. 49 (a), 
54(a) and 56. 

36. Coomaraswamy — History of Indian and Indonesian Art., London, 1927, 
p. 74. 

37. Vernon Blake — < Relation in Art, London, 1915, p. 168. * An intense pre-occu- 
pation about detail accompanied by a loss of power in commanding and ordering 
it are the signs of impending, if not actual decadence.’ 

38. ‘ And the spirit of that age, as every extension lecturer knows moved to- 
wards truth and naturalism for naturalism .and verisimilitude; in the history of art 
it is known as early decadence.’ Clive Bell — Art, p. 143. 

39. A. K. Coomaraswamy— op. cit., p. 59. 



518 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Maholi and other images of the Kushaiga period may be taken to be that of 
Gautama the Bodhisattva. Coomaraswamy has pointed out that the jdla- 
boddhanguli is first found in the Mankuwar image.' 1 " In Benares a definite 
Buddha type was evolved by the late 5th century after experiments. But 
the faces of these images are not stereotyped. It became so later, but in the 
classic Gupta times they show a rare variety. In my studies in the Samath 
Museum, I found five types of faces : — 

A. B(b) 2, 4, 9 and 63 E — long face with powerful jaws. 

B. B(b) 10, 21 and 150E.--- Oval face. 

C. 178 E. Long face with shallow cheeks, triangular upper lips, tan- 
gential eye-brows (common in all) and slightly pointed chin. 

D. B(b) 5. 

E. B(b) 181, B(b) 8- a round face with heavy cheeks. 

The images of Bodhisattvas and Buddhas show that Samath was a 
stronghold of 1 IinaySna school till 5th century of the Christian era. It is 
in this century that the first intruding element makes its appearance. The 
sagacity of the emperor Asoka had warned the church of the consequences 
of schism. In spite of that soon after his death different schools appeared 
and defaced his monuments by getting their names inscribed on them. Now 
Mahayana images appear at Sarnath, this is B(d) 1 ; the figure of Bodhi- 
sattva-'Padmapapi dedicated by Vhhayapati Suyattra. Mahayana school be- 
came strong after the Yue-Chih invasion. But so long its later development 
does not seem to have made itself felt at the holy Mrgadava. For little 
beauty, and simplicity of design it really happens to be a rare piece. It 
lacks the embellishments in which the later artists revelled. The main figure 
stands on a lotus springing from its foliage, which is found in the images 
dedicated in the reigns of Kumaragupta II and Budhagupta. It wears only 
a necklace, otherwise the body is devoid of any ornaments, and compares 
favourably with the later image of Siddhaikavira. The coiled hair on tire 
head is reminiscent of the Ekamukhalinga from Khoh in Nagod State, though 
it lacks some of its finesse. Few locks of unruly hair have been allowed on 
either neck like that of Rpsija holding Govardhana and the Bodhisattva 
image S. 37 of the Indian Museum. The upper garment is shown below 
the navel and right palm of the god and is tied in a loop while the ends are 
shown hanging down on the proper right side of the image in a series of 
superimposed fishtail& While the other end is between the legs and is shown 
in the same style as the hems of the sanghali of the standing images of 
Buddha. There is a slight smile hovering between the lips. It wears ear- 
rings and jewelled girdle and a long chain. The Gupta genius was able to 
impart a youthful freshness and a serenity which is seldom met with in 
later images. 41 

40. Coomaraswaxny— Ibid, p. 74. 

41. Sahni — Catalogue, pi. xiii ; and B. Majumdar Guide to Samath, pi. B. 



ROUTES BETWEEN ARYAVARTA AND DAKSH1NAPATHA 


By 

Mr. S. R. SHENDE, 

Brihan-Maharashtriya Karyalaya, Sangli, (Bombay). 

In tin' prehistoric days Aryavarta was the name of the Northern and 
Dakshmfipatha of the southern Bharatakhanda. These were the natural divi- 
sions due to difficulty in crossing Vindhya mountain and the Narmada river 
and 111 * 1 hilly and jungle tracts of Chota Nagpur and Orissa. Crossing of these 
was made further difficult by the cruelties of barbarous tribes residing there. 
Routes to go from one side to the other were very few and it is interesting to 
find them out from old records. Below arc given as many I am able to trace. 
There are three sets of the 29 records given below. In the first set, the routes 
are stated directly as in Nos. 7, 10, 11,. 13 to 21 and 24, 25 and 29. In the 
second set the routes can be traced out indirectly but probably indications 
are there such as in Nos. 1 to 6. 8, 9, 12, 22. 23. The persons in the third 
set have crossed Vindhya but the routes are not given as in the cases of 
Nos. 26, 27 and 28. 


Suial 

No. 

I 

Route 

2 

! 

Whiut recorded. 

i 

3 

Who used. 
4 

Date . 
5 

1 

i 

i 

! From 

Sind 
to 

Sopara. 

1 . Carmichael Lec- 
tures (1918) of Dr. 
D. R. Bhandarkar. 
pp. 23 and 24 and 
Baudhayana Dharma 
Sutra. Chaukhamba 
Ed. of 1934. 

1. Northerners took 
to sea voyages and 
reached Kachha. Sau- 
i ash i ra , Bharu- Kacha 
and Sopara. 

(?) 

2 

Tapi 

Valley 

* 

2. Vol. IX, Part I, 
Bom. Gaz. (1901 Ed.) 
and Mot al a Brahmana 
katha and personal in- 
vestigations. 

2. Kama Brahmans 
of Khandesh went to 
Jambusar and Moia, 
whose descendants as 
1 take them to be are 
the present Motala 
Kapil and Jambti 
Brahmans of Surat 
and Broach districts. 

(?) 



3. Personal investi- 
gations. 

• 

3. Jambus have 
gone back to Khan- 
desh and C. P. and 
Ahmednagar by this 
very route. 




520 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Serial 
No . 

1 


3 


3 or 4 


4 


5 or Via 
No. 3 



Bhamkachha 

to 

Aparanta 
(this joins 
the, fourth) 
and 

vice versa. 


Nasik 
Nandurbar 
Songad 
Gujarat . 
Do. 


Mahisha- 
mati to 
Ujjain. 

Do. 



4. Personal investi- 4. Leva Gtijars and 

nations. Leva Kunabis went 

to Khandesh and 
Buldhana Districts 

from Gujarat h. 

5. Copper plat e of j 5. Emigration < ?: 

1113 of Kontapur and j Gurjara and Karhada 

personal investiga- 1 Brahmans from Kar- 

tions. j hataka to Lata and 

j back to Kokan. 

i 

i 

6. Bhargava Brah- j (>. Bhargava Brah- 

ma nano ltihas (in j mans went to Bliaru- 
Gujarati) by Munshi, i kachha from Rajapur. 
pp. 7b- 79. | 

7. SarkarV Shivaji j 7. Shivaji had visit - 

and his times, 3rd Eel. j ed Sural twice by 
(1929) pp. 91-97 and I this route in 1661 and 
174. 1670. 

8. Madras Census 8. San rash tra Brah- 

Report of 1931 and L. mans of Madura seem 
S. I.. Vol. IX, Part II, to have gone there by 
pp. 447-48 and an ar- this route. 

tide by Kaka Kalel- 
kar in Maharashtra 
Sahitya Patrika, Vol. 

8, pp. 663. 

9. I hole Inscription, 9. Pulkeshi II, con* 

V. 22. quers Lata Desha. 

10. Travels of Yuan 10. Yuan Chawang 

Chawang by Watters, goes to Bharu Kachha 
Vol. II, p. 241. from Ajanta. 

11. Peshwa Dnftar, 11. Chimnaji Appa 

Vol. 30, p. 295. goes to Gujarat. 

12. Aihole Inscrip- 12. Pulkeshi con- 

tions. Verse 22. quers Malva and Gu- 

jarath. 

13. (a) Sulla Nipa- 13. Pupils of Pavari 
ta, V. 1010-11-12. (b) go to Ujjain. 

Dr. D. R. Bhandar- 
kar s Carmichael Lec- 
tures, p. 21. 

14. History of Mo- 14. Malva and 

hamadan Powers, by Khandesh. 

Fcrishta, Vol. I, p. 307 

(1829 Ed.). 

15. Peshwa Da f tar, 15. Bajirao I goes 

V. 30, pp. 268-9. 4 to Malva. 


C 500 
years 
ago 


(?) 


(?) 


(?) 


6th 

century. 


6th 

century. 


1729 Dec. 


6th 

century. 


5th 

century 
B. C. 


1294 A.D. 


1724. 



ROUTES BETWEEN ARYAVARTA & DAKSHUjIAPATHA 


521 


Serial 

Route 

Where recorded . 

Who ?*sed. 

Date. 

No. 





1 

2 

3 

■1 

5 



16. Peshwa Daftar, 

16. Chimanaji Appa 




V. 30, pp. 283-4-5. 

goes to Bundi and 
back. 

1728-29 



17. Do. No. 30, 

17. Chimnaii Appa 




p. 311. 

returns from Bundel- 
khund. 

1733. 



18. Do. V, 27, p. 

18. Raghunathrao 




70. 

goes to Ujjain. 

1733. 



19. Peshwa Diary, 

19. Raghoha re 




VI l, Madhavrao I. 
Vol. II, by Lad arid 
Joshi (1911 a.d. ) p. 

turns to Khargona 
from Ujjain. 

1767. 



419. 



6 

ITande to 

20. Peshwa Daflar, 

20. Baiirao I, re- 

1719. 


Bhopal. 

Vol. 30, pp. 262-3. 

turns from Blielsa to 
Ilande. 




21. Peshwa Diary, 
VII, Madhavrao I, 

21. Raghoba Da da 
goes to Bhopal. 

1766. 



Vol. II, by Vad and 
Joshi (1911 Ed.) p. 





109. 



(> or Via 


22. Ihole inscrip- 

22. Pulkcshi II, goes 

6th 

5 


lions V. 23 & 24 and 
Ind. Ant. Vol. VII, 
p. 290. 

to defeat Harsha. 

century. 



23. Travels of I bn 

23. Batuta comes 

13th 



Balula by Lee, p 162. 

j 

down to Daulatabad. 

century. 

7 

Via 

24. Peshwa Daflar, j 

24. Chimnaji Appa 

1732. 


Sohagpur 

V. 30, p. 308. 

goes to Bundclkhand. 



and 




Narsingpur. 


25. Bajiran I, goes 


8 

Chanda, 

25. Peshwa Daftai, 

1729. 


Nagpur, 

V. 30, p. 288, and 

to Mahoba via Chan- 



Mandla. 

Peshwa Diary, part 

da and Mandla, and 




II, by Vad & Paras- 

visits Chhatrasal and 




nis (1906 Ed.) pp. 
229-30. 

his son. 


Either 


26. Valmiki Rama- j 

26. Ram reaches 

(?) 

5, 6, 7 


yana. j 

Dandakaranya. 

or 8 


: 

27. Early history of 

27. Agastya crosses 

(?) 



the Deccan by Bhan- 

Vindhya and stays at 



darkar anl Valmiki 
Rama yana. 

Panchavati. 




28. Sutta Nipala V, 

28. Bavari reaches 

6th 



976-7. 

Ashmaka from Kasai a. 

century. 





B. C 

9 

Bihar to 

29. Travels of Uyan 

28. Uyan Chawang 

6th 


Orissa. 

Chawang, by Watters. 

goes to Puri from 

century. 



Vol. II, pp. 194 and 

Tamluka. (Midna- 



197, 198. * | 

pur). 




522 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


List of those whose routes can possibly be traced (1) A Jain 
Shrutakcvalin went to Shravana Belgola from Kosala in 3rd 
century BC (2) Routes of several Buddhists who came to Maharashtra. 
(3) Routes of expeditions of the. Lieutenants of Delhi Court from 13th to 
16th centuries and travels of foreigners. 

It is necessary to give serially explanatory notes to the Column No. 4 
“ who used ”. They are : — 

(1) Baudhayana in his Dhamia Sutra (1 : 2 : 4) says that the Nor- 
therners i.e. the people of Aryavarta take to sea voyages which according to 
him is irreligious. And if the quotation of Rhallavin according to Dr. D. R. 
Bhandarkar is 1 : 2 : 12 : 14 (Chau Khamba series) it is a half truth to say 
that “Another route by which the Aryans seem to have gone to South India 
was by sea. They apircar to have sailed from the Tndus to Kachha, Kathe- 
wad, Bharu Kachha, Sopara I add here a passage to support the learned 
Dr. from footnote 2 to Page 1 of Vol. No. IX Part I “Gujarat Popula- 
tion ’’ of the District Gazetteers of the Bombay Presidency. It runs as 
follows. 

“ The explanation to the early Brahmans in Gujarat from Upper India 
is that they are descendants of those who entered Gujarat either by sea or 
by land from Sind." 

Buddhists Jatakas. 339 Baveru Jataka and Sussondi Jataka No. 36G - 
tell us that they have sailed from Bharu Kachha. “ Linguistically Kachhi 
is not an intermediate language -between Sindhi and Gujrathi. It is a form 
of Sindhi with a varying mixture of Gujrathi”. (Page 176, Vol. I, Pt. I, 
of L. S. I.). 

(2) Explanatory notes about these classes will be iound on pp. 10 
and 12 of the Vol. IX part I < Bombay Gaz . ) . These three classes belong to 
Kjanva Shakha of Yajurveda while in the whole of Gujarath if my information 
is correct, no follower of Kanva Shaka is found at all. That the story given 
in the footnote of page 12, tracing the original home of the forefathers of 
the Motala Brahmans at Kolhapur, may not be correct. Kolhapur cannot 
be the abode of Kanvashakha Brahmans whose headquarters are Khandesh 
Districts adjoining Surat and Bhadoch and therefore, I take that the Kanva- 
shakha Brahmans might have migrated to Surat and Bhadoch to perform 
sacrifices. The Kanva Shakha Brahmans can be traced at Jambusar as far 
back as 7th century a.d. according to a copper plate (J. R. A. S. of Great 
Britain and Ireland N. S. Page 247, Vol. I). Mr. Bhimbhai Kriparam, com- 
piler of the aforesaid Gazetteer volumes thus describes the Motala Brahmans 
“ In addition to their appearance which is more Deccani than Gujarati, four 
points support the tradition that the Motala Brahmans came from the 
Deccan. At the time of the marriage and for four days after the bride 
keeps her head uncovered and fastens the end of her robe from left to right. 



ROUTES BETWEEN ARYAVARTA & DAKSHIl^lAPATHA 523 

In all these points except the first the practice of the Motala, Jambu, and 
Kapil Brahmans is the same and agrees with the practice of the Deccan 
Brahmans. The Motala Brahmins are intelligent, active and hardworking. 
The priestly class have a name for learning superior to that of the most 
other sub-divisions of Gujarath Brahmans (pp. 12 and 13). The inter- 
marriages between Jamboos and Motalas took place a century ago (Foot- 
note 3 page 12).” 

In the book named “ Motala Brahman Katha ” (p. 2 to p. 4 chapters II 
and III) the aforesaid statements are corroborated. A Motala friend of 
mine very lately wrote me expressing these very views current amongst his 
caste. 

(3) My investigations have shown that the Jamboo Brahmans who 
have migrated about three centuries ago to Indore State and Chanda and 
Nagpur Districts of C. P. and Ahmednagar District of the Bombay Presi- 
dency have completely merged into Maharashtra Brahmin fold, and they are 
being classed as Maharashtrians. These Jamboos can go to Khandesh only 
by Tapi Valley route. 

(4) Leva Gujars and Leva Kunbies arc residents of Khandesh and 
Buidhana Districts and have completely merged into a Maharashtra Caste 
so much so that 95% of them are adherents of Bhagwat sect of Pundharpur. 
They have, I am told, gone there five or six centuries ago. Their way to 
Khandesh is but by Tapi Valley. 

(5) A few families of Maharashtriya Karhada Brahmins have com- 
pletely been absorbed by the Motalas and an interesting story of their ab- 
sorption is narrated in Schedule “Z” and “T” (pp. 44 and 73 of Motala 
Brahman Katha). 

The families of the surnames ol Gurjats of Karhada Brahmins of Maha- 
rashtra have come back to Konkan from Gujarat before the Saka 1113. 
(History of Athale family, p. 9). They aie described as 

> n a copper plate from Rajapur of the Ratnagiri District. 
Similarly Pomburlekar Joshi another Karhada Brahman family is said to 
have come from Gujarat (Bharat Itihas Samshodhak Mandal Quarterly- 
Shivacharitra, Vol. IV, pp. 3 and 8). These and other families of Karhatak 
who received donations from Gurjar Kings must have gone to and come back 
from Gujarat via. Kolaba and Thana Districts which are short-cuts to both 
the provinces (Gupte's ‘‘’Karhad”). 

(6) The story of the migration to Gujarat from Rajapur of the Dikshit 
families of Broach is narrated on pp. 76 to 79 of the “ Bhargava Brahmanno 
Itihas”. Way to Broach of these Dikshits can only be through Konkan 
Districts. 

(7) Shivaji visited Surat first, in 1664 via Nanaghat, Mahuli. Jawhar, 
Ganadevi (pp. 93 to 97) and on second* occasion raided it in 1670 via. Kalyan 
(p. 174). 



524 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(8) Saurashtra Brahmans are weavers from Saurashtra as the name 
itself indicates. Madras Census report writer (1931, p. 292) says that the 
language of the people is a Gujarathi dialect and that they have come by 
C. P. Belgaum and Dharwar Districts of Bombay Presidency which seems 
to be doubtful. Srj. Kaka Kalekar who visited Madura and came across 
with these people and language remarked in an article in “Maharashtra 
Sahitya Patrika, Vol. VIII, p. 663 ff." is, as a “ Lost Brother of Marathi 
lie does not see any connection of it with Gujarat as regards language, 
custom, mode of living etc. lie further adds that along with Telegu, Tamil 
and Kannada words it contained, many Marathi and Konkani words, phrases 
and idioms are also found therein. The linguistic investigations made by me 
go to concur with the veteran learned Kakasaheb. That is the reason why I 
think that these Saurashtra people must have gone to Madura via, Lata. 
Konkan, Vanavasi, Coimbatore having received royal patronage at Madura 
since long. 

(9) Pulkeshi II subjugated the kingdom of Lata (V. 22) where he 
might have either gone via. Konkan after having conquered Puri (V. 21) 
by the route No. 3 or if the conquest was an independent one his route might 
have No. 4. 

(10) Yuan Chawang went to Bharukachha from Ajanta after crossing 
Narmada fp. 241, Travels of Y. C. by Watters). 

(11) Chimnaji Appa Peshwa left Khara Nala on 14-42-1729, crossed 
Tapi and proceeded to Ankaleshwar, crossed Narmada and reached Broach 
on 24-12-1729. 

(12) Though Lata, Malva and Gurjars : are described to 

have been conquered in one verse 22, geographically the expeditions must have 
been two ; the first for Lata and the second for Malva and Gurjar and there- 
fore two different routes should be assigned to these. No. 3 for Lata 
and No. 4 or 5 for Malva and Gurjar. Rajputana was in those day's in the 
possession of Gurjars and hence their name to it (p. 415 of 

/. B. B. R. A. S’., Vol. XXI). 

(13) Pupils of Bavari left Pratishtana and went upto Mahismati and 
reached Ujjain. 

(14) Ramdeo King of Devagiri writes to Alln- 'd-din Khilji (1294) 
in a letter : - 

“Supposing that you should be able to retreat from hence undisturbed, 
are not the princes of Malva, Kliandesh and Gondavana in your route. . . . ? 

Can you hope they will permit you to escape unmolested? ’’ (about 

1290 A.D. ). 

- Page 307 of the History of the rise of the Mohamedan Power, 1829 Ed. 
by Ferishta Vol. I. Here the route of Alla-ud-din is shown via ^ 

Khandesh and back. 



ROUTES BETWEEN ARYAVARTA & DAKSHIJJJAPATHA 525 

(15) Bajirao I went to Malwa via Rajapura, Maheshwar, Mandavgad, 
Nalse and Khargon in April and May of 1724. 

(16) Chimnaji Appa leaves Rajapura on 23-41-1728 via Nalcliha and 
Ujjain goes to Bundi by February 1729, and returns via. Bundelkhand, Dahod 
on 1-4-1728 Jambhol Bore Gajarati Rajapura to Sendhava on 16-4-1729. 

(17) Chimnaji Appa while returning from Bundelkhand via. Malwa 
Ghat (9-5-1733) halted on his way back at Navi Sarai, Fazilpur, Zirpa and 
reached Makadai on 13-5-1723. 

(18) Raghoba Dada left Sendhava (1753) and visiting Khargon and 
Indore reached Ujjain. 

(19) Raghoba Dada returned from North Indian Expedition of 1766- 
67 via Devas (1-5-67 Ujjain), Dharampuri to Khargon on 5-6-1767. 

(20) Bajirao I, on his way back from Sarai of Moghala ( 14-4-1719) 
halted at Nanakpur, Sarai Satarana. Bhelsa, Shihore, Ichhawar, Ilande and 
Ratanpur and reached on 7-5-1719 to Bahranpur. 

(21) Raghunath Kao left Raver on 5-2-1766 and after halting at Bah- 
ranpur, Makdai. Ilarde, Ilande and Ncmavar reached Bhopal on 6-3-1766. 

(22) Pulkeshi 11 defeated Harsha (V. 22) after crossing Vindhya and 
Narmada but the route not having been mentioned 1 assign either No. 5 or 6. 

(23) The same is the case with Ibn Batuta who left Delhi and reached 
Daulatabad but the intermediate places mentioned on p. 162 are not traceable 
to me and therefore it may be that he might have crossed the mountain by 
either rdute No. 5 or 6. 

(24) Chimnaji Appa left Klhandva on 30-11-1732 reached Shivani 
(Malva) and from where, he went to Sohagpur to cross Narmada and reached 
Narsingpur and thence proceeded to Bundelkhand in the beginning of Janu- 
ary. 1733. 

(25) Bajirao I reached Washim on 28-12-1728 and proceeded to Ma- 
hur, Girad (Chanda), Makade Dhokade (Nagpur) Mandale and entered 
Bundelkhand and reached Mahoba on 13-3-1729. 

(26-27-28) Ram and Agastya of Valmiki Ramayan came down to Danda- 
ka> anya and Bavari a Buddhist Bhikshu came to Ashmaka from Kosala which 
they could only do by crossing Vindhya and not otherwise but there is no 
mention of their route and therefore it. could be said that they have crossed 
Vindhya by either of the 5th, 6th, 7th or 8th route. 

(29) Yuan Chwang after reaching Singbhuma in Bihar went south- 
ward to Tamluka in Midnapur District and visited Chilka Lake near Katak 
and Rajmahcndri in Orissa. 

To sum up the subject I have to point out that the route No. 1 i.e., 
voyages in the western sea were common till at least Sixth century before the 
Saka Era. Regarding route No. 4 and 3 1 have to say that till sixth century 
of the Saka Era people from Sind ancTMalva used to come to Anarta and Lata 



526 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and Aparanta. Routes No. 5 and 6 were of frequent use to cross Vindhya, 
Nos. 7 and 8 were used rarely and No. 9 was not only used by Yuan Chwang 
but I may say that the colonisation of Utkala might have taken place by this 
route. 

Another interesting feature is that most of the railway lines are cons- 
tructed by these old routes. The Tapi Valley line of B.B.C.I., runs by No. 
2. Bombay- Ahmed abad line of the same Railway goes by No. 3 and on- 
wards. The Malva branch i.e., Khandwa to Ratlam Section passes by our 
route No. 5. 

Khandwa to Bhopal line of G. I. P. Ry. is out route No. 6 and Nagpur 
Itarsi branch is our route No. 8. 

Mrdnapur to Kharagpur and further upto Puri are branches of B. N. 
Ry. which is our route No. 9. 



BRAHMANISM AND JAINISM 

By 

Dr. PHANI BHUSAN ROY, m./v., ph.d. 

Jainism and Buddhism are the two great Pauruseya religions of India ; 
and by common consent it is held that Jainism was the earlier of the two. It 
will not be improper then to look upon Jainism as the typical Pauru§eya 
religion of India. If so regarded. Jainism offers naturally a strong contrast 
to Brahmanism which is traditionally regarded as Apauruseya religion par 
excellence. We may tentatively define a Pauru^eya religion as one which 
grows round a central Figure who both intuits and preaches the truth whereas 
an Apaurujseya religion has not this Central Figure. A Pauru§eya religion 
is therefore historical in its origin and growth while an Apauruseya religion 
is Sanatana or timeless. But the question is : Can any religion be called a 
Pauruseya religion? 

(A) MahavTra, the Jina, after attaining to Kcvalajnana, preached the 
holy message to all and Sundry. If, instead of preaching the path of Kaiva- 
lya, he pointed out to his hearers the primrose path of dalliance, he could 
have still gathered round him a band of followers (like any successful robber- 
chief, Angullmala for example) but he could never have commanded the 
deep esteem and veneration of pious and earnest men and women. This fact 
establishes an indisputable truth. Some men may be bad and immoral but 
most mm are not, so the vogue of a robber-chief can never be equal (never in 
quality and also not in quantity) to that of a religious teacher. That is, the 
appeal of religion and morality evokes a strong and lasting res]x>nse in the 
hearts of men and women which effect can never be produced by an appeal 
to the baser side of human nature. But what prevents a religious preacher 
from pointing out the primrose path of dalliance ? Truth and its realisation. 
Only because Truth has captured his soul that a Truth-realiser cannot but 
deliver the message of Truth (as the sun cannot but gjive light and heat) ; 
and until and unless this message of Truth is delivered, nobody can evoke 
an undying and widespread enthusiasm among earnest men and women. 
Truth operates then in a creative or dynamic way. Firstly, Truth, by re- 
vealing itself to the soul of the Fortunate one (Mahavlra, for example) 
moulds him as its vehicle or standard-bearer and then using him as an ins- 
trument broadcasts itself all the world over. This fact also establishes an 
indisputable truth. Truth creates a super-man, not a super-man Truth, that 
is to say, Truth is higher than, nobler, than, greater than its standard-bearer 
or realiser. 



528 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(B) The process of Truth-realisation has been lucidly explained in 
Buddhism (Sarp. Nikaya Vol. II, p. 25). But 1 shall cite here a more his- 
torical example : Newton, the mathematician, was once sitting under an 
apple-tree when a ripe apple fell to the ground. In a flash of lightning Truth 
i.e. the Universal Law of Gravitation revealed itself to the consciousness of 
Newton. Nobody would suggest that the Universal Law of Gravitation began 
to operate the moment. It was intuited by Newton (in that case Baby New- 
ton could never have dropped from his mother's womb). Madhucchanda 

sings : Agnim Tide (Rv. I. I. I.) and at once the Fire-god (Agni) 

breathes into being ! This account will be very absurd, for the truth is very 
emphatically the other way about. The correct interpretation is : Fire-god 
was, is and will be for ever ; only because lie, in His benignity, has revealed 
Himself to the consciousness of Madhucchanda that Madhucchanda has been 
able to sing forth in such full-throated ease. The word Madhucchanda (so 
far as R, K. Singing i.e. inspired singing is concerned) should not be put in 
casus Rectus (Nominative case) but in casus Ablativus (Instrumental case) 
for Madhucchanda does not and cannot possess Karttrtva (agency), he pos- 
sesses merely Karanata (instrumentality). Therefore the Vedic seers called 
Vedic Religion, Vedic Religion, but never Vasi?tha religion or Kanva reli 
gion or Bharadvaja religion (so on and so on), for they knew, in their infinite 
wisdom, that Truth is greater than its standard-bearer, Truth is greater than 
its fortunate realiser. 

(C) The R.K. -songs have been sung by a number of inspired singers 
and no one among them has arrogated to himself the position of supremacy 
over others. If Vasi$(.ha looked ujx>n himself as Truth’s sole realiser and 
looked down upon Grtsarnada, Bharadvaja etc. as so many petti foggers than 
he would have committed a blunder that was committed by the founders of 
Pauru^eya religions. Instead of religious toleration and concord we would 
have then religious tyranny and discord in Vedic times. Moreover the whole 
thing would have, rested upon a grievous untruth : the exaltation of the Truth 
realiser far above Truth or hi* equation with it ( Yd mam passati so dhatnmam 
passati). A Buddhist might say : Dhammam Sarapam gacchami but what 
sense is there in his saying : Buddham sarapam gacchami ? The opponent 
may argue : Jainism etc. are ascetic religions and therefore they should not 
be confounded with Vedic Karmakanda. Our reply would be : Yajfiavalkya 
(Br. Ara. Upa.) is as much a Vedic seer as Grtsarnada or Vasi$(ha is. Only 
a head-strong man would opine that the Upanisads are more Vedic than the 
Saiphitas, which fact propounds a noble truth : the wind bloweth where it 
listeth and truth reveals itself in many ways, not ordinarily known to man. 

(D) The opponent may still argue that Jainism etc. are not merely so 
many systems of philosophy but they are so many ways of life (Marga) and 
as such they should be separately named as the streets are named in a city. 
We shall request our opponent to peruse carefully the Introduction to Jaina 



BRAHMANISM AND JAINISM 


529 


Sutras (S. B. E.), by Jacobi, where the great Savant has proved up to the 
hilt the fact of Jain-Buddhist indebtedness to Brahmanism in the matter of 
ascetic practices and regulations. Neither the Buddha nor Mahavlra was a 
Padavit (Path-finder) in a startlingly original sense of the term. So the 
Maggadesakattva of Mahavlra need not be taken into account in naming the 
religion after him. It clearly follows then that no religion should be called a 
pauruseya religion simply because of the fact that it stupefies truth for whose 
sake religions are preached and practised. Secondly, a pauruseya religion al- 
ways and invariably gives an unholy encouragement to separatist and faction- 
al tendencies which create lamentable discord and strife among men, profess- 
ing different religions. 

We shall now attack the problem from a different standpoint. All the 
pauruseya religions arc proselytizing cults, i.e., the Pauruseya religions make 
great use of upiiya-kausalya or religious propaganda. The Vedic religion is 
singularly free from this proselytizing zeal. Why ? For the sake of religions 
earnestness and steadfastness (adhikara). A Yajamana does not go to a 
meeting to hear a sermon from some great religious teacher ; he, in a mood 
of deep veneration, goes to the uncreated Veda for getting his religious ins- 
piration (sabdJ-bhavana). Now, take for example the holy injunction : Dar- 
Sapunjamasabhyam svargakamo yajeta. This holy injunction occurs in the 
tiatapatha Brahmana which is not after all a juvenile text meant for children 
which fact compels the Yajamana to devote a considerable time to Vcdic 
studies (Brahmacarya). So the Vedic religion did always remain a *vathi- 
nayana and never deteriorated into Sahajayana. Now, dilly-dallying and 
shilly-shallying in matters religious begets a corresponding habit of dilly-dally- 
ing and shilly-shallying in life. In my humble opinion, our national decline 
is mainly due to these personal cults which breeding a sort of latitudinarianism 
in religion have slackened our grip on life. We fear to tread the uphill path 
in any department of life, always hankering after soft jobs and cushioned 
chairs. “ Religion Made Easy ” has made us take life also much too easy. 

For the sake of truth than which nothing is higher, for the sake of reli- 
gious concord than which nothing is more noble and for the sake of accept- 
ing life as a struggle than which nothing is more courageous, tire Pauruseya 
religions should be renamed ; and the new nomen that I propose for Jainism 
is Vedic-Rcligion, i.e., the religion of Veda (truth) as revealed to the consci- 
ousness of Mahavna, the Jina. 


35 



THE PROSPECTS OF ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR 
INDIA AND THE WORLD 


By 

Dr. BENOY SARKAR, M.A., dr.h.c. 

Economic India Tomorrow 

A Plan jor Economic Revolution in Post-War India has been issued by 
some industrialists of Bombay (January. 1944). It is always useful to dis 
cuss the far-off divine events. But as in every other country, belligerent 
or neutral, in India also post-war icconstruction will have to attend to the 
problems of famine, epidemics, business failure, and unemployment. The im- 
mediate economic requirements of India to-morrow will have to be: met, no 
matter what be the ultimate goal. Post-war economy is essentially the 
economy of demobilization. The fundamental problem is to decide, as to how 
much of the wartime state controls in industry, trade, currency, and agricul 
ture, as -well as employment, prices and wages ought to be maintained in 
order that demobilization may be prevented from producing its worst effort?. 
Reconstruction problems before India are bound to be in the main of the 
same order as those before other countries. 

In the present conditions of under-development the temptation to in- 
dulge in comprehensive schemes and fundamental principles of planned in- 
dustrialization is bound to be great. For the time being, let us combat that 
temptation in a deliberate manner. Since 1907 the present author has been 
issuing schemes, plans or creeds for theorists and public workers. Some of 
the most pressing needs of India in the immediate future which have been 
discussed in one or other of those creeds are being enumerated below. The 
object is to suggest a few channels along which the demobilized resources in 
finance and personnel may be utilized. 

The plan, designed as it is for all the provinces of India, comprises the 
following items : 

A. Tec \ i no-Industr i al 

1. Electrification of every municipal area, in order that, among other 
things, cheap power may be conveniently rendered available to small and 
medium industries. (The municipalities of India are approximately 1,000 
in number.) 

2. Construction of roads, inter-district and intra-district, with a view, 
among other things, to facilitating the marketing of agricultural goods. The 
poverty of Bengal, especially of East Bengal and Assam, in roads, is note- 



ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR INDIA AND THE WORLD 531 

rious. Motor roads between Dibrugarh on the one hand and Sadiya and 
Chittagong on the other have long been overdue. Perhaps some of them 
are already under construction as military necessities. 

3. Erection of shipyards and equipment of harbours at diverse mari- 
time centres and river-mouths. Narayanganj (Dacca) and Chandpur 
(Camilla), for instance, may be singled out as first-class sites for seaports 
in East Bengal no less worthwhile than Calcutta. 

B. The Standard of Living of Peasants, Workmen and Clerks 

1. Allocation of special funds (of large size) such as may be rendered 
available, to individual cultivatois through co-operative societies at convenient 
rates of interest. 

2. Introduction of compulsory social insurance among working men and 
other employees with adequate state grants. (A Bill is in preparation). 

The standard of living and efficiency of the masses in villages and towns 
is likely to be raised in a special manner by the above two measures. 

C. Socio-Economic 

1. Training and employment of women in health and other social ser- 
vices at the rate of one per each union board. (The number of union boards 
is about 5,000 in Bengal). 

2. Intensified campaign (large scale pumping, land-reclamation, train- 
ing of rivers, irrigation etc.) for the eradication of malaria, district by 
district. 

3. Enactment of consolidated Public Health Act. (A Public Health 
Act has already been passed in Madras in 1939). 

This may be regarded as the irreducible minimum of techno-industrial 
and socio-economic planning during the period of “reconstruction” in the 
narrow sense, say, five years from the end of the war. A large part of the 
pci sonnel technocratically educated and disciplined during World-War II 
is likely to be absorbed through road-making, electrification, port construc- 
tion, river-engineering and allied industrial projects. An avenue may then 
be found for taking charge of large numbers that are bound to be thrown 
on the unemployed list, as soon as demobilization commences. 

For an outsider who is not in the know as to the exact kinds of indus- 
tries that the war-econorqy has brought into life or expansion it is not possi- 
ble to say how many of them ought to be maintained and under what pat- 
terns. Tire redistribution of working-men and clerks also among new work- 
shops and business concerns can likewise be suggested only by persons ac- 
quainted with the activities of the war supply and other offices. 

Idealism of the Bombay Plan 

Of course this prescription, modest* as it is, cannot be expected to bring 
the Indian infant mortality down to the Anglo-American level or raise the 



532 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


expectation of life up to the German level in seven or ten years, as recon- 
struction planners would wish. Nor can the national income per capita be 
possibly augmented hundred per cent within a quiquenriium or so as a result 
of the carrying out of the simple scheme of the eight items formulated here. 
It would be but crying for the moon if on the strength of these recommenda- 
tions India were to emulate within a decade or so the figures exhibited in 
Japanese ' Trade and Industry by the Mitsubishi Economic Research Bureau 
(London, 1936) or National Income in Japan (Japanese Economic Federa- 
tion, Tokyo, 1939). No economic millennium is in contemplation. And 
as for the federated world-state of human brotherhood and inter-racial amity, 
this humble plan is the furthest removal from that consummation. 

It is superfluous to observe that the plan put forward in this modest 
fashion would appear too elementary and primitive by the side of the pro- 
gramme suggested for England in The Condition of Britain (London, 1937), 
by G. D. II. and M. I. G>lt\ That work, of course, dads with pre-war 
conditions and formulates fundamental policies. Nor is it possible to en- 
counter here the planilications attempted in Turkey under Kcmal Ataturk 
since 1923 and esiiecially since 1933, the year of her first five year plan. It 
is from a hated condition of semi-colonie prevailing during the previous half - 
century that Turkey has been emancipated by comprehensive state interven- 
tion in the domain of agriculture as well as by state aids to industry, as one 
understands from Conker and Witmeur’s Redressement economique et Indus- 
trialisation de la nouvelle Turquie (Paris, 1937). 

The 10,000 crore-finance envisaged by the Bombay Plan is certainly 
very heartening. But the Plan is vitiated by the fallacy of which the plan- 
makers are not unconscious. First, it assumes the emergence of a 14 National 
Government/’ Secondly, it assumes the. emancipation of India's economic 
policy- full freedom in economic matters ’--from the British empire eco- 
nomy. No plan could be more superbly idealistic and wide of the mark 
in regard to the realities. 

Planification as an Ideology 

In contemporary economic discussions the category, economic planning, 
planned economy, or planified economy, is being loosely employed in season 
and out of season. Another category is being no less loosely employed. This 
has become current coin during the atmosphere of .World War II as recon- 
struction or post-war re construction. It is extremely difficult to avoid these 
conventional and much too popular categories while dealing with current 
economic questions. No less difficult is it to avoid employing these cate- 
gories in the loose manner of common parlance. 

Everybody who has some idea in regard to the economic welfare of 
his people considers himself to be the author of an economic planning or 
planned economy. Any and every scheme or plan is said to belong to 



ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR INDIA AND THE WORLD 533 

“ planning ” or “ planification.” And since we all happen to be living in 
what is perhaps the second phase of World-War II, each one of these econo- 
mic plans is treated as being equivalent to a scheme of post-war reconstruc- 
tion. In India, especially, planning and reconstruction have grown to be 
almost synonymous or identical categories. 

In a living science or art looseness in the use of expressions can hardly 
be prevented or avoided. Virtually every category has to be taken in an 
clastic sense. 

And yet to prevent misunderstandings care should be taken to pin these 
categories down to spccilied contents of thought. Literally speaking, be it 
observed, reconstruction ought to imply nothing more than the transfer or 
.transition of economic morphology from war to peace. W r e ought to visua- 
lize the withdrawal of finance and employment from war industries to nor- 
mal occupations. This is an aspect of “ demobilization ” which automati- 
cally involves unemployment. Rc-employment in certain industries is 
another item of imixjrtance. The le-establishment of trade, tariff, currency, 
prices, wages and what not on pre-war ( ?) or rather non war foundations 
belong to this phase of economy. The entire complex may be called stabi- 
lization or rehabilitation and is generally given over to a five-year period. 
Be it noted that a literal restoration of or reversion to pre-war condition is 
neither assumed nor possible. 

During the first year or two ( 1939-40) of the present war, Indian econo- 
mists, businessmen and politicians managed invariably to identify the war 
effort with all-round “economic planning.” Everybody wanted the Govern- 
ment to utilize the situation in such a manner as might equip India with 
every conceivable industry and business. It was hardly possible for them 
to comprehend that war effort could not aim at anything more than specific 
and temporary economic development for a well-delimited period. Now that 
the war has been presumably looking forward to its close, Indian economic 
statesmanship is as a general rule bent upon advising the Government to en- 
visage " post-war reconstruction” as identical with India’s techno-industrial 
development of a comprehensive character. It is invariably difficult for 
Indian publicists, comprising the authors of the “ Bombay Plan ”, to realize 
that post-war construction cannot possibly have more than a short-period 
and very limited scope. , In scientific analysis both “ war-effort ” and “ post- 
war reconstruction” are to be taken in the narrow sense of occasional and 
temporary or transitional measures. 

Communism vs. Capitalism in Planning 

Planning or planification, in its simplest and most naive form, implies 
the attempt of even the pre-historic caveman to save his first stone imple- 
ment for use on a future occasion. It is as old as conscious man. A goal- 
ful futurism is to be found in the soul of a plan. In itsi somewhat mature 



534 


U. C. LAW VOLUME 


form it covers the budgetary activities of all states, — ancient, mediaeval or 
modem, — in regard to the incomes and disbursements of a twelve-month 
period. Every improvement trust or road scheme is an instance of plan- 
ning. Finally, in its most hyperdeveloped form, planification means nothing 
but the communistic economy under state auspices introduced by Soviet 
Russia in October, 1928. Strictly speaking, planned economy is communism 
as concretely realized in Soviet Russia since then. 

But the success of the first five-year plan of Russia set the world in 
1933 thinking of the merits of some of the features, e.g. etaliame, centralized 
control and despotism, etc., - associated with Sovietic planning. And so virtu- 
ally every nori-Sovietic stale,- -from Germany, Italy, Japan, England, France 
and the U.S.A. down to the most undeveloped regions in the two hemis- 
pheres, has pounaxl uixin planning or planification as a new 
panacea, slogan or technique of public life and national welfare. Today we 
have to visualize two entirely distinct type's of planned economy or economic 
planning.. One is the original, Sovietic. Bolshevistic or communistic type. 
Its fundamental feature is the abolition of private property, private capital, 
private interest, private rent, and private profit, '['he other planning is noil- 
communistic, that is capitalistic or bourgeois. It recognizes the private pro- 
perty and private capital of age-long traditional economy. But both are unit- 
ed in state control. 

Today socialism is to be taken in two distinct senses or forms. One is 
the communistic socialism of Soviet Russia. The other is the non communistic 
or capitalistic and bourgeois socialism of all non-Soviet territories. Thus con- 
sidered, socialism is the prevailing economico political system throughout the 
world. 

Whether capitalistic or communistic, planification is state control, etatisme, 
or, what is virtually the same thing, socialism. In B. E. Lippincott’s com- 
pilation entitled Government Control oj the Economic Order (Minnesota, 
1935) pro-control ideas are expressed by Colm, Feiler, Lederer, Means and 
Nathan. This symposium may lx: placed by the side of the anti-control 
symposium edited by F. von Hayek as Collectivist Economic Planning 
(London 1936). 

Vansittartism in World-Planning 

No reconstruction can possibly realize the ideals or principles, should 
there be any, of world-wide economic salvation. The coming post-war world- 
economy or economic reconstruction bids fair to be but a continuation, in 
the main, of the world-economy at 1939. 

Arthik Unnati (economic progress,) is a social phenomena of doses and 
decrees. It is essentially gradualistic and can never claim finality or all- 
round comprehensiveness. 



ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR INDIA AND THE WORLD 535 

It is the equations of comparative industrialism and technocracy such 
as were in evidence! in pre-war years that would set the general lines along 
which the new transformations within the reconstruction complex are likely 
to proceed. The disturbances or modifications of pre-1939 equations gene- 
rated by World-War II in and through war industries, inflated employ- 
ments, inflated currencies, inflated wages and inflated prices - are to be 
treated in the main as aberrations of not much permanent value. They are 
fundamentally short period emergencies. The post-war equations may be 
taken chiefly as not very great deviations from the pre-war. Reconstruction 
as such is considerably limited by these positive considerations, -pious wishes 
or idealistic plan ificat ions notwithstanding. 

Let us be clear about two terms, post-war economy and world -economy. 
It is not necessary to indulge in speculation in order to explain the two 
categories. The economic evolution between World- War 1. and World-War 
IT, i.e. from 1919 to 1939 furnishes the objective data about these pheno- 
mena. 

First, then, ix)st-war economy is, realistically considered, the economy of 
preparation for the next war. Secondly, world- economy is not equivalent to 
the economic organization of the entire world. It is to be understood prag- 
matically as the economy of that much of the two hemispheres which it is 
possible for a people to utilize. This utilization is not, however, to be taken 
in a similar sense. The spirit of “ mutuality M with the other peoples of the 
same region is not to be excluded. 

The present war (since September, 1939) is, generally, being expected 
to come to an end by 1945. Sweeping proposals for dealing with defeated 
tier many are set out in a memorandum published (on May 1943) by the 
Post-War Policy Group of members of the House of Commons and Lords 
of which Wardlaw-Milne is the Chairman. The memorandum, signed by 34 
members of the Group, urges effective occupation of Germany and setting up 
of an Inter-Allied Council of Control. The first duties of such a Council 
should be, it is said, preservation of all order and complete demobilization 
of all German armed forces within six months, dismantling of the aeroplane 
.industry and control, and where necessary, closing down of German war 
potential including heavy and chemical industries to the extent of which 
they arc the basis for production of munitions ; arrests and bringing to trial 
of persons alleged to be*guilty of war crime, disbanding of officers’ corps and 
training corps. The essential points of the subsequent peace treaty in this 
plan should be that Allied army and air-forces will occupy Germany until 
the Allies agree that this may with safety be terminated or relaxed, inde- 
pendent states in East Prussia and Rhineland, restoration of the sovereignty 
of all countries invaded by the Axis, Allied control of radio, printing and 
education in Germany, no German army, navy and air-force, civil aviation 
cr aircraft industries until allied nations decide otherwise, return of all loot 



536 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


or compensation in kind, all costs arising out of Allied occupation to be paid 
by the German States. 

The paper on “ A Plan for Germany’s Economic Disarmament ” by 
Einzig in the Economic Journal ( London, Juno-Septcmber, 1942) throws 
likewise a flood of light on post-war world reconstruction. It may be said 
that the world-economy is expecting a Super-Versailles by 1946. World-War 
II cannot therefore be the last war of history. Humanly speaking, a war of 
revenge may be expected by 1965-70 in spite of the efforts of the victors to 
prevent that consummation. Some idea of such efforts to be directed by 
Anglo-American “ peace-force " may be seen in King-Hall's Total Victory 
(New York 1942) and Gclber’s Peace by Power (London, 1942). In June, 
1943, the British Labour Party also at their conference declared for the 
totalitarian disarmament of the German people. They proceeded on Van- 
sittart’s hypothesis that there were no “ good Germans ” in Germany. Post- 
war world-economy, then, is tantamount to the economic structure and 
dynamics of the world during these two decades or so (1946-710) of universal 
war-preparedness or continuation and maintenance of war-organization. Some 
of the items may be seen in Condliffe’s Agenda for a Post-war World (New 
York, 1942), a work, en passant, that lights shy of idealistic and millennial 
world-recipes.* 


* B. K. Sarkar : The Equations of World-Economy (Calcutta 4.943), Villages 
and Towns as Social Patterns (Calcutta 1§41) and The Political Philosophies Since 
1905, Vol. II, Part II (Lahore, 1942). 



BACITRA NATAK 


By 

Dr. 1NDU BHUSAN BANERJ1, m.a., ph.d. 

Calcutta University 

The main historical interest of the Bacitra Natak, which may lx- regard- 
ed as an autobiography of Guru Gobind Singh, the last Guiu of the Sikhs, is 
concentrated in seven sections, viz., the seventh to the thirteenth. In his 
epoch-making work on Sikh Religion, MacaulifFe gives us an English trans- 
lation of the first, seven chapters of the work 1 as well as of the last, but these 
important sections are omitted, the author giving it as his reason that as all 
the details narrated here had been incorporated in the general biography of the 
Guru, no separate translation seemed necessary. Unfortunately, from Macau - 
li'Te’s account of the life of the Guru it is not possible to doctor which portions 
of it are based on the Bacitra Natak and where the other Sikh records are 
laid under contribution. But inspile of its limitations, the Bacitra Natak is 
undoubtedly the most important of all the records about Guru (Jobind Singh 
and it is essential that we should know what it has got to tell us independent- 
ly. An English version of these sections of the Bacitra Natak is, therefore, a 
desideratum. The Guru’s descriptions, however, are animated and sometimes 
full of repetitions. We have, therefore, omitted some of these but, on the 
whole we believe that nothing has been left out, which can be of any use to 
the student of political history. 

T. Section viii 
The Battle of Bhangani 

When. I obtained sovereignty I conducted religious affairs to the best of 
my ability. I hunted various sorts of game in the forest and killed bears, 
nilgaus and elks. 

Afterwards I left that place and went to the city of Paunta. I enjoyed 
myself on the banks of the Kalindri and say amusements of various kinds. 

1. The third section is, however, skipped over but on the other hand \vc are 
given an English translation of the first three verses of the eighth section, another 
extract from which is incorporated in Macauliffe’s work a general account of the 
battle of Bhangani. Malcolm also incorporates another extract from this section 
in his Sketch of the Sikhs. These we have used freely and we take this opportunity 
°f acknowledging our indebtedness to their aythors. We may add here that for the. 
Purposes of this article we have used the printed list published by Gulab Singh and 
Suns and the annotated edition of Bhai Bishan Singh Gyani. 



538 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


There I selected and killed many lions, nilgaus and bears. Fatha Shah, 
the king, became angry and came to blows with me without any reason. 

There Sri Shah raged and the five stately heroes took their position firm- 
ly on the field of battle — the tenacious Jit Mai and the skilful Gulab, whose 
graceful figures on the battlefield were wondrous to behold, — the determined 
Maheri Chand and Gangaram, who defeated and shattered the enemy’s forces. 

1 ,akhand raged becoming red with anger and his bravery cast into shade even 
the pride of the peerless lion. 

Mahcru raged with a fearful expression and killed the. brave Khans in 
battle. The Brahmin Dayaram rushed into the fray with great anger and 
fought bravely and skilfully like Drona of old. 

Kripal advanced with a mace in his hand and smashed the head of the 
fierce Ilayat Khan. 

* * * 

Then Nand Chand rushed into the fray with dreadful ire, wielding his 
spear and brandishing his sword. His keen sword broke but he drew out his 
dagger and with great determination saved the honour of the Sodhi race. 

Then uncle Kripal advanced in his rage and exhibited the war feats of 
a true Kshatriya. The mighty hero was himself struck by an arrow but ne- 
vertheless made a valiant Khan fall from his saddle. 

The brave Saheb Chand entered into the fray and slew a bloody Khan. 
The stately hero wrought havoc in tire enemy’s ranks and those that survived 
fled with their lives. 

There, in the arena, Sri Shah fought and brought many Khans to the 
ground. (On the other side) Raja Copal stood erect on the field and looked 
like a lion amidst a herd of deers. 

There raged the great hero I lari Chand who skilfully took his position 
in the field. In great anger he discharged sharp arrows and those whom he 
struck he sent to the other world. 

* * * 

Then Jit Mai aimed with his spear and struck Hari Chand down to the 
ground. 

* * * 

The bloody Khans drew out their Khorasan swords, the keen edges of 
which flashed like fire. Arrows crowded upon one another, the bows cracked, 
the young horses fell and struck the more experienced and firm. 

* * * 

How far shall I describe the mighty battle ! Those who fought (in the 
front) were killed and thousands fled. 

The Hill chiefs spurred their horses and fled ; the soldiers retired with 



BACITRA NATAK 539 

their arrows undischarged. The Rajas of Jaswal and Dadhwal, who had been 
fighting with zeal, now left the Held with all their forces. 

The Raja of Chandel became exhausted and perplexed, when the tena- 
cious Hari Chand rose with a spear in hands. lie became immediately alive 
to the duties of a leader and raged furiously. Those who opposed him were 
cut to pieces and fell. 

Then Najabet Khan entered and directed his weapons against Sangu 
Shah. Several well-equipped Khans joined in the attack and sent Sangu Shah 
to the other world. 

After having killed Najabet Khan Sangu Shah fell fighting. There were 
lamentations in this world but rejoicings in heaven. 

When this insignificant creature saw Sanghu Shah fall in battle he took 
up his bow and arrows. With the first arrow I struck a Khan . . . who fell 
to the ground. I then drew out another and aimed it at the face of Bhikhan 
Khan. The bloody Khan fled leaving his horse, whom the third arrow struck 
and killed. 

After waking up from his swoon Hari Chand directed his shots with un- 
erring aim and then those whom he struck fell senseless and died. 

* * * 

In his anger Hari Chand drew out his arrows. His first arrow struck 
my horse. He aimed another at me but God saved me. the arrow only graz- 
ing my car in its flight. 

His third arrow penetrated the buckle of my waist-belt and reached my 
body, but wounded me not. It is only God who protected me, knowing me 
his servant. 

When I felt the touch of the arrow, my wrath was kindled. I took up 
my bow and began to discharge arrows in abundance. 

* * 

I killed Hari Chand and the enemies were trampled under foot. (Even) 
the millionaire chief was seized by death. 

The hillmcn fled in consternation and I, through the favour of the eternal 
God, gained the victory. 

Having thus held the battle-field, we raised aloud the song of triumph. 
I showered wealth on my warriors and they all rejoiced. 

When I returned after the victory I did not remain in the city of Paunta. 
I went to Kahlur and there established the village of Anandpur. 

Those who had kept themselves away from the battle, I drove out of the 
place ; and I patronised those who had distinguished themselves there. 

Many days passed in this way and I fostered the faithful and rooted out 
all the wicked. 



540 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


II. Section ix 
The battle of Nadaun 

Many days passed in this way till Miyan Khan of Jammu came and 
sent Alif Khan to Nadaun. Immediately quarrel broke out with Bhim Chand. 

The Raja called me to assist him in the war and I joined his side. They 
had erected a wooden fort there on a mound and brought the chiefs under 
control by means of guns and arrows. 

There came Raj Singh and the powerful Bhim Chand, the vigorous and 
manly Ram Singh and the brave Sukhdev of Jassrol. and they managed 
everything with zeal and enthusiasm. 

There came also the determined Prithi Chand of Dadhwar, fully prepar- 
ed and after having made arrangements for the government of his realm. 
Kripal Chand arrived with ammunitions and drove back and killed many of 
the enemy’s forces. 

Troops from the other side arrived, approaching the other side they at- 
tacked and killed many and felled him to the ground and the Raja began to 
gnash his teeth in great anger. On the other side, the soldiers beat their 
drums and blew their bugles ; the Raja (looked on) from a distance and his 
mortification knew no bounds. 

Then Bhim Chand himself raged, uttering the mantra of Ilanuman in 
his mouth. He called all the heroes and myself too. All assembled and ad- 
vanced in order. 

All the great heroes entered into the fray in great anger and advanced, 
just as a flame advances over a fence of dry weeds, (burning it in its train). 
On the other side, the valiant Raja Dayal of Bijharwal advanced with Raja 
Kripal, together with all his forces. 

+- * * 

Then Kripal raged, standing erect on the field of battle with great deter- 
mination. lie discharged arrows in abundance and killed many heroes. 

* * * 

He made a great fight and the row was heard throughout the nine quar- 
ters of the world. His weapons wrought havoc (in the enemy’s ranks) and 
he exhibited the true virtues of a Rajput. 

Then the Rajas, in great anger, fought with Enthusiasm and immediately 
the troops of Katoch were encircled by the enemy chief. 

The people of the tribes of Nanglu and Panglu advanced in order toge- 
ther with the forces of Jaswar and Outer ■ The great hero Dayal also joined 
and saved the honour of the people of Bijharwal. 

Then this insignificant creature (the Guru) took up his gun and aimed at 
one of the Rajas. The Raja reeled’ and fell upon the ground, so unerringly 
was the shot directed, but even then the angry chief thundered. 



BACITRA NATAK 


541 


I then threw off the gun and took up arrows in my hand. I drew out 
four and discharged all of them. Then again I took three others and dis- 
charged them with my left hand, (though) whether they struck anybody or 
not I do not know. 

Then the Almighty God hastened the end of the fight and the enemy were 
driven out into the river. 

* * * 

Alaf Khan fled and all the other heroes retreated precipitately. I re- 
mained there on the bank of the liver for eight days and visited the palaces 
of the various Rajas. 

Then I took leave of the Rajas and returned home and they proceeded 
in the other direction to negotiate reconciliation. The two parties came to 
terms and therefore the story ends. 

I came back here after having plundered Alsun (on my way) and, having 
reached Anandpur, enjoyed myself in various ways. 

III. Section x 

The expedition of the Khanzada 

Many years passed in this way and all the thieves (apostates) were 
hunted out and killed. Some left the city but came back in utter destitution. 

Then l>ilwar Khan sent his son against me. At midnight the Khans 
assembled and prepared for attack. 

When the party reached the bank of the river, Alam came and woke me 
up. There was a great row ; everybody stirred up and took up their wea- 
pons with fiery zeal. 

Immediately volleys of shots were discharged. The heroes shouted in 
various ways and the noise was heard even from the other side of tire river. 

Drums beat, bugles blew, the soldiers thundered, horses danced, the guns 
roared and all mingled in one huge uproar. 

The river wore a dreadful appearance and the soldiers suffered terribly 
from cold. From this side my heroes thundered and the bloody Khans fled 
with their weapons unused. 

* * * 

On their way they plundered the village of Barwa and established them- 
selves at Bhallan. Through the favour of God, the wretched fools could not 
even touch me and fled. 

IV. Section xi 

The expedition of Hussain Khan 

The Khanzada fled to his father but, . being ashamed of his own cowardly 
conduct, he could not utter a single word. There Hussain thundered, strik- 



542 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


ing his mailed fist (against something) and, with all his troops, prepared for 
attack. 

Emboldened by the strength of his army Hussain advanced. First he 
plundered the houses (of the hillmen). Then he defeated the Raja of Dadh- 
wal, brought him completely under control and made slaves of the princes. 

Next. Hussain thoroughly looted the Dun, nobody being able to with- 
stand the wretched fool. He took away food grains by force and distributed 
them among his own followers. The big fool thus committed a very dirty 
act. 

Some days passed and Hussain went on with his depredations. Now 
the turn of meeting the Raja of Guler came. 

If they had not met for two days more the enemy chief would have come 
( upon me, but) destiny had thrown the apple of discord amidst them. 

The Raja of Guler came to meet (Hussain) and with him came Ram 
Singh too. When four quarters of the day had passed they arrived and n;ct 
Hussain, who felt extremely flattered and became blind in his vanity. 

Just as sand becomes heated by the heat of the sun but the wretched 
thing does not know the sun and becomes proud of itself. 

Similarly, the slave (Hussain), in his vanity, did not even condescend 
to notice them. With tire Rajas of Katoch and Kahlur at his side, he 
thought that he was peerless in this world. 

They (Gopal and Ram Singh) offered Hussain the money they had 
brought with them. In this matter of giving and taking some differences 
arose and they returned to their own place with the money. 

At this the slave became very angry and lost all sense of good or bad. 
He did not pause to consider the ways and means but at once ordered the 
beating of the drum for advance. 

He threw all tactical considerations to the wind. A party of hares sur- 
rounded a lion for the purpose, of overawing him. He kept them invested 
for 15 pahars (about 45 hours) and did not allow either food or drink to 
pass. 

The soldiers became indignant at the want of food and drink and sent 
a messenger for the purpose of making peace. Behoving his valiant Pathan 
soldiers around him, the slave lost his balance and did not agree to the pro- 
posal. 

“ Either give me ten thousand rupees immediately or take death upon 
your head, ” (he said) : I (the Guru) had sent Sangatia there and he brought 
Gopal (to the enemy’s camp), giving him assurance (for his safety). 

The two sides could not agree and then Kripal thus thought within him- 
self such an opportunity will nfiver come again ; time, in its circle, de- 
ceives every body.” 



BACITRA NATAK 543 

“Gopal must immediately be done away with — either he must be made 
a prisoner or be killed-” When Gopai got scent of these intrigues, he, the 
king of heroes, escaped to his own men. 

When Gopal was gone, Kripnl raged in his fury. Minimal and Hussain 
(joined) and rushed into the fray. 

* * * 

Then raged the Rajas of Kangra and Kaloch, their faces and eyes red in 
anger, and their minds free from all other considerations. From another 
quarter the Khans entered arrows in hand, and it seemed that leopards were 
roaming in quest of flesh. 

* * * 

There had been lighting a hero named I lari Singh, who received, in his 
body, many arrows from the enemy. In great anger he killed many of the 
soldiers and, after exhibiting a great fight, went to the other world. 

Himmat and Kimmat advanced sword in hand. Jalal Khan joined with 
a mace. The determined heroes fought, intoxicated as it were. Blows fol- 
lowed blows and weapons crowded upon one another. 

* +. * 

Then Hussain himself entered into the thick of the fight, wielding bows 
and arrows in both hands. His face and eyes red with indignation, the fierce 
Khan commenced a great fight. 

Jr * * 

Then all the heroes entered arrows in hand and from all the four sides 
arose the cry, ‘ kill, kill. ’ They wielded their weapons with great dexterity 
and at last Hussain Khan fell and went to the other world. 

# K s'. 

(When they saw Hussain Khan fail) all the soldiers of Katocli advanced 

in their rage, together with the indignant Himmat and Kimmat. Hari Singh 
also came forward at that time and killed many valiant horsemen, especially 
selecting them for the purpose. 

Then the Raja of Katoch raged, carefully selecting his position in the 
field. He wielded his weapons with unerring aim, thundering death (upon 
his opponents). 

(From the other side) raged the Raja of Chandel and all attacked in- 
dignantly in a body. Those, who had entered into the fray were killed and 
those (who had remained, behind ) fled with their lives. 

Sangat Rai died with his seven companions. On the death of Kripal in 
the battle Gopal rejoiced. When the leaders fell the soldiers all fled in dis- 
order. 

* * * 

In this way the enemies were all killed and they began to take care of 
their own dead. There they found th*j wounded Himmat and Ram Singh 
spoke thus to Gopal — 



544 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


“ That Himmat, who has been the root of all these quarrels, has now 
fallen wounded in our hands. " When Gopal heard this he killed Himmat 
and did not allow the latter to get up alive. 

Victory came and the battle ended. The soldiers remembered their homes 
and proceeded thither. The Lord saved me (from unnecessary warfare) by 
decreeing the din of battle elsewhere. 

V. Section xii 
The expedition of Jujhar Singh 

In this manner fight continued endlessly and the leader of the Turks was 
killed. Dilwar became very angry and sent another army (in this direction). 

From his side came Jujhar Single who immediately drove out the enemy 
from Bhallan. On this side Gaj Singh mobilised his troops and fell upon 
him early in the morning. 

There Jujhar Singh stood erect, like a flag-post planted on the field of 
battle. Even the post might waver hut the brave Rajput did not flinch 

The soldiers of both parties moved in detachments, the Raja of Chandel 
on that side and on this side, the Raja of Jaswar. They were all fired with 
indignation and the fight commenced. 

+ it 

The battle continued with great vigour on both sides. Chandan Rai 
was killed when Jujhar Singh alone continued the fight. He was soon sur- 
rounded from all sides. 

Without any hesitation he rushed into the enemy's ranks, wielded his 
weapons with great dexterity, killed many of the valiant soldiers and at last 
himself went to the other world. 

VI. Section xiii 
The arrival of the Shahzada 

In this manner Jujhar met his death and the soldiers returned to their 
homes. Then Aurangzib became very angry and sent his son to the Punjab. 

At his approach all were frightened and fled to the hills. My own men 
also were very much frightened as they did not understand the ways of the 
Almighty. 

Some left me and took shelter where the big hills stood. Then the son 
of Aurangzib became very angry and sent a subordin in this direction, who 
pulled down the habitations of those who had left fhc. 

* * * 

The name of the man who plundered the apostates was Mirza Beg. The 
Guru himself saved all those who remained true to him. 

There Aurangzib’s son’s anger knew no bounds and he sent four other 
officers. These plundered the houses ( of all those apostates who had escaped 
Mirza Beg Khan. 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 


By 

The Rev. II. HERAS, s.j. 

Magan is a kingdom mentioned in a number of Sumerian documents 
between 2,630 B.c. to 2,400 B.c. The references to Magan in these documents 
are of a different nature. 

1. Magan is one of the countries conquered by King Saigon of Akkad. 1 

2. Naram-Sin the son and successor of Sargon went to Magan and 
defeated its king. 2 3 4 

3. Gudea, patesi (lord) of Lagash imported large quantities of products 
Iron Magan for a temple he was building/ 1 

4. Sundu, probably a merchant from Ur, sent a messenger named Bur- 
niigga accompanied by one Akalla, to Magan. The. purpose of the expcdi 
lion was most likely commercial.' 1 

These relations between Sumer and Magan partly peaceful and partly 
violent, have aroused great interest in all Sumeriologists. Accordingly they 
have tried to identify this kingdom of Magan, and the number of opinions 
about this identification shows that the kingdom of Magan has not finally 
been found as yet. 

Hommel identifies Magan with Ma’an in the Minacan country of Arabia 
or Yemen on the south Western coast of the Peninsula. 5 6 So think also Hitti* 
:md Dowson ; 7 though the latter, on another occasion puts it on the eastern 
coast of Arabia. 8 * 

Woolley suggests that Magan must be “some point on the Persian 
Gulf”; 0 and is finally inclined to localize it “probably on the West coast ot 
the Persian Gulf”. 10 The same eastern coast of Arabia is suggested by- 
King. 11 


1. Smith, Early History of Assyria, pp. 86-87, 89. 

2. King, Chronicles concerning Early Babylonian Kings, II, p. 10, 4. 

3. Cylinder A of Gudea, Cf. King-Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light 
of Recent Discoveries , p. 203. 

4. Nies, Ur Dynasty Tablets No. 84 Cf. Hitti, Wsiory of the Arabs , p. 36. 

o. The Encyclopaedia of Islam , I, p. 377. 

6. Hitti, History of the Arabs , p. 53. 

7. Dowson, The Age of the Gods , p. 116. 

8. Ibid., p. 78. 9. Woolley, The Sumerians, p. 46. 

10. Ibid., p. 82. 

11. King, History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 242. 



546 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


That Magan was in the Sinaitic peninsula was the opinion of Lenor- 
mant 12 and later of King and Hall. 13 

G. Smith says that Magan is “ The most ancient cuneiform name of 
Egypt ” : li an opinion which was brought forward once more in more recent 
times by Dr. W. F. Allright. 15 

S. Smith avers that Magan is “ far to the south-east of Babylonia ”, 1 « 
though in the same work he acknowledged that Magan “ must lie some con- 
siderable distance to the south-west”. 17 

Langdon believes that Magan is to be found in Jebel Akhdar in Oman ; l * 
and more recently Peake identifies the place with Jabal al Ma’adan in the 
comer of Arabian land entering the sea and forming the entrance of the 
Persian Gulf.' 9 

Among all these varied opinions there is none pointing out to India as 
the possible country of identification of Magan.- 11 Nothing was known about 
synchronism of civilizations in Sumer and India till recent times. The dis- 
coveries of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa opened new vistas into the field of 
oriental research. We know now that India was well known in Sumer. Bet- 
ween Mohenjo Daro and Sumer “ a close trade connection is proved by the 
fact that seals of exactly the same type as those found in India have also 
been found in Babylonia ”.- f Hall and Iiaddon haw already advanced the 
opinion that the people of Sumer probably came from India. 52 In fact the 
migration of the Sumerians from India seems to be implied by Genesis 23 and 

12. Journal of the Society of Biblical Archaeology VI, pp. 348 and 399. 

13. King-Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of Recent Discoveries, 
p. 158. 

14. Smith, " Early History of Babylonia ”, Transactions of the Society of 
Biblical Archaeology, I, p. 52. 

15. Allright, “ Menes and Naram-Sin Journal of Egyptian Archaeology t VI, 
pp. 89-98 ; Allright, " Magan, Meluha and the Synchronism between Menes and 
Naram-Sin ”, Ibid., VII, pp. 80-86. 

16. Smith, Early History of Assyria, p. 99. 17. Ibid., p. 49. 

18. Cambridge Ancient History, I, p. 416. 

19. Peake, " The Copper Mountain of Magan ”, Antiquity , 1928, p. 457. 

20. In order to show how India has been apparently purposely ignored in this 
respect, it is worth relating that when a committee of inquiry was constituted " to 
report on the probable sources of the supply of Copper used by the Sumerians” 
copper Specimens were obtained from Asia Minor, Persia, Cyprus, Egypt and Ara- 
bia. India was discarded a priori. Cf. Peake, op. cit' pp. 452-457. 

21. Ibid. Cf. Heras, ” The Origin of the Round Proto-Indian Seals discovered 
in Sumer”, B. B. & C. I. Annual, 1938; Gadd, "Seals of Ancient Indian Style 
found at Ur”, Proceedings of tne British Academy, XVIII; Langdon, “A New 
Factor in the Problem of Sumerian Origins ”, Ibid. 1931, pp. 593-596 ; Langdon, 
“ Another Indus Valley Seal ”, Ibid., 1932, pp. 47-48. 

22. Hall, Ancient History of the Near East, pp. 173-174 ; Haddon, The Races 
of Man and their Distribution, p. 100. ‘ 

23. XI, 3. 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 


547 


confirmed by Berosus. 24 A Babylonian chronicle mentions the name of 
Andubar as of an Indian who taught astronomy to the early inhabitants of 
Mesopotamia. 29 The Indian tradition about trade relations between India 
and Sumer is recorded in the Baber u Jataka . 2C We cannot doubt at present 
about the frequent intercourse existing between both countries from very 
ancient times. 

This being firmly settled, we may now make a further inquiry : Is 

perhaps Magan situated in India? In order to elucidate this question we 
shall study it from different points of view, 

I.. The Name. The country referred to in the Sumerian documents 
is ordinarily called Magan, which probably was pronounced as Makkan by 
tire Semites. 27 Both the Babylonian Chronicle and the Assyrian Omens call 
this kingdom Maganna. 28 On Ptolomy’s chart this name is given as Mayrvcw 
Now comparing these three names, 

1. MAGAN 

2. MAGAN -NA 

3. M A G I N DA NA 

we find that the first two syllables of this name should doubtlessly be Magan 
consistent in Nos. 1 and 2 and only once changed into Magin. As regards 
the third syllable there is no doubt that there was a third syllable in the 
name, for Nos. 2 and 3 each have 3 syllables. Now in No. 3 this third syl- 
lable is da, while in No. 2 is na. But na happens to be the fourth and last 
syllable of No. 3. Hence we may reasonably state that na was the last syllable 
of the name as given in Mesopotamia (through whose geographers and scholars 
it came to the ears of Plolomy). The third syllable da of No. 3 was very 
likely lost in No. 2, while reduplicating the syllable na instead, which syllable 
happened to be the last one, a phenomenon which is not infrequent in ancient 
linguistics. Accordingly the full name of the kingdom as known in Sumer 
seems to have been Magandana.'-" 

Now in India, there existed a country called Magadha from very ancient 
times. The earliest mention of Magadha is found in the Atharvaveda, when 
fever is wished away to the Gandharas and Mfxjavants to the west and to 
the Anga9 and Magadhaa to the east. 30 This passage already show's that the 
kingdom of Magadha was inhabited by people that appear throughout Vedic 

24. Schnabel, Berossas 'und die Babylonisclt-Helletmtische Literalur, pp. 253- 
254. 

25. Cf. Rawlinson, “Notes on Captain Durand’s Report upon the Islands 
Bahrein }. R, A. S. (1880), XII, p. 208. 

26. Cowell, The Jataka, III, 83 ; Cf. Heras, “ The Origin of the Round Proto- 
Indian Seals”, loc. tit. 

27. Unguad, in Orient. Lit. Zeit. JL908, col. 62, No. 4. 

28. King, Chronicles, II, pp. 10 and 33. 

29. Rawlinson, op. tit., p. 215. 30. Ath., V, 22. 14. 



548 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


literature as of low reputation. 31 In fact later Vedic texts disclose a clear 
antipathy to the people of Magadha. 3 - The cause of this dislike on the part 
of the Aryas was the fact that Magadha was not aryanised. 33 Magadha was 
persistently pre-Aryan long after the Aryas settled in Madhyadesa. 34 Accord- 
ingly the Brahmans living in Magadha were supposed to be bad Brahmans 35 
and looked at with great contempt.' 10 In fact it was unusual for a Brahman 
to dwell in Magadha. 37 Even in the Upani$adic period there were very few 
Brahmans in Magadha. 38 The fact that some respectable Brahmans some- 
times were living in Magadha is considered to be an exception. 39 

Synonymous of Magadha is the word Klkata 40 The KIkatas in fact 
were a tribe of non- Aryan people living in Magadha. 11 Hence the whole 
counUy of the KIkatas is considered to be a non- Aryan country. 1111 Accordingly 
the KIkatas are classified as low-born and hostile to the Rgvedic singer in one 
of the hymns of the third mandate* 2 

Magadha therefore existed in the Rgvedic period, and existed as a king- 
dom, for in the same passage of the Rgveda its king is mentioned, as we 
shall see presently. How are we justified in supposing that the kingdom 
existed long before? It would be a very strange coincidence, indeed, that 
the kingdom would have been founded just then, at the time of the arrival 
of the Aryas. It was a Lhavidian kingdom, the very name of which discloses 
it? importance, which could not haw been acquired in a few years. For M aka- 
dam , which evidently was the ancient Dravidian ' name of the kingdom 45 
means “ the powerful country Evidently this power and consequent great- 
ness was the natural outcome of hundreds of years of uninterrupted rule. 
Hence it is not improbable, nay it is practically certain, that the kingdom 
already existed round the middle of the 3rd millennium B.C., when the Sume- 
rian documents mentioned the kingdom of Magan. 


31. Macdoncll-Kcith, Vedic Index , II, p. 116. 

32. Katydyana Srauta Sutra, XXH, 4, 22 ; Katydyana Srauta Sutra , VIII, 6, 

22 . 

33. Oldenberg. Buddha , p. 100, n. 

34. Weber, Ittdhche Studkn , I, pp. 52, 53 ; 185 ; 10, 99 ; Weber, Indian Lite- 
rature, pp. 79, n. 1 ; 111 ; 112. 

35. Katydyana Srauta Sutra , VIII, 6. 

36. Keith, The Religion and Philosophy in the Veda and U pani$ad, p. 496. 

37. Sdnkhdyarta Aranyaka , VII, 13. 38. Chandogya Aranyaka VII, 13. 

39. Oldenberg, op. dt., p. 400, n ; Weber, Indian Literature , p. 112. Cf. Law, 
Tribes in Ancient India , pp. 195-198. 

40. Macdonell-Keith, op. cit L p. 159. 

41. Zimmer, Altindische Leben . pp. 31, 118. 

41a. Yaska, Ntrukta, VI, 32. 

42. Jf?g. Ill, 53, 14. Cf. Geldner, Rigveda , Kommentar , p. 58, 

43. There is still now a portion 6f the South Arcot District which is 1 called 
Makadam . 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 


549 


II. The King. The king defeated, perhaps killed, 44 by Naram-Sin was 
called Mannu-dannu. 45 In an inscription on the base of a broken statue of 
Naram-Sin found at Susa the name of the King is partly wanting. Fr. Scheil 

reads the name Mani ; [ ] and has suggested that the syllable missing 

is -urn, the whole name therefore being Manium. 45 But Thureau-Dangin 
says that in the lacuna following the first part of the name, there are traces 
of the sign dan. Therefore the name must be the same as given in the Baby- 
lonian Chronicle, Mannu-dannu. 47 

The historian of Sumer draws the attention of their readers to the ad- 
jective dannu, meaning “ powerful ”, for this king is the only one amongst 
those defeated by Naram-Sin, who receives this honorific title. From this 
fact they deduce the great power this king enjoyed before his being defeated 
by the Akkadian King. 4 * 

Now Dr. Allright has identified this king Mannu-dannu with the first 
dynastic king of Egypt, the famous Mencs. ,! ' His opinion nevertheless has 
not been accepted by any orientalist. 50 

As a matter of fact if we examine this name carefully we shall easily 
detect a great resemblance with Dravidian names. Man may mean “ earth " 
and also “ greatness ”, “ superiority ”, “ excellence ”. These latter meanings 
pel fectly agree with the dignity of the king. As to the title dannu, meaning 
“ powerful ” in Sumerian, it is derived from the Dravidian word tan or dan 
that means “ to give,” “ to be generous,” etc. The name Tanan or Danan 
“the generous man”, “the gift giver” is an ordinary Tamil name in the 
present and was read phonetically in the Indus Valley inscriptions'' 1 by the 
present writer. The Sumerian meaning is a derivative, meaning, for a person 
who gives gifts and is generous and is supposed to be powerful. 02 

Now considering this meaning that the Sumerians gave this word, it is 
wonderful how it fits most perfectly to a king of Magadha. The Dravidian 
meaning of this name is “ the powerful country ” ; and the Sumerian mean- 
ing of the title of the king of Magadha is the same “ powerful ”. Naturally 
fhc king of the “powerful country” was also “powerful”. That perhaps 

44. According to the Susa inscription : Scheil, Textes Elamitcs-Semil iques, 
III, p. 5. 

45. King, Chronicles, T J, p. 10. 46. Scheil, op. el loc. cit. 

47. King, A History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 241, note 2. 

48. Allright, "Menes and Naram-Sin,” Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, VI, 
p. 89. 

49. Ibid., pp. 89-98. 

50. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, VI, pp. 295-296. 

51. Mackay, Further Excavations at Mohmjo Daro, II. pi. LXXXIX, No. 
363. 

52. The ending -u of both the name and the title of this king also smacks of 
Dravidian phonetics. 



550 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


was the reason why this title was given to this king in the Sumerian docu- 
ments, and not to the other kings subdued by Naram-Sin. 

Now though we do not know of any king of Magadha who could be 
identified with this early king defeated by the Akkadian ruler, we know of 
one belonging to a period somewhat later, whom we wish to mention here. 
In the I?gvedic period the Klkatas of Magadha are supposed to be under 
the leadership of Pramaganda. Pramaganda is said to be the owner of much 
wealth. 53 He is supposed to be the king of the Klkatas of Magadha. 54 He 
evidently is a non-Aryan. 55 His real name seems to have been Periyama- 
kandan, which means “the great powerful gift" a name which is of special 
interest while comparing it with that of Manu-dannu, because both bear a 
suffix title implying the connotation of generosity. 

III. Other neighbouring Kings. An ancient Babylonian map of the 
world to illustrate the campaigns of Sargon of Akkad, has been found and 
published in modern times. 50 The explanation of this map is not unfortu- 
nately very elucidating on account of its fragmentary condition. Neverthe- 
less we find there a description of the “ circular river ” i.e. the sea, with the 
mention of Utnapishtim, who was according to ancient tradition living in an 
island of the southern sea. Then Sargon is mentioned, and finally Nur- 
Dagan, “ the king of a country whose name is lost,” who appears to be living 
in the same mythical neighbourhood as Utnapishtim. 57 This shows that Nur- 
Oagan is living in a country bordering on the southern seas ; and since we 
know that one of the countries conquered by Sargon was Magan and that this 
map was supposed to illustrate his conquests, we may rightly assume that 
Nur-Dagan was either a king of Magan, or a king of a neighbouring coun- 
try.s* Now this name Nur-Dagan happens to be a purely Dravidian name. 
Nur-Takao would mean “ a hundred serpents ”, a significance which is very 
suggestive considering the numerous naga tribes existing in India, and the 
naga origin of two later dynasties that rule in Magadha. 

Another king mentioned in connection with Naram-Sin’s campaign against 
Magan is named Sidur. He is one of the nine vassal princes or chiefs who 
help Nar&m-Sin in the conquest of Magan. 59 Now Sidur is a Dravidian 
name that means “ the city of Sid ", Sid being the name of the river Indus 
in the proto-Indian times. 60 Hence the whole country round the river was 

53. Pg., III, 53, 14. 54. Macdonell-Keith, op. dt., II. 

55. Ibid. 56. Thomson, Cuneiform Texts, XXII, pi. 48. 

57. Smith, History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 85. 

58. The historicity of this king has been doubted, but there is no serious ob- 
jection against the veracity of the documents that refer to him. Cf. Smith, op. 
dt., pp. 86-88. 

59. King-Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of Recent Discoveries, 
p. 158. 

60. Cf. Gnana Prakasar, “ An examination of the words ’’ ' Hindu ’ and ‘ Or- 
gan', The Hindu Organ (Jafna, Ceylon), XLIX, No. 3, p. 3. 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 


551 


also called Sid from the name of the river. King Sidur was most likely the 
king of Sidur through whose country Naram-Sin had to cross before entering 
the kingdom of Magan. This explanation seems quite natural, since the 
country of Sid, afterwards named Sind, was well-known in Sumer and in 
Babylon not long after. Cotton in this country was known as Sindhu, be- 
cause they knew it came from the country of that name. 61 The king of Sidur 
had apparently acknowledged the sovereignty of NarSm-Sin, either willingly 
or after his being defeated, and eventually helped his overlord against his 
neighbour of Magan. 

IV. A conquest prior to the conquest of Magan. Before the conquest 
of Magan by Naram-Sin is narrated in the Babylonian Chronicle, there is 
the account of the conquest of Apirak, which deserves careful attention. The 
Chronicle words are as follows : — 

“Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon, [marched] against the city of Apirak, 
and he constructed mines [against it,] ; and Rish-Ad,[ad], the king of Apirak, 
and the governor of Apirak his hand sub|dued] ”. o; Apparently Rish-Adad 
or Rish-Adan was an ally of the king of Magan. 63 If they were allies, their 
kingdom could not be far from each other. Rawlinson identified Apirak, 
after removing the augment of locality -ak, as is found in many Akkadian 
names, 61 with the Biblical Ophir. 05 The identification of the Biblical Ophii 
with the present Sopara on the western coast of India is already of old 
standing. Yet in modern times Biblical scholars are inclined to place Ophir 
in Arabia, without knowing that the Phoenicians who were the seafarers em- 
ployed by Solomon for his maritime, expeditions, were originally hailing from 
India. They naturally would come to India, whose products they knew 
very well, to supply Solomon with the riches he was seeking for building a 
worthy temple to God. 

Moreover in order to carry out these expeditions Solomon built a new 
fleet, on the shore of the Red Sea, north-west of Arabia, 60 whence the mer- 
chandise was taken to Jerusalem undoubtedly on camel’s back. If the pro- 
ducts looked for by Solomon were from Arabia he would not have been in 
need of building up this new fleet nor engaging Phoenician navigators 07 to 
such a great expense. By land these products could have been taken to 
Jerusalem, as they were finally taken from Asiongabcr, Solomon’s fleet har- 
bour. In fact from the harbour of south-west Arabia called Eudaemnn 

fit. Marshall, Mokettjo Daro, I, p. 3 S'. 

62. King, Chronicles, II, pp. 9-10. 

63. Rawlinson, "Notes on Capt. Durand’s Report”, /. R. A. S., XII, p. 214. 

64. For instance Asnunak, Surippak, Susinak. 

65. Rawlinson, op, et loc. cit. ; Prideaux, “ The Sepulchral Tamuli of Bah- 
rain ” A. S. A. 1. Report, 1908-09, p. 60. 

66. Ill Reg. IX, 26; I Paral., VIII, ‘17. 

67. Ill Reg. IX, 27 ; II Paral., VIII, 18. 



552 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(Aden) there was a caravan route passing through the land of the Edomites 88 
where Asioogaber was situated. Now the products of India were all taken 
to Eudaemon by sea, if we are to believe the Periplus .® 9 Hence the fleet 
built by Solomon’ was not needed at all if the goods required by him were 
finally coming from the Arabian peninsula. This shows that the fleet was 
going much further, in fact to such shores from which land communication 
with Jerusalem could not be easily established. 

As to the products of Ophir they are all Indian and the name given 
them in the Hebrew original of the Old Testament is Indian too : — 

1. Gold ; 70 gold was found in India from very ancient times. The 
mines of gold of Mysore and Hyderabad were exploited in very early times. 
Gold jewels were found in Mohcnjo Daro. 71 The Periplus speaks of gold 
mines in about Bengal. 78 

2. Thyine trees. 73 What sort of trees were meant by this name, it is 
difficult to say. Many authors understand that sandalwood or another son 
of precious wood hailing from India was meant. 71 

3. Precious Stones. 7 * 1 In India they were numerous and were exported 
from very ancient times. The exportation of precious stones from India is 
spoken of in the Periplus.'* In particular the following precious stones are. 
mentioned as articles of exports : Agate. 77 carbuncle,” carnelian, 79 beryl, 
diamonds, ruby, spinel, 70 coral, 81 lapislazuli, 82 sapphires, 82 topaz. 8 * 

4. Ivory. 85 It is well-known that India has always been one of the 
ivory exporting countries. 

5. Monkeys. 8 ® The word used in the Hebrew original is kophy, which 
some suppose is derived from the Egyptian go/e. 67 The ancient Dravidian 
word meaning monkey is kapi, from which the Egyptian word also proceeds. 8 ’ 


68. Kammerer, Petra et la Nabalcm, pp. 46-50. 

69. Schoff, The Periplus of the EryUirtan Sea, p. 32. 

70. Ill Reg. IX, 28 ; II, Fatal V1IT, 18. 

71. Marshall, Mohcnjo Daro and the Indus Civilization, II, pp. 519, 521-523. 

72. Schoff, op. civ., pp. 48, 160, 258. 

73. Ill Rest., X, 11, II. Fatal., IX, 10. 

74. Hagen, Lexicon Hibiirum, HI, cols. 1,188-1189. Cf. Montgomery, Arabia 
and the Bible, p. 178 and note 34. 


75. 

Ill Reg., X, 11 ; II Paral., IX, 

10. 



76. 

Schoff, op. cit., p. 37. 


77. 

Ibid., p. 193. 

78. 

Watt, op. cit., 716. 




79. 

Ibid., pp. 561, 716 ; Schoff, op. 

cit.. 

pp. 

190, 193. 

80. 

Schoff, op. cit., pp. 222-221. 


81.. 

Ibid., p. 168. 

82. 

Ibid., p. 170. 


83. 

Ibid., p. 226. 

84. 

Ibid., p. 167. 


85. 

Ill, Reg., X, 22. 

86. 

Ibid., II, Pared. IX, 21. 


87. 

Hagen, op. cit.. Ill, col. 1Q11. 

88. 

Montgomery, op. cit., p. 177. 






THE KINGDOM OP MAGAN 



6. Peacocks. 8 ” The word used in Hebrew is tukhim, which is evidently 
derived from the Dravidian tokei which is still used in Malayalam. 

The products mentioned in the Bible as coining from Ophir are so clearly 
Indian that even Schoff, who does not recognize Ophir as an Indian harbour, 
says about them : “ The Indian names for the products mentioned proved 

clearly enough that it was a trading centre dealing with India, even if the 
land itself was not Indian.”'"’ 

Now the Indian Ophir cannot be but the present Sopara, on the northern 
Konkan coast. Its name has had the following varieties : 

1. Shurparaka. In Sanskrit literature. 

2. Supparaka. In Buddhist literature. 


3. Hopara ) Local pronunciation of the name of the town. 91 

4. Opara j 

Wc see therefore that the original initial S has the tendency to be eliminated 
as it was done by the writers of the Bible ; while it was still kept by 
Josephus as Sophira”-' and in the name meaning India in the Coptic and 
Egyptian languages which is also Sophir Moreover Josephus tells us that 
Sophira was a “ regio Inaiae,” a region of India. In fact Sopara was one 
of the most important places of the Western coast of India from very ancient 
times. In the Mahf/bharata it is mentioned as a very holy place where the 
Pandavas rested tin their way from Gokaina (S. Kanara) to Prabhas. 01 It 
is being referred to as a very large city,"-' where, according to Buddhist tradi- 
tions, Gautama was bora in one of his former births. 9,5 It was the capital 


of the Koiikaij for a very long time.” 1 

Against the identification of Ophir with Sopara, it may be said that the 
country where Sopara is, is all round an agricultural track, wherefrom these 
products of industry and commerce can hardly be expected. But it is also 
a fact that having in this north-western coast of India excellent harbours, pro- 
ducts from other parts of India were brought there to be exported to foreign 
countries. The author of the Periplus says that silk cloth, raw silk and 
other goods were brought to Broach all the way from Bengal. 91 The pro- 
ducts exported from Broach were numerous and varied, 8 '’ amongst them 
agate and camelian. 109 The ships from Broach were going up to Egypt. 101 
There is therefore no objection in having export ships sailing from Sopara 


89. Ill, Reg., X, 22 ; II Paral,, IX, 21. 

90. Schoff, op. cit., p. 175. 91. T hana District Gazetteer, p. 317. 

92. Flava Josephi, Anliquilatum Judaicarum, 1. VIII, c. 6, No. 4. 

93. Champolion, L' Egypt e, 1, p. 98 ; Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, I, p. 134. 

94. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, CXVIII. 

95. Harivaritsa, XXXIX, v. 28 ; XL, v. 39. 

96. Hardy, Manual o] Buddhism, p. 13 (2nd edition). 

97. Imperial Gazetteer, XXIII, p. 87 * 98. Schroff, op. cit., p. 48. 

99. Ibid., p. 27. 100. Ibid., p. 42. 101. Ibid. 



554 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


This Sopara, Supparaka or Opara seems to be the city named as Apirak 
in the Babylonian Chronicle. Nar&m-Sin was in need of this city in order to 
get possession of its harbour where the products of the whole of India used 
to be taken for exportation. 

The conquest of Apirak -- Supparaka as a preliminary step to conquer 
Magan also points to India as a probable country where to locate this 
kingdom. 

V. Geographical Situation. Among the lands conquered by Sargon 
there are some countries mentioned as being “beyond the upper sea,” and 
others being “ beyond the lower sea ” Ana .... and Kaptara (Crete) are 
the former ; Dilmun and Magan are the latter. 1 02 By the upper sea the 
Mediterranean is evidently meant. The lower sea seems to be the Persian 
Gulf. Magan therefore should be found beyond the Persian Gulf. 

Now beyond the '* lower sea” Saigon is said to have reached “ the coun 
try of the black heads,” which becomes the theatre of his military exploits. 103 
Who were these “ black heads ”? Sargon himself calls his subjects wisi 
salmal kakkadi, “ the black-hcadcd people.” 1,11 The Sumerians therefore were 
“ black heads.” Therefore while speaking of “ the country of the black 
heads,” Sargon seems to mean “the country where the black heads hail 
from,” “the cradle of the black heads.” We have already seen that the 
Sumerian’s country of origin is India. Hence the exploits of Sargon seem 
to have taken place in Tndia. 

Moreover Magan, according to the Sumerian records, appears to be a 
mountainous country. An inscription on the broken statue of Narman-Sin 
found at Susa informs us that the stone out of which that statue was carved 
out was brought from “ the mountains of Magan.” 105 This information per- 
fectly agrees with the geographical condition of Magan. The Himalayas 
rise on its northern boundaries. 

As regards the distance from Sumer to Magadha, two small details 
found in the Sumerian documents give us some useful information. The 
Lagash palest, Gudea, had brought tta-kalag, “a stone” from Magan, tire 
expedition taking one full year. 100 Evidently, therefore, the expedition went 
beyond the Persian Gulf. Magan was evidently accessible from the Indian 
Ocean. 107 But what side of it, on the Indian shores to the east or on the 
African coast to the west? 

102. Smith, Early History of Assyria, p. 89. 

103. Rawiinson, op. cit., p. 214. 

104. Kortleitner, De Sumcriis eorumque cum vetere test ament o rationibus, 
P- 16. 

106. King, A History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 242. 

106. Cylinder A 23, 1. 

107. • Allright, " Magan, Mduka, Menes and Naram-Sin,” Journal of Egyptian 
Archaeology, VII, p. 82. 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 


555 


The messenger sent from Ur to Magan by the merchant Sunda had been 
furnished with food for his journey . 108 The tablet in which the sums for 
his food are recorded also speaks of a royal paymaster, accompanied by a 
guard with his spear and two assistants going to the city of Susa, the capital 
of Elam, which at this time was in subjection to the Kings of Ur. This 
seems to show that the merchant Sunda took the opportunity of the expedi- 
tion of a royal paymaster to Susa to send his own messenger with him up 
to this capital. If Magan is placed in Arabia, as Nies does, the mention 
of this royal paymaster and his attendants in this tablet seems inexplicable. 

This fact is of great importance. First, because it shows that Magan 
could be reached on foot all the way from Ur. Second it discloses likewise 
that Magan being towards the East beyond the Persian Gulf, must be some- 
where in the Indian peninsula. 

As regards the time employed by the messenger to reach Magan, Nies 
thinks that it was a month. The whole question depends on the significance 
of the word Magan. If the. word meant the capital of the kingdom, the 
future Rajagrha, Buniigga would have employed somewhat more than a 
month. But if Magan meant only India where Magan was situated, it 
could be more or less reached within that period of time. 

The fact that the ships going to Magan took one full year to reach its 
shores, inclines me to believe that the ships turning round Cape Comorin 
went to the eastern coast of India on the Bay of Bengal wherefrom the 
kingdom of Magadha was much nearer. Trade from the eastern coast of 
India to the Arabian sea was known in ancient times. The Periplus of the 
Eiylhrean Sea speaks of maritime commerce carried on between Sopatma, 
a port on the eastern coast of India, and Egypt . 100 

VI. The Ships of Magan. The kingdom of Magadha being at a cer- 
tain distance from Sumer, probably the whole of India where Magadha was 
situated received the denomination of Magan. The ships of Magan are 
very often mentioned in the Sumerian documents. mi In fact Magan is 
called “ the land of ships " in Sumcro-Babylonian inscriptions . 111 The people 
of Magan were a seafaring nation renowned for their skill as shipwrights . 113 
They were in fact the merchants that established a link between their coun- 
try and Sumer . 113 A period of anarchy had preceded the reign of Ur-Nammu. 
This king restored peace and prosperity throughout his kingdom. A dedi- 
catory inscription of the temple of Nannar in Ur by Ur-Nammu commemo- 

108. Nies, op. cit.. No. 84. 109. Schoff, op. cit., pp. 46-47. 

110. Allright, "Menes and NarSxn-Sin,’’ Journal of Egyptian Archaeology VI, 
PP. 90-91. 

111. Dowson, The Age of the Gods, p. 78. 

112. Encyclopaedia of Islam, I, p. 379* 

113. Dowson, op. cit., pp. 78-79. 



556 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


rates the renewal of commerce with Magan by saying that “ the ships of 
Magan he restored to its hand .” 111 They were therefore the ships of Magan 
that were trading with Sumer, not vice versa. 

This sea trade also [joints to India, the country of the Minas, of the 
Tirayars and of the Panis, whose maritime achievements were the only ones 
in ancient times. There was no nation in Arabia, nor in the African coast 
who ever carried out maritime trade as the Proto-Indian tribes of India. In 
fact the Akkadian-Dravidian sea trade is considered as a fact by Schoff . 1 15 

VII. Magan Products. The commerce between Magan and Sumer was 
of importation rather than of exportation. A religious text clearly says : 
“The products of foreign lands may he bring to Nippur . 110 

The products of Magan referred to in the Sumerian documents are the 
following : — 

(a) Alabaster. A vase of alabaster was carried away from Magan by 
king Naram-Sin as part of the war booty . 1 ’ 7 

Alabaster is found in several parts of India . 110 “ Alabaster, where met 
with, is largely utilized in the manufacture of ornaments and toys. The 
dark-green form procured from Garhwal is regularly made into elegant cups 
and saucers and large bowls that are much admired by the richer native 
gentlemen of Northern India .’* 1 1:1 The Periplus speaks of alabaster as being 
exported from the Minaen country 1 -" in south Arabia. It is well known that 
many of the products ex|Jorted from the Minacan harbours had originally 
come from India . 121 

(b) Copper. Much copper was imported to Sumer from Magan. 11 - 
Magan is called “ the land of copper ’’ and “ the mountain of copper .”’ 21 
The latter expression was known to the author of the Periplus, who trans- 
lated it as oreichalkos (mountain-copper ). 121 

In India copper is found in Darjeeling, Garhwal and several parts of 
the outer Himalayas, “where a killas-like rock persists along the whole 
range, and is known to be copper-bearing in Kulu, Garhwal, Nepal, Sikkim 


114. Woolley, The Sumerians, p, ,133. 

115. Schoff. op. (it., p. 173. 

116. Langd'.m, Sumerian Liturgical Texts, No. 1, oDv. col. 2. 

117. Thurcau-Dangin, Altsumerische und Akkadische Konigsinschriflcn, 
p.. 164 ; Affright, “ Magan, Meluha,” Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, VII, p. 83. 

1,18. Watt, The Commercial Products of India, being an abridgement of “ The 
Dictionary of Economic Products of India,'' pp. 716-718. 

119. Ibid., p. 718. 120. Schoff, op. cit., p. 31. 

121. Ibid., p. 115. 

122. Smith, Early History of Assyria, p. 49. 

123. Allright, “Magan, Meluha,”*' op. cit., p. 3,1. 

124. Schoff, op. cit., p. 24. 



THE KINGDOM OF MAGAN 557 

and Bhutan .” 125 This is very likely the “ mountain of copper” of the 
Sumerian records. 

Copper was already used for making arms, vessels and images by the 
Proto-Indians. Numerous objects of copper have been found in Mohenjo 
Daro 1 - 0 and Harappa . 127 The exportation of copper from India is also men- 
tioned in very early times . 128 

(c) Diorite. This very hard black stone was brought from Magan, 13U 
for fashioning statues . 130 

Diorite is also found in India and has been used for making statues 
specially for temple worship, from very old times. Diorite statues are found 
in India very far from diorite quarries. Therefore the shifting of diorite 
blocks is acknowledged in the history of Indian art . 131 

( d ) Goats. They were also brought to Sumer, though there is no speci- 
fication of the kind of goats imported . 132 

In India there have been goats of different breeds from very ancient 
times , 133 among them the one called goat-antelope . 131 

(<?) Pigs . 135 Pigskin is also mentioned as an article of Indian expor- 
tation . 1311 

(/) Rhinoceros. It is mentioned in the Sumerian documents with the 
word makkanu 

The existence of the rhinoceros in north-eastern India, is well known. 
It is used for homwork in industry . 138 

(g) Wood of different kinds. Gudea avers that he brought wood of 
all kinds from Magan. r/J One of these kinds of wood is mentioned in Sume- 
rian documents as Afus Magana , “the tree of Magan ” 140 It has been iden- 
tified with the Acacia niloiica by the partisans of the Egyptian identifica- 

,125. Watt, op. cit., p. -101. 

126. Marshall, Mohenjo Daro and the Indus Civilization, I, p. 30 ; II, pp. 481- 
488. 

127. Watts, Excavations at Harappa , I, pp. 85, 99, etc. 

128. Schott, op. cit., p. 151. 

129. King, Babylonian Chronicle , I, p. 52. 

130. King, .4 History of Sumer and Akkad , pp. 242, 258, 262 ; Cambridge 
Ancient History , I, p. 415. 

131. Watt, A Dictionary ’of the Economic Products of India , VI, pi. IV, p. 73. 

132. Allright, op. cit., pp. 82-83. 133. Watt, op. cit., pp. 644, 743. 

134. Watt, op. cit., p. 844. 

135. Allright, '‘Menes and Naram-Sin,” op. cit., p. 90. 

136. Watt, op. cit., pp. 702, 752. 137. Allright, op. et loc. cit. 

138. Watt, op. cit., p. 644. 

139. Inscription on Gudea's colossal statue erected in E-ninnu : King, op. cit., 

p. 262. • 

140. Allright, 14 Magan, Meluha” op. cit. p. 82. 



558 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


tion of Magan. 141 Others identify it with the Acacia seyal. Yet there seems 
to be a general consent as regards the genus. Mus Magan seems to be an 
acacia. No country may boast of a tree so widely spread as India may 
boast of the Acacia arabiga, called in northern India babul (Sanskrit, 
vavvula) and in south India karuvel. 1 * 2 The karuvel, called then kolvel is 
already mentioned as used for building houses, in the Mohenjo Daro inscrip- 
tions. 143 

No other country besides India could offer the rulers of Sumer the ex- 
traordinary and rich variety of trees well known to all industrialists : sandal- 
wood, 144 teak, 145 blackwood, 146 elbow, 141 to mention a few. 

(A) i Reeds. “The reed of Magan” seems to have been famous, as 
is referred to in this way in the Sumerian documents. 118 In India there are 
different kinds of reeds used for making mats or thatching huts ; l4a canes or 
bamboos for basket making.' 50 The reed nevertheless brought from Magan 
as “ reed of Magan ” was the reed called sacchari, from which honey-like 
sugar is extracted, which was exported from Broach to Egypt already in 
ancient times. 151 The sugarcane indeed could be very rightly denominated 
“ reed of Magan ” ; it was a precious agricultural product of great value in 
countries where it did not grow. In fact, this reed seems to have also been 
veiy famous in China, being named after the name Kasi (the ancient 
Benares), from which kingdom very likely it was being exported there across 
the mountains. Thus it happens that later on the word Kasi is being trans- 
lated in Chinese Buddhist work as Ti-mao, which means “ reed-sprouts." 153 

Having reached the end of our study we may now state that the kingdom 
of Magan with which the old Akkadian and Sumerian kings had been in 
contact on different occasions, was most likely India in general, and the 
kingdom of Magadha in particular. Thus after the conquest of Magan, 
Nanim-Sin could rightly boast of the title “king of the four quarters of 
the world.” 153 


141. Ibid. 142. Watt, op. cit.. p. 3. 

143. Heraa, “ La Escritura Proto-Indica y su Desciiramiento,” Ampurias, I, 
p. 76; Cf. above, p. 

144. Watt, op. cit, p. 152. 145. Ibid. 

146. Ibid. 147. Ibid., p. 153. 

148. Allright, “Menes and Naram-Sin,” op. cit., p. 90. 

149. Watt, op. cit., p. 777. 150. Ibid., pp. 98-112 ; 114. 

151. Schoff, op. cit., pp. 27. Cfr. p. 90. 

152. Law, Ancient Indian Tribes, p. 2. Cf. Watters, Yuan Chwang, II. 

pp. 58-59. • 

153. King, A History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 242, 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF SUDDHADVAITA 


By 

Dr. SUSIL KUMAR MAITRA, M.A., ph.d., 

Calcutta University. 

The present paper proposes to be an exposition of the philosophy of 
Vallabhacaryya and his school, known as the Philosophy of Suddliadvaita. 
The Suddhadvaita philosophy is of interest not merely as an advaita inter- 
pretation of Vedanta opposed to Sarikarite mdydvdda and its world-denial, 
but also as the philosophy of one of the principal Vaisnavika Schools distinct 
from Visisfcadvaita, Dvaitadvaita as well as Acintyabhedabheda. 

- The real founder of the School of Vallabhacaryya is supposed to be an 
’ancient deary a, called VisnusvamT. According to tradition, Visnusvaml was 
the son of a Dravidian king who was a vassal of the emperor of Delhi. The 
exact time of Visnusvami is difficult to determine, but if Navaji’s Bhakta - 
nulla can be relied on, Sadhu Jnanadeva belonged to his sect and was an 
immediate successor to him. If this Jnanadeva be the identical person who 
translated the Srvmadbhagavadgitd in'Maharastrl language, Visnusvami must 
be placed somewhere near 1250 a.d., i.c., about forty years before Jftanadcva 
who flourished in 1290 a.d. Grierson’s contention 1 that Vallabha’s father, 
Lak$ana, was a disciple of Visnusvami and Visnusvami must have flourished 
in the 14th century a.d. is refuted by the fact that the way in which Madha- 
vacaryya mentions in his Sarvadarsana Sangraha the sect founded by VL^riu- 
vvami proves beyond doubt that Vi^.iusvami must have flourished long before 
Madhavacaryya himself. 

\ The followers of Visnusvami were believed to be worshippers of Vi$nu in 
die Incarnation of Nrsimha or the Lion-man. i For a long time the sect re- 
mained all but extinct and it was Vallabhacaryya who resurrected it and gave 
it a fresh lease of life. Vallabhacaryya was a contemporary of Sricaitanya. 

fThe anubhdsya by Vallabhacaryya on the Brahmasutras is the principal 
authoritative philosophical treatise of the Suddhadvaita School, j Vallabha 
was a prolific writer and his writings include the Subhodim tikd on the 
Srimadbhdgavata, the Tativarthadipa or T attvadipanibandha, the Pu$li- 
pravdhamarydddbheda, the Kr^napremdmrta , the Siddhantarahasya , etc. all 
which are read, discussed and cherished with reverence by the followers 
of the school. Vallaba's son, Viiththalanatha Dik?ita or Viththale&vara 
Uik§ita, was also the author of several works, the principal amongst them 
being the Vidvanamatidana (referred to in Vallabha’s anubkd$ya 4-4 sutra 


1. Encyclopaedia of Religion & Ethics a Vol. II. 



560 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


14), the Premamrtafika, the Puslipravdhaniaryydddbheda-tikd, the Bhakti- 
hatfisa, Vallobha$taka, etc. VHhthalanatha’s fifth son, Raghunatha wrote a 
commentary on the Bhaklihartisa called Bhaktitarahgirfi and also another }ika 
on V allabhastaka. Mention may also be made here of the Suddhudvaitamdr- 
tanda — an imjxwlant work of the school by Sri Giridharajee Maharaja, a 
commentary thereon called Suddhadvaitaiiiujlandapra kies a by Sri Rama- 
kjsiia Bhatta and the Prameyarntndryava by Balakrsna Bhatta. The V dda- 
kathu by Kalyana Raya, a disciple of Vithlhala and the BhaklhnuHunda by 
Gopesvaraji Maharaja also deserve mention amongst the works of the school. 
Another disciple of Vifhfhalanatha called Pitimbara, was the. author of the 
ivardnablun'iga (which was a ilka on Vallabha's Tattvadipanibandhapra- 
k dm), the Pus(ipravdhamaryydddvivarana, etc. Purusotlama, the son of 
Pitambara, wrote the tllca on the mmbhdsya called Prakfisa as also the Vid- 
vanmandanutikd, the BhakLihamsaviveka, the BliaktUarangimlikatirttw , the 
Valiabhastakavivrtiprakasa, etc. For an acquaintance with the philosophy 
of the school, the perusal of the “ Suddhadvaiiamdrtandu ”, the " Prameya- 
ratndrnava”, Ilari Raya’s Brahmavdda, Gopal Krsna Bhatta’s Brahmavada- 
vivaTana, etc. is essential. To the same category belong also the “ Prasthana- 
ralnakara" by Sri Pumsottamaji Maharaja. 

The literature of the Vallabhite School will not compare with that of 
the Ramanujists or the Madhva School either in erudition or depth. There is 
no Vallabhite writer who will compare with Vedantadesika or Vyasaraja- 
svanu either in learning or subtlety of thinking and philosophical analysis. 
O' Vallabhacaryya was the son of a Telugu Brahmin called Laksana Bhatta. 
Lnk$ana Bhatta started on a pilgrimage to Ivasi with his wife. On the way, 
his wife gave birth to a son. It was this son of his who subsequently became 
famous as Vallabhacaryya. Vallabha’s time of appearance was 1439 a.p. 
(1535 Vikramabda). Vallabha spent some time at Mathura and Bfndabati 
It is said that at that time Gopalakrsija under the name of Dcvadamana or 
Srinatha made his appearance to him over the hill called Govardhana. It 
is also said that at that time the Lord also revealed himself to him in a 
dream and directed him to build a temple for himself and spread the cult 
of Pustibhakti. - 

< According to Vallabha, the finite self ( Jiva ) is monadic (a/m), is a 
fraction {atnsa) of Brahma and is non-different ( abhinva ) from Brahma. 
Like sparks from a big fire do monadic Jivas shoot forth or emanate from 
the infinite, inexhaustible and immutable Brahman which is their material 
cause, fivas are thus of the essence of intelligence and felicity like their 
material cause, Brahman, but with the emanation of the Jivas from Brah- 
man, the inherent property of Suddhasaltva in Brahman becomes divided 
{atrisabhuta ) and attached in infinitesimal quantities to the monadic Jivas, 
and, becoming predominant at die will of the Lord, causes the tirodhana or 
suspension of the element of joy or felicity in the Jivas. Hence Jiva, crea- 



PHILOSOPHY OF SUDDHADVATA 


561 


lure, or finite being is that monadic fraction of Brahman in which intelli- 
gence is preponderant while joy or felicity is in abeyance or arrest. ( Tad a 
mrupadhiko - 1 inurdpo-aksardtfisascitpradhdnastirohilanando jlvasdbdavacya 

bhavali . — “ Prameyaratndrnava ", p. 7. Chowkhamba Sam. Ser.). In other 
words, Jiva is the name) of an infinitesimal fraction of Brahman with intel- 
ligence only as its manifest property. From the time of creation, the ele- 
ment of joy or felicity is in abeyance in the Jiva, while msvarayya, i.e. the 
lordly powers of omniscience, omnipotence, etc. as also other excellences that 
belong to it as fractions of the divine powers and excellences become tirokitu 
or suspended subsequently (Ibid., p. 7). Though the Jiva is monadic, infi- 
nitesimal ( aim ) , yet, inspired and filled by the Lord, it manifests the quali- 
ties of infinitude and all-pervasiveness that belong to the Lord himself. But 
this does not establish the intrinsic infinitude or pervasiveness of the Jiva, 
for just as the heat generated in an iron-bar through contact with fire is not 
intrinsic to the iron- bar itself so also the pervasiveness that manifests itself in 
the Lord-inspired fractional intelligence called Jiva is not intrinsic to the Jiva 
but is due to its contact with the element of joy or felicity in the Lord. 

Though Vallabhites speak of the creation of Jivas, yet they do not 
consider them to Ik - amlya or beginning in time. Though Jivas are nitya 
and therefore without beginning, yet their creation (srsfi) is conceivable in 
the sense of emanation ( nihsrti ) which means their udgama, vyuccarana or 
shooting up (like sparks) and not their beginning to be < utpalli ). The all- 
pcrvfcsivencss of Brahman does not preclude effluxes or emanations from 
the Lord (like sparks from a blazing fire). In fact, Brahman is not merely 
the cause but also tlie effect, not merely the updddna, primordial matter oi 
stuff but also the upadeya or final product, the vydpdra or causal operation 
and the adhikaratta or seat of the final effect. 

Jivas are either sttddha, pure, or satftsdrt, unfree, or mukla, liberated. 
The state of the fractional, monadic intelligence immediately after its efflux 
from Brahman, with the element of joy or felicity in complete suspension, is 
suddkajivabhava or pure creaturehood of the finite being. It is a state of 
unalloyed ( suddha ) intelligence. After this state, when the Jiva contacts 
avidya and comes under its influence, the condition of pure creaturehood is 
superseded by one of bondage and entanglement in samsdra and the vicis- 
situdes of mundane life. At this stage, at the will of the Lord, the lordly 
powers ( aisvaryya ) and other excellences, which continue in the Jiva in the 
Suddha state in fractional forms, become also suspended. And so the Jivas 
become baddha, unfrcc and limited by an alien world ( parddhina ). Amongst 
these unfree Jivas, some are godly or angelic in nature, while others are 
endowed with a demoniac or wicked nature. Angelic nature ( daivatva ) con- 
sists in subtile vasanas or predispositions towards a higher spiritual life 
which qualify their possessors for mukli or liberation. The creatures whom 
the Lord desires to be his associates ih his dramatic disports, he endows 
37 



562 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


with these higher spiritual aspirations so as to enable them to qualify for 
liberation. In other words, the Jivas whom the Lord chooses as his elect 01 
consorts are godly Jivas while the Jivas who are espoused or won by mayd 
are the demoniac Jlvas. The Lord and the godly Jivas never forsake one 
another and the same is true of mayd and the demoniac natures elected by 
mayd. And in both cases the ultimate cause is the will of the Lord which 
divides Jivas into good and evil spirits for the enactment of the world-drama. 
The demoniac natures cannot become one with the Lord, for in them on 
account of the moha or confusion created by maya, the two lordly powers 
of Jniina or enlightenment and Dhakti or devotion become inoixrrative and so 
at-one-ment or sayuyya with the Lord becomes impossible for these mays- 
dominated demoniac beings. In fact, though mayd works both in demoniac 
and godly beings, in the former it is mayd that dominates and eclipses the 
Jiva's real nature while in the latter it never succeeds in getting the upper 
hand and completely obliterating the Jivas sell -possession and self command, 
i.e., in the fine case it is maya that is the ruling principle, in the other case 
the ruling principle is the Jiva himself. And so in demoniac natures domi- 
nated by mayd at-one-ment with the Lord in the sense of sayuyya cr enter- 
ing the Lord's peison is a forlorn hope. In the Brahma rddavivarana (pp. 
30-31) the prospect of entering the Lord’s Person for a demoniac nature is 
compared to that of the: semen of the male, once discharged into a female 
womb, re-entering the male body again. 

It is no doubt true that Prakrit as the Sakli of Brahman is non 
different from Brahman, sakli being ahhima or non- different from ti e 
Saktimat. Therefore Prakrti as part and parcel of Brahman muc 
ato consist of the felicity or joy which is the essence of Brahman. 
But this in no way improves matteis for the demoniac natures, for they 
have not the remotest experience of the felicity that is Brahman’s essence 
for the reason that the Lord docs not reveal his joyous nature, before tin* 
demoniac Jivas. Daivi maya and dsuri maya differ from each other even 
though the work of mayd is confusion or moha in each case, for daivi maya 
subserves the end of liberation in the angelic natures while dsuri mayd works 
only towards the entanglement of the ungodly beings in the toils of mundane 
life. When Prakrti becomes dissolved in the Lord and with it the demoniac 
beings are also reabsorbed in the Lord, even then, despite indirect unity with 
the Lord through Prakrti, these demoniac beings hav ' no experience of the 
felicity in the Lord because of the presence of barriers. These barriers de- 
marcate dissolution from liberation. In liberation there is experience by 
the Jiva of the inherent felicity in tire Lord as part and parcel of the Lord 
Himself, but dissolution is mere resting in the Lord and the consciousness of 
this in oneself without any experience of the Lord’s essential joy or felicity. 
The experience of this inherent divine felicity is attainable through devotion 
only ( Bhaklimalrasadhya ) and such devotion is of the nature of affectionate 



PHILOSOPHY OF SUDDIIAOVATA 


502 


love ( sneharupa ). The experience of this joy arises in the liberated state. 
Then the devotee rests in the heart of the Lord as Lak$mi or His Beloved 
Consort. In pralaya or dissolution there is no experience of positive felicity, 
there being then only negative cessation from pain as in sleep or drowsiness. 
Though all Jivas arc intrinsically partial elements (svdr/tsa) of the Divine 
Personality, yet the division into godly and ungodly beings is there, at the 
Lord’s will, for His dramatic disport- When the Jivas heart is inspired by 
higher spiritual aspirations, it dot's so at the will of the Lord. Contrarywise 
when the Jiva gives way to low and evil desires and becoming lillcd with 
wicked tendencies acquires a demoniac nature, that also happens at the will 
of the Lord. The demoniac Jivas live disreputable lives in their coarse, 
corrupt bodies and on account of their misdeeds become degraded more, and 
mote in their rebirths, becoming reborn into ever lower forms of life. Thus 
they become slaves of their carnal desires and are enthralled by the mundane 
life. It is only the Lord's will that can lift them out of their degradation 
and till the l»rd wills their salvation, they cannot escape from avidya and 
its effects. But when the Ixnd pleases to take them back to himself as his 
consorts, their avidya and the samsdra and its toils that result from it forth- 
with cease at the Lord’s will. Then the Jiva does not require to go through 
the discipline of praxis or sadhand for his salvation but becomes purified 
through the Lord’s grace and realises at-one-ment or unity with him. 

Mukta or liberated Jivas are of two classes- -Jivanmukta and Parania- 
raikta. fivannmkli commences with the cessation of avidya. Of the class 
of Jivanmuklas are Sanalca and several other sages. Theirs is the ■mukli of 
kaivalya, the freedom which is dispassion or detachment, the freedom which 
comes through enlightenment or Jiidna and is possible in the embodied state. 
Those who live in the Infinite ( vydpaka ) Vaikunlha or in other realms of 
the Lord barring Paramavyorna arc mukta or liberated Jivas. Thereafter 
when through a special grace (tnsislakrpd) of the Lord they enter Paramo- 
vyoma, there is paid mukli which is pure Brahmahood. Amongst the godly 
beings some become participators in the Lord’s eternal disports ( nityalild ) 
through disinterested, self-contained, ( svatantrd ) Bhakli. Such Bhakli is 
awakened by hearing, etc., in those in whom spiritual aspirations have been 
generated through associations with pious and devout people. 

f According to Vallabhites, Para-Brahman is Krsna himself as signified 
by the word Purusottama. He is the subject of all sorts of apnikrta or 
immaterial excellences and’ virtues and has a nature of everlasting joy or 
felicity. All His dramatic disports are eternal, and all supernatural qualities 
are ever manifest in Him. When Para-Brahma desires to be many, then 
there arises in Him a change of rupa or form. The Form which thus arises 
in Him is the cause of all causes and is Ak?ara or Immutable Brahman. In 
this Ak$ora state owing to the preponderance of sattva the element of feli- 

2. Brahmavadavtvararia, pp. 26^27 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


564 

city or Ananda becomes dormant or latent. Ak$ara Brahman is differently 
apprehended by the Jndnl and the Bhakta respectively. 

(1) To the Bhakta or the devout lover he appears as the Form of the 
pervasive Vaikmtfha and other realms ( lokas ) of the spirit. In the Immut- 
able Form as it presents itself to the perception of the Bhakta some excel- 
lences appear manifest while other qualities remain non-manifest, though all 
qualities oontinue in being. The appearance or manifestation and the dis- 
appearance or vanishing from sight are nothing but the Lord's special powers 
(saktivisesa) . When qualities become imperative or defunct they are said to 
have passed over into the non-manifest or afndkrta state. This disappear- 
ance is not the work of mdya. The tirobhava which is caused by may a is 
not objective but subjective ; mayd does not cause the disappearance of the 
object but only of our knowledge of the object. Maya oix-rates in unfree 
beings and causes pratiti-abhdva or non-apprehension in respect of sadvisaya 
or things that arc or exist. But the disappearance caused by the Lord is an 
objective transition into the aprdkrta state. 

(2) To the Jndnl or enlightened, however, Aksara Brahman appears as 
reality, intelligence and joy, as beyond space and time, as self-luminous, and 
as beyond all qualities or determinations. In the appearance in this form 
what remains manifest in Brahman is the power of tirodhana or suspension 
while all other qualities remain non-manifest. Hence the Aksara or Immu- 
table Brahman of the enlightened or Jhdnin is described as nirdharmaka, 
featureless or indeterminate. In reality however He is not featureless. If He 
were really featureless then the unreal would have to come into being. Valla- 
bhites say, what is called abhdva or non-existence is only tirobhava or 
non-manifest existence, and production or coming into being and destruction 
or ceasing to be have no intelligible meaning except as becoming manifest 
and ceasing to be manifest. Since duhkha, suffering, misery, etc. are figments 
of mdya and therefore false appearances, therefore the cessation or absence 
of duhkha, etc. must also be a false appearance. Hence assertions of the 
absence of duhkhadi in Brahman amount to the assertion of the falsity of 
duhkhadi. It follows therefore that the Form of Brahman as conceived by 
the Jndnl or enlightened reduces to a featureless being with all powers 
abstracted therefrom and therefore beyond description in judgments for 
practical purposes ( sarvavydvahdrdtlta ) . 

One particular form of Puru§ottama which js noticeable in the Sttryya- 
mandala is his form as anlaryydrm or inner controller. This antaryyann is 
called Purusa or Nanay aria. Three kinds of PUru§a may be noted in this 
connection — (1) Purusa as creator of Mahat, (2) Purusa as immanent in 
the world-embryo (Brahmdndasamsthita) , and (3) Purusa as indwelling 
presence ip all bhutas or beings (sarvabhutastha) . Out of Puma come forth 
the Incarnations of the lord's LJla or dramatic sport in the forms of the 
Great Fish, the Great Tortoise, etc. The antaryyamins that come 



PHILOSOPHY OF SUDDHADVATA 


565 


out of the Ak$ara or Immutable are all parts or partial forms {arpsa) 
of this Principal Antarydmi. They are all marked by their joyous natures, 
are numerically different, like Jlvas, in different corporeal forms and are the 
inner controlling agents of the Jlvas in which they dwell. In short, the antary- 
ydmins of sentient beings and non-sentient things are all partial modes or 
manifestations of the Primary or Principal Antaryydmi — a part or fraction 
of the Principal Antaryydnu being manifest in every individual antaryydmi 
in a sentient being or a non-sentient thing. 

According to Vallabhites, just as there is visuddha or pure sattva other 
than prdkrta sattva or sattva as the matter or stuff of the world, so also there 
are aprdkrta rajas and aprdkrta tamas besides prdkrta rajas and 
lamas that constitute the world-stuff or material cause of the world. Aprdkrta 
or Immaterial Sattva after creating the forms of fish, etc. appears therein 
after the manner of fire in an iron-ball and carries on their functions. In 
such forms consisting of pure sattva the Lord enters with a view to maintain- 
ing the world. The Lord as informing such Visuddha-Saltva-lorms for the 
purpose of world -maintenance and the like is called Visnu. In the same way 
the Lord as inspiring aprdkrta or Immaterial Rajas- forms is called Brahma, 
and as informing Immaterial Tamas Vigrahas is called Siva. Though they 
are all aprdkria vigrahas or immaterial forms, yet as also controlling and 
directing the material or Prdkrta gunas they are to be regarded as Saguna 
or related to the gunas. That they have been described in the Purajias as 
Para Brahman is due to there being no real difference between them and the 
Lord. Though Brahma, Vi$nu and Siva are all Incarnations or Forms of 
aprdkrta gunas . yet the form of Visnu is to be regarded as the highest 
amongst the three on account of the presence in it of the distinctive qualities 
of the Lord in a special manner. 

The Lord has an infinite multitude of Forms. Every form of the Lord 
is Brahman in its completeness. This explains the fact why on the path ol 
enlightenment there is no difference between praxis ( sad hand ) and its con- 
sequence ( phala ). It is otherwise however with the way of Bhakti or devo- 
tion. Just as the Lord creates the world for the purpose of dramatic disport, 
so also he has chalked out a separate path of Bhakti for those who desire to 
realise Him through loving devotion. In the Forms of the Lord’s Vibhult 
or Powers, both the praxis and the end achieved thereby are limited, relative 
and circumscribed. The highest and most complete result cannot be achieved 
through these works, such result being attainable not through the worship 
of the Vibhutifupas but of the Svayathrupa or Intrinsic Form of the Lord 
which is the Form of Krspa. The highest end or result is sayuyya and 
sdyuyya, according to Vallabhites, is not identity with Brahman but direct 
connection (yoga) with Brahman. Such connection or intimate relation is 
attainable not by enlightenment but thrpugh single-minded devotion to and 
service of Lord Kp^ia. There is no worship unless the Lord presents himself 



566 


13. C. LAW VOLUME 


externally to the worshipper as the object of devotion. That is why Bhajana 
or worship must be the worship of the Lord in his manifestations as external 
to oneself. 

Ulceration ( mukti) is of two kinds — sagunii mukti and nirguna mukti. 
The primary result of the worship of any deity is saynyya or direct union 
with the deity. Where the deity is saguna the resulting union is saguna 
mukti or liberation within the gunas. In other cases, mukti is nirguna or 
liberation beyond the gunas. All deities barring Lord Krsna himself arc 
saguna. Hence nirguna mukli or liberation beyond the gums 
is intimate union with Krsna (Krsna-sdyiiyya). There is no nirguna 
mukti on the path of enlightenment. The Immutable {Aksara, 
Kntastha ) t though transcending the gunas, also consists with t)v 
gums. Enlightenment is the realisation of the Aksara (as immanent in gunas) 
through sravana , manana , etc. The liberation which results therefrom is 
Kaivalya , Detachment , or Jivanmnkii , freedom in embodied being. Kaivalyn 
is sattvikajnmia or enlightenment arising from saltvaguna. Therefore it is 
sutlvikamukti or liberation in saltvagwja. The enlightened turns away from 
the world scared by the? miseries of savisara and takes to the way of fiecdnm 
through knowledge. It. is a condition within the gunas and not one. beyond 
tire gums. With knowledge or enlightenment comes liberation in the embo- 
died state. In that state illusory Mollification with prakrti (adhydsa) erruvs 
and consequently attachment to the material world and its modes falls off. 
Such liberation in embodied life is liberation within the gunas. for in that 
state creature-hood or creature- consciousness as under the sway of Vidyo arid 
Avid yd continues. Bhakli makes its appearance subsequently to the realisa- 
tion of Brahmabhdva one then reaches beyond the gunas. If Bhakli docs 
not awaken after Brahmabhdva , one then has to continue in the jivanmnkla 
stale of cmlxjdied freedom. Such was the condition of Sanaka and \ he 
like : theirs was a state (of freedom) in the gunas, not one beyond the gunas. 
Till Bhakli is reached, one continues within the gunas ; with the awakening 
of Bhakli one gets beyond the gums. The first is a condition of enlighten- 
ment :-:urh. t>ic- second one of Bhakli conditioned by enlightenment. 'The 
first is illustrated in Sanaka, etc., the second is illustrated in Suka and others. 

The praxis or sad hand by Bhakli laid down by Vallabhites is called the 
way of pusli ( pustimarga) . Pusti means the Grace , krpd ) of the Lord. It 
is an attribute of the Lord and is counteractive oMime. Its effects are mani- 
fold -both natural arid supernatural. Pusli is inferred from its effects. 
Mahapusti is Grace Pm Excellence and consists in effecting the attainment ot 
one’s real status in the teeth of powerful obstacles. The great obstacles are 
the resistance of ones own nature or svabhdva and the resistance caused by 
one’s works. Pusti accomplishes all the four purusarthas or ends of life, viz.* 
dharma , artha , kania and tnokya. The pusti which realises these four ends 
is samanyapusti or grace of the common or ordinary sort. There is 



PHILOSOPHY OF SUDDIIADVATA 


567 


however a special grace ( visiftapusti ) from which results Bhakli culmi- 
nating in the realisation of the Lord's svariipa or intrinsic nature. The 
Bhakti which results from such special grace is called putfibhakti. Pu$ti- 
bhakti arises from the Losd's favour alone and not from anything else. 

( PustimaTgo-aiiugrahaikasadkyah prayndijaumrgdt vilaksanah ‘ Anu- 

bhdsya ", 8-8-9). 


Every kind of Bhakli dcjiends on the Lord’s favour. But the Bhakli 
that arises from the Lord's ordinary favour is called Alaryy <ld dbhakl i. The 
Bhakli that is kindled by the Lord's special grace is technically called pusti- 
bhakli. In pn si i bhakti the only object sought is the Lord himself and there 
i: no desire for anything other than the Lord. Even inukli or liberation 
appears trivial in the eye of the devotee who has attained to puslibluikli. 

According to Vallabhites there are lour kinds of puslibhakli, viz. : — 


1. Pravahapusli. Prcvdha means the stream of saiy.sdra or world-life 
consisting in the consciousness of the “ I ” and the “ mine ’’ in relation to 
things. And the pirMhhakii which arises in .T-socialion with this smn'dta- 
consciousncss is characterised by karmaruci or the liking for works. Iri other 
words, in puslibhakli bound up with saijirdrapravdlia there are woiks suited 
to tile nature of the Lord. 

2. Maryyadapufli. In the condition of maryydda, there is cessation 
from the pursuit of objects arising from attraction or attachment so that 
the Jive turns to the way of nivrtti or world-denial and its consequent prac- 
tices or duties. In the Bhakli that arises in this state, or condition, the Jh-a 
conquers iris lust for objects and acquires a zest for hearing, etc., of discourses 
on the Lord and flis nature. 

3. Puslibhakli. Those who attain to this third type of puslibhakli are 
[mslibhakUis who. owing to another favour of the Lord conducive to the 
awakening of the enlightenment that is suited to His worship, become omnis- 
cient or all-knowing. Such bhaktas know all about the Lord, the lord’s 
personal attendants and courtiers, His dramatic sports, the world, etc. 


■ 1 . Suddhapuslibhakli. Those who are bhaklas of this fourth type are 
inspired by love and intrinsic affection. They soive the Lord and sing his praise 
out of pure affection and love. Theirs is a devotion that is very rare indeed. 

Ilari Raya has described this suddhapuslibhakli in twenty-one verses 
( vide Prameyarahtdrnava i pp. 19-24), the substance whereof is as follows : — 
In the way of Suddhapuslibhakli, the phala, consequence or end achiev- 
ed is Bhogavatprdpti, attainment of the Lord, but for the realisation of this 
end, no sadhand or prescribed course of discipline is necessary. In other 
words, the method or means here is the absence of any prescribed means or 
method. Or, one may say, the end (i.c., the Lord himself) is here the 
means. Siddhi or fruition is dependent, on the Lord’s favour and not on 
individual efforts. In fact, individual effort hinders instead of furthering the 



56S 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


realisation of the end. The Lord elects Jlvas. out of Free Grace irrespective 
of their worthiness or unworthiness, (according to human standards). And 
the devotee also does not try to judge the rightness or otherwise of tire 
Lord’s act of Grace but simply feels and recognises its super-excellence. For 
such a Bhakta there is neither a sense of frailty or weakness in such acts of 
the Lord Krspa as shedding tears when chastised by His mother Jasoda, 
plundering the storeroom, etc., nor a sense of the uncommon or extraordinary 
when overpowering and subduing the Snake-king Kaliya or extinguishing the 
conflagration, etc. For him all acts ix>int to the Lord or Master as their end 
and no special direction, Vedic or otherwise, is necessary to discover tire 
intrinsic import and end of all our efforts. The Lord elects Jtvas unto him- 
self out of free Grace — His favour is ahetuka, not measurable in terms of 
human reason. And this is the reason why the end which the disciplined 
and much-practised man fails to achieve by his strenuous spiritual efforts 
is easily attained by a man who may appear to be comparatively unworthy 
of him. Even at tire time of separation from the Lord, such a bhakta has 
experience of the Divine felicity, for such Bhakti is autonomous in respect 
of its joy-producing virtue and does not depend on the presence of the Lord's 
Person for producing the felicity that arises from it. As in Bhakti in this 
form the consciousness of the Lord overshadows every other experience, the 
fear of this as well as the other world vanishes so that the bhakta feels the 
Lord’s Presence in himself as obliterating all sense of time, all consciousness 
of moral obligations as well as all ideas of himself and of the qualities intrin- 
sic to himself. On the way of Suddhapusfibhakti, the means is union, physi- 
cal and mental, of the finite being with the Lord, and the end i9 the union 
of all the senses with the Lord. And the union takes place at the will of the 
Lord. The consequence of it is the consciousness of the Lord in all that is 
allied to the Lord, a feeling of repugnance to all things that are inimical to the 
Lord and a sense of indifference to all that is neither allied nor inimically rc- 
later to Him. The Bhakta in this state is prompted to the preservation of the 
body not from a feeling of personal ownership in it but from the consciousness 
of its being God-given atid therefore belonging to the Lord. And even at the 
time of separation from the Ix>rd it is preserved in the hope of a future re- 
union with the Lord. In the path of Suddhaputfi, worship does not consist in 
the rendering of any service, to the Ivord, and the Lord also does not insult the 
devotion of the worshippers by bequeathing reward,? for their worship. Sua- 
dhapusfi, in other words, is suddha or pure bhakti for its own sake — it is 
love for love’s sake — i.e., man’s love of God out of pure zest for such love 
as also God’s love of man for pure love’s sake. In separation one tastes 
greater felicity in ‘such Bhakti than in union, because separated one has in- 
ward realisation of a new aspect of the Lord’s Vila or self-display at every 
new moment In the path of Suddhapuftibhakti, the means and the end 
exchange positions so that the means is also the end and the end the means. 



PHILOSOPHY OP SUDDHADVATA 


569 


Thus the means which is here Bhakti or love of God for its own sake is also 
the end which it aims at and in which it culminates. Similarly the end w’nich 
is Bhagavalprapti or attainment of the Lord is also the means inasmuch as 
such attainment or realisation comes only as a Gift of the Lord Himself who 
is to be attained or realised. The dainya or consciousness of nullity and in- 
significance which is not dependent on anything else is the cause of the 
appearance of the Lord, i.c., when the Jiva feels his own insignificance or 
nullity, the Lord reveals Himself. Hence such dainya must be distinguished 
from the sense of emptiness ( dainya ) that arises from separation, this latter 
being an effect or phala (of the separation) and not a cause. In Suddna- 
pu$(i the dainya is intrinsic, atiyanirapek$a, non -dependent on anything else 
and this brings on the revelation of the Lord. Suddhapufli brings on com- 
plete renunciation of all worldly objects and surrender of everything including 
the body, but while as worldly they are renounced, as gifts of the Lord they 
are again accepted. In short, in Suddhapusli — the consciousness of “ I ” dis- 
appears, and the will, not as “ my will ” but as “ Thy will ” or the Lord’s 
will, prevails. In this state the Jiva realises the hand of providence in everthing. 

According to Suddhadvaitins, the Jiva is consubstantial with Brahman 
but only as a partial element thereof and not as Brahman in all-complete- 
ness and fullness. Therefore worship is necessary for restoration or recovery 
of the Jivd s real status as a partial element within the All-Inclusive Brah- 
man. Worship, in other words, is necessary for overcoming avidyd which is 
resjionsible for the Jivas self- forgetting and consequent fall into saijisdra or 
the stream of mundane life. Worship effects his reinstatement as a Bhakta, 
i.e., his restoration as a partial element within Brahman and in necessary 
intimate relation of love and unity with the whole. With the cessation of 
egoism and its i lowers or aisvaryya and the mvTiti or overcoming of avidyd, 
one attains to unity with the Lord. Even then however differences amongst 
Jivas continue . 3 Though the Bhakta attains to sameness with the Lord in 
respect of person, personal beauty, etc., yet, as without difference there is no 
real commerce of spirit, differences continue at the stage. It may be asked, 
as avidyd ceases in the pure puftimarga so as to make one fit for devotion 
or bhajand, what use is bhajand or worship in this suddhapu$ti stage ? The 
Vallabhite answer is : for the purpose of tila or dramatic sport— the separat- 
ed Jiva reunites with the Lord through bhajand and thereby tastes the joy 
of the reunion. But since bhajand in the Suddhapusli marga does not consist 
in works but is bhdvalmaka or an emotional realisation, therefore it is phala- 
mpd in spite of its being of the nature of sddhand or a preparatory means. 
Hence such bhajand never loses its character as Suddhaputfi for pustimdrga 
is the way in which the end is itself the means toi the end (putfimdrgaJj sa 
eva yalra phctlam svayameva sddhanam) .* 


3. Cf. Brahmavddavwatatia, p. 20. 


i. Ibid., pp. 22-23. 



ON SOME SPURIOUS CALUKYA COPPERPLATE 

GRANTS 


By 

Dr. MORESI 1WAR D1KSHIT, ph.d., Poona. 


In his paper contributed to the Tenth All India Oriental Conference 
held at Tirupati, in March 1940, Rao Bahadur C. R. Krisiikamachaklii 1 2 
has discussed the dates of four spurious records of the time of Calukya 
Vinayaditya which range from Saka 516 to 520. As these dates? are too 
early for the king who issued these charter-* and as the palaeography of thu 
inscriptions is far too much removed from the period in which they purport 
to record the donations, it is obvious that these copper-plate grants are for- 
geries. After alluding to certain other spurious records of a Western 
Calukya (?) chief Vira-nonamba cakrnvarti, Rao Bahadur chakli:* has put 
forward a tentative theory that in recoining the exaggerated early date.:, die 
forgerers have calculated the dates ( i.e. the Saka year, the name of the 
Samvatsara, tit hi, week-day etc.,) as if the events took place (500 yea is ear- 
Her and that tlm forgeries were actually made in the. eleventh century A.D. 
He also surmises that for the puqxrses of those grants the year Saka 600 
must have been, adopted as the starting of an era, which may possibly be 
in celebration of, or in commemoration of certain epoch-making and im- 
portant political event in the reign of the Western Calukya king Vinayaditya 
Satya-Sraya. In the light of these remarks he has examined critically the 
dabs and suggested how tlx.se with certain ernentlm )o:h support his con 
tent ion. 


Though the suggestion made in this paper is really a very ingenious one, 
as I shall presently show, the calculation of dates involve certain difficulties 
which cannot easily be solved. For, since the above paper was written I have 
come across two move spurious grants of Calukya Vinayaditya which register 
donations made by him in the Saka year 520. The first one of these sets 
was long ago discovered in the village called Pali near Karad in the Satara 
district of the Bombay Presidency. It was published in July 1922, in the 
Quarterly of the B . /. S. M., I IT. pp. 6*16. This’ grant is dated Saka 520, 
Kalayukta Samvatsara, Karttika suddha 5, Bhanuvara. Its object is to 
record the donation of a vatikd in the village Ellapura, in Karahafaka 1000, 
to a Brahmin named Vasudeva belonging to the Bharadvaja gotra. 


1. Proceedings and Transactions of the Tenth All India Oriental Conference, 
Tirupati, March 1940, pp, 359-65, 

2. Ibid., p. 362. 



ON SOME SPURIOUS CALUKYA COPPER -PLATE GRANTS 


571 


The second set was made available to me through the courtesy of 
Messrs. S. V. Avalaskar and S. N. Patwardhan-Joshi, both residents of the 
village Dive Agar, in the Janjira State ( Dist. Kolaba, Bombay Presidency ). 
It was unearthed in that village some three years ago by a farmer and before 
it reached my hands was still covered with thick verdegris. The plates are 
three in number ( each measuring about. 10" X 5j'i") and are strung in a 
circular ring bearing the. seal of a boar to left. The grant is dated in the 
Saka year 520, Kalayukla Saiiivatsara, Caitra Amavasya, Vyatipata, Thurs- 
day, when it is stated that there was a solar eclipse. Its object is to 
record a donation by Calukya Vinayaditya of the village Kollapuia along 
with its hamlets situated in the Datiga 2000 Visava, to 3500 Brahmins 
(leaded by Kesava Dvivedi, Bliaskarn Trivedi, Sankara Dvivedi, and 
M.ldhava Biiatta. of the Atreya and Bbaradvilja g-vb ■«•/>•. [ quote below the 

relevant text of the inscription for easy reference : 

Piate If b. 

Line 27 O- 

f.ine 28— (spft) 

Line 29— qflig* rfqq;|vffej( |Vsr 

Line 30--^gqpj%^ ^fsfS'cTRFT *FliTpTltl§ (ft) 

i.ine 31— 3EH3TOIrftfil(d)g 'TRSgxRT- 
Line 32 - l 

Line 33 3TiqifUi5f %51^R*T- 
l.inc 31— jspif 3flf(»ir)?513r%f 3T^ll*%RW2RT 5PIW ur- 

1 .ine. 35— <jpr # 

.Plate III a. 

Line 36— gig* ^3* sfcr*T 

Line 37— <TRagi^v7R[p|^4; *{#903 II 

Line 38— gsIftqWt 3FgTOWT: qfajRId wjof cT?T 

Line 39— ?3l(^«n)tff «PT: JOTiq I qfaqJiTlif 

Line 40— ^3T(^sn)q Jfflioj t qf^WRt en# smwHT: #T: 

Line 41— swM I I <js^0tv7f- 

Line 42 — ay spirPTftjjfr iWR I # 0 #q ) # 3W Spiff: *T- 

Line 43— qq# junof fTW ^TOff: nfafftwi: 5UTFT I tjftr atTFT 

Line 44— ;#f <tqlrR3|#& | ... (Imprecating verses). 

Line 47 — II I 


3. From the original Plates. See Figs. 1-2. 



572 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Both the Pali and the Dive Agar grants have almost identical texts 
excepting of course the details regarding the donees and the property grant- 
ed. Both of them are dated in the same year Saka 520, but palseographic- 
ally their script 1 resembles the characters of the 11th century a.d. Curiously 
enough both of these refer to Rakt&pura situated on the northern banks of 
the river Malapahari ( Malaprabha ) ; and the village Kurunda like the four 
grants studied by charlu. 

If we accept Rao Bahadur charlu’s suggestion taking 600 as the 
starting point of an era, the dates 7 * of the Dive Agar and Pali grants would 
correspond to 8th April and 7th October A. D. 1198 respectively. The 
week-days in both cases do not tally with those recorded in the inscriptions. 
There has been no solar eclipse in tire Saka year 520 as stated in the Dive 
Agar plates and consequently all the other details specified in the grants dc< 
not concur. 

I have therefore tabulated all the spurious records of Calukya Vinaya- 
ditya in the accompanying chart and a careful examination of their dates 
would reveal that there is no uniformity er any method in the calculation 
of their dates even after taking 600 as the starting point for each date. All 
the dates except in Grant D have to be adjusted in one way or the other to 
suit our needs and in the case of Dive Agar and the Pali grants even these 

adjustments do not work well. It may be noted that the Dive Agar grant 

supplied the evidence from an unknown tract for inscriptions. 

From the dates newly supplied by the Dive Agar and the Pali grants 

it is clear therefore that there is no method attempted in forging the spurious 
records of Calukya Vinayfiditya. 


4. Though no facsimiles accompany the article on the Pali plates, I have ex- 

amined the original set, now preserved in the Bharata — ItiHasa Sam&xjhaka Map 
data, Poona. . 

5. cf. Pillai, Indian Ephemeris, III, pp. 398-99. 



SPURIOUS COPPER- PLATE GRANTS OF CALUKYA VINAYADITYA. 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 

AS BASIC CONCEPT OF BUDDHIST THOUGHT 

By 

Dr. B. M. BARUA, d.ut. (bond.), Calcutta University. 

Though it may sound rather strange to say that every great thinker or 
true philosopher of the world is really a man of one thought, it is nevertheless 
a truism of history. Just as a central idea, called moral, runs through an 
epic narrative interweaving various episodes into a unity, so a central thought 
pervades a whole system of thought or of faith built ufion its basic 
concept or creed. As regards Buddhist philosophy, its basic concept is prali- 
tya-samutpuda . a term which has been variously represented in English by 
‘ caused genesis \ ‘ dependent original ion ’ and ‘causation'. We need not 
quarrel over words. Let us better try to realize its full philosophic and doc 
trinal significance as the basic concept of Buddhism in general and of Bud 
dhist thought in particular. 

In the Ariya-pariyesmia-Suttd, Buddha tells us that the noble quest 
which had impelled him to pass from home into the homeless state of a 
wanderer or seeker of truth happily led him to a twofold discovery, viz., (1) 
that of iha pratyayuta puititya-sttmulpada, and ( 2 i that of nirvana. The 
discovery meant the finding out of the thing or things longed for. That was 
in Buddha's case the non contingent, that, which is not subject to the limiting 
conditions of life and existence. 1 

If thus the claim made bo that of a discovery only, it stands to reason 
to premise that the discoverer himself does not create the thing he discovers 
but simply finds it out as it is (yathabhutam). Buddha’s discovery is. 
therefore, aptly compared to the accidental discovery by a traveller of an old, 
buried and forgotten city as well as of the path leading to it. 2 Hence was 
his well-deserved epithet of Tathdgata , meaning the Truth-finder and Path- 
finder. :J Buddhism which was an outcome of that discovery became thus 

both a way of truth and a way of life. As way of truth it became concerned 
with the thing as it is or the things as they are , and as a way of life, its 
concern was with the thing as it ought to be or th§ things as they shotild be , 

1. Majjhtma , i, p. 16V ff.; Barua, Ceylon Lecture on Buddhism as personal 
religion. The Mahabadhi , Vbl. 52. p. 60. 

2. Sarpyutta , ii, p. 104 ff.; Mrs. Rhys Davids, Buddhism (Home University 
Series), p. 33 ff. ; Lahkdvatdra-Sulra. rd. Bunio Nanjio, pp. 113-4 ; Suzuki’s Transl., 
pp. l/sW ; Barua, A so ha and His Inscriptions , 1*1. I, Ch. IV. 

3? I accept above English renderings of the epithet offered by the late lamented 
Mrs. Rhys Davids. 1 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 


575 


i.e., the ideal or ideals of life conformably to the form or forms of truth as 
stated as well as to the nature of reality as discovered. To be intelligible to 
human understanding and effective as guidance to thought and action the 
form or forms of truth must lx*, either philosophical or scientific, logical or 
psychological. To be inspiring to life and appealing to human heart and 
effective in their diverse expressions, the form of the ideal or ideals must be 
cither ethical or aesthetic, literary or artistic, social or i>olitical, religious or 
educational, national or international. 

So far as the menial or subjective aspect of the discovery goes, it is an 
unprecedented experience with an objective content referring to an existing 
fact, an actuality or a reality. This experience has to pass successively 
through three mental modes lx fore it becomes a public proiierly as a body 
of doctrine and discipline ( dharmavinayam ) or a system of thought and 
faith, namely, intuitional or mystical, conceptual or apprehensible, and 
nchitcclonlc or systematic. With each merle is connected a particular form 
of mental activity, whether it be noetic, ideational or rational, where the 
pro.-pcct of success calls up the emotion of joy ( priti ) and the attainment 
of success is followed by the enjoyment of self-satisfaction, happiness, bliss 
or beatitude (sukha). The experience which is preservative at the first 
mode becomes representative at the second and expressive or presentable at 
the third. 

According to the Pali scholiast Dhamma',xila, whilst reflecting on the nature 
of reality the Blessed One got hold of the causal genesis in his mind. 1 This 
may be taken to mean that with Dhammapdla prat itya-sum u tpuda or causal 
genesis represents the true nature of reality. But in the words of Buddha, 
the term is applicable as much to the true nature of reality as intuited as to 
the true nature of reality as conceived and formulated ; it is applicable to the 
same as presented, interpreted, expounded, elaborated, elucidated and applied. 

Pratitya-samulpdda as intuited in its presents tive character is otherwise 
known as paurdna dharmasthilitii, and it stands for the ancient or eternal 
nature of reality which exists by its own right, independently of the advent 
of the Tathagatas, indeirendently of all modes of knowing and all forms of 
thought-construction and rational interpretation. The same as conceived or 
formulated in its representative character is otherwise known as pralydtma- 
dharmaslhilitd , 3 and it stands for the basic concept of Buddhism and Bud- 
dhist thought as the unalterable cosmic law. The same as presented, inter- 
preted, expounded, elaborated, elucidated and applied is known variously by 
the name, of pratyaydkdras 0 (causal forms), satyas (truths), and the like, 

4. Udana Commentary, Siamese Ed., to the Bodhi Sutta, I, : Bhagava Bodhi- 
mkkhamule dhamma-sabhuva-paccavekkhana-vasena paticca-samuppadam manasd- 
Itasi. 

5. Lankavatdra Sutra, pp. 143-44. 

6. Vibhanga, Ch. VI, where paccayakdra is used as a substitute for paficca- 
samuppada). 



576 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and all of them stand for the various architectonics of thought as well as 
the moral law. The ideals of life and action are set out in conformity with 
the truths as formulated and presented, the truths are formulated on the 
basis of the central concept, 7 while the central concept has behind it the 
nature of reality as intuited or experienced. The Buddhist creed formula, 
ye dharmdh hetuprabhavafy, etc. applies to pratitya-samutpada as conceived, 
formulated, presented, interpreted and applied. Regarding the paurana- 
dharmasthitila, the pratyalma-dharmasthilita, and the system of thought and 
faith based upon the second, Buddha’s significant statement in the Sarfiyutta 
is : “ Because of birth, monks, dccay-and-dcath. Whether there be an prising 
of Talhdgaias, or whetlier there be no such arising, in each this nature of 
things stands, this causal status, this orderliness, the relatedness of this to 
that. Concerning that the Talk a gat a is fully enlightened, that he fully 
understands. Fully enlightened, fully understanding, he declares it, teaches 
it, reveals it, sets it forth, manifests, explains, makes it plain, saying : Be- 
hold ! conditioned by this, that comes to be.’’ 8 9 

In the above statement, Buddha clearly refers to and distinguishes be- 
tween the three successive mental mocks : 

(1) becomes enlightened or awakened as to the nature of reality which 
exists by its own right — abhisambujjhaii ; 

(2) formulates with the suggestion therefrom the fundamental law of 
the cosmos, which is to say, forms the basic concept of his doctrine — abkisa- 
meti ; 

(3) states, addresses, sets forth, establishes, discloses, expounds, eluci- 
dates. in short, presents as a system — acikkhali, deseti, etc. 

Pratitya-samutpada as the essential nature of reality is characterized in 
Pali as the elementary datum of experience, the standing order of becoming 
{dhammatthilatd) , the way of the happening of things ( dhammaniyamata ), 
euchness (orderliness, tathatd), uncontrariness ( avitathaid ), unotherwiseness 
{anahnathatd) , background of relatedness ( idappaccayatd) . It is further 

characterized in the Ldfikdvatdra Sutra and other Mahayana treatises by 
such predicates as vacuity ( sunyatd ), realness ( bhiitata ) and actuality, 

( satyatd ). The same set of predicates applies, nmtatis mutandis, also to 
pratityasamutpdda as formulated, presented, interpreted and applied, 5 
though in a somewhat different sense. 

The positive thesis of the philosophy of Nagarjjna, who is not without 
reason honoured in the Latikdvaldra Sidra as the second Buddha, is gene- 
rally missed. This is, however, clearly stated in the two opening verses of 
his Kdrikd. These indicate that Nagarjuna’s primary interest was to call 

7. According to the Lankdvatara Sutfa , pp. 143-44, Buiddha’s discourses were 
all based on the pratyatma-dharmaslkititd and not on the paunlna. 

8. Saqiyutta, ii, p. 25 ; The Book of the Kindred Sayings, ii, p. 21. 

9. Vtsuddhtmagga , ii, p. 518. % 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 


577 


attention to the pratitya-samutpada as the fundamental nature of reality 
which is not capable of verbal representations and not apprehensible by the 
intellect, the mode of understanding. It refuses to accept all the predicates 
the intellect can devise, e.g. cessation ( nirodha ), origination ( utpada ), anni- 
hilation ( uccheda ), eternality ( sdsvata ), singleness ( ekdrtha ), manifoldness 
0 ndndrtha ), advent ( agatna ), and egress ( nirgama ). The only mental mode 
of witnessing or being face to face with it is intuition, immediate percep- 
tion, first-hand experience or direct vision, all being means within the reach 
of mysticism. The powerful dialectics employed throughout his Karika are 
directed to expose the incapacity of all the intellectual and verbal modes of 
representing that nature of reality as it is, as it exists by its own right, inde- 
pendently of all thinkers and all ideal constructions. If the last word of 
Nitgarjuna s dialectics be * be quiet it only means the futility of the modes 
of understanding and the expressions of language as means of representing 
and stating that nature of reality, and nothing else. The incapacity of in- 
tellect and language is not to be used as proof against the objective reality 
of that nature as intuited, witnessed or experienced,-— the nature of reality 
to which the Buddha mind was awakened and being awakened to which the 
Buddha felt with the deepest conviction that he became supremely enlighten- 
ed Uibhisambuddho) . The utility of this intuition or supreme experience is 
not denied, for therein lies the means of stopping all aberrations of intellect 
and getting tranquillity which is the summon bonum ( prapancopasama siva ). 

Dr. Satkari Mookcrjee characteristically observes : “ The Sautrfintika may 
rejoin that (his) philosophy is the most perfect possible explanation of the 
objective world and is absolutely immune from the logical difficulties which 
are the besetting sins of other realistic philosophies. But the justice and vali- 
dity of this claim have been disputed by Nagarjuna and Sankara, who have 
shown in unmistakable language that causation is the hidden rock on which 
the barque of realism has suffered shipwreck/’ 10 But reading between the 
Sines, one cannot fail to understand that here Nagarjunas way of thinking 
is not different from the general Buddhist way. Pralitya-samutpada or the 
essential nature of reality which exists by its own right is not the law of 
causation as conceived, formulated and applied. Proceeding from the expe- 
rience with its elementary datum, one may come to conceive and formulate the 
law of causation or dependent origination, but one cannot resolve it back into 
the experience itself which occurred once only when it occurred and remains 
nevertheless a point of reference to pmtitya-samutpada conceived and formu- 
lated as the law of causation. According to the general Buddhist way of 
thinking, one may proceed from a chemical combination of all the ingredi- 
ents used to account for the possibility of the preparation of a dish of pud- 
ding, but one cannot for that reason resolve the taste of the pudding, which 
is something unique, into the separate tastes of the ingredients themselves 


10 The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux, p. 57. 
38 



578 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


that have lost their individualities in course of the cooking. 11 The experience 
which is a momentary affair and never occurs twice in one and the same form 
accounts similarly for the possibility of the conception and formulation of a 
law of causation, and the law of causation or tire system of thought built 
upon it derives its significance therefrom, but that does not mean that the 
experience is restorable from the law itself, far less its elementary objective 
datum which is not an ideal construction, and hence deserves the name of an 
asaqiskrta dhatu or uncreated element of reality. As it is constituted, mind 
can just once peep into the nature of reality as it flashes through intuition or 
mystical experience. 

Now, considered with reference to the noble quest described in the Ariya- 
pariyesana Sittla, is the discovery claimed to have been made by Buddha two- 
fold or single? If twofold, are we not compelled to entertain the notion oi 
there being two dsamskrta dhatus or uncreated elements of reality, namely, 
pratilya samutftada and nirvana, which is logically absurd? 12 The uncreat- 
ed elementary objective datum of experience must be single or unitary. But 
how is it stated to be double or twofold ? Suppose we assume that pratUyu 
samutpada alone is the element of reality, can it not be shown that nirodka 
or nirvana is just a side-issue or an aspect of it ? 

Whether we objectively watch cosmic life, or individual life, or life of 
consciousness, we can have just momentary peeps or glimpses into it. At 
the most we can have 4 point instants ’ or 4 snapshot views ' within a limited 
duration. In the kaleidoscopic or cinematographic view, one picture seems 
to pass away or to appear in quick succession or in an order of sequence, 
while just one picture is always present before the eyes that gaze on without 
reflecting or thinking. The impression left on the mind of the observer is 
that of the movement of pictures or appearances in the continuity of an order 
of change or becoming, in short, of orderliness in a continuity of which the 
first beginning ( pubbakoli , pubbanla ) and the ultimate end ( aparako! i, apa 
rant a) cannot be seen and determined. So far as the cosmic life, individual 
life, or fife of consciousness is concerned, certain experiences occur that re- 
mind us of tht)se occurred in the past and are preserved in memory. But for 
the memory, the experiences that occurred previously would be lost or non- 
existent for ever. If the case be that of a person continuing to write a new 
figure on a black board with his right hand and to efface the old figure with 
his left, there is present always a single figure befer^ the observer and that 
which is effaced is gone for ever. But for the memory the past is past, the 
present is present and the future ( andgala ) is that which is not come, that 
which is yet to be. With regard to the past, the correct statement is that it was 
( ahosi ), with regard to the present, that it is ( etarahi paccuppamo) and with 
regard to the future, that it will be (bhavisaati) There is no other mental 

11. MUinda, p. 63. 12. Kathavatthu, VI, 2. 

13. Poffhapada Sutla, Digha,. i. p. 200 ff. 



PRATiTYA-SAMUTPADA 


579 


mode of describing historically the event watched than representing it in terms 
of the three portions of time, viz., a past (atita), a present ( paccuppanna ), and 
a future (anagata), while the event itself has nothing to do with these men- 
tal modes that introduce into it the ideas of sequence, succession and dura- 
tion, and thus relate it to the concepts suggestive of time and its reality. As 
'we watch, that which strikes us is the continuity of a process of genesis at 
every juncture ( pratisandhi ) of which is to be noticed something ccasing-to- 
be and something coming-to-be, in other words, nirodha and utpada, but the 
objective datum of experience is always the utpanna or something which has 
come-to-be. Something which has ceased-to-be becomes a thing of the past, 
and non-existent for us but for memory. We proceed from the utpanna 
dharma to utpanna dhartna, the ceasing-to-bc and the coming-to-be being 
the mental modes of representing the junctures in the process of genesis. The 
observed order of sequence applies to one utpanna dhartna ceasing-to-be and 
to another utpanna-dharma coming-to-be. One can say, therefore, that the 
notion of cessation is just a side-issue and a negative aspect of the fact of 
sequence, either that something having ceascd-to-be, something ceased-to-be, 
or that something having come-to-be, something came-to-be. This indeed is 
known as the original formulation ( ddi naya ) of pralxtya-samutpada con- 
ceived as the fundamental law or mode of happening in the process of genesis: 

(1) Imasnm/i sali idam hoti, unass' uppada idam uppajjali ; 

(2) Imasmim asati idam na hoti. imassa nirodha idam nirujjhali. 

The first setting, called anuloma-desand, is set forth in terms of advent 

or appearance, and the second, called praliloma-desand, is set forth in terms 
of cessation or disappearance. 1 In the second Pali Abhidhamma text called 
Vibhatiga, as well as in the Sarvastivada texts, the pratiloma-desand is alto- 
gether dispensed with and just the anulomadesand is retained. 1 '’ 

In the above formulation of the general law of giencsis, happening or 
becoming, the mental representation or verbal statement is in terms ot se- 
quence between two utpanna-dharmas, one ceasing-to-be and the other com- 
ing-to-be. • If we cannot causally connect or inter-rclate them, the building 
up of a system of thought is impossible. When we causally inter-relate 
them in thought we make different causal relations out of the simple fact 
of sequence, and take them to subsist between the paccayas (causal factors, 
conditions or circumstances) and the paccayupanna-dhammas (causally in- 
duced states, i.e., effects.). 1 ® If the causal relation subsumed between two 
successive events or stages in a process of genesis involving the notions of 

14. Udona, I, 1-3 ; Majjhima, i, 262 ; ii, p. 32. 

15. Vibhanga, Ch. VI ; P. C. Bagchi in Epigraphia It\dica, Vol. XI, pp. 194, 
199 ; B. C. Law, Concepts of Buddhism, p. 47 ff. 

16. According to Vasubandhu, between the samutpada (i.e., hetu ) and the 
xamutpatnna (Le., phata). Abhidharma-koia, III. 28. 



580 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


advent and cessation, single terms are the convenient devices of thought to 
designate these events or stages. The notion of temporal sequence is out 
of place in the causal interpretation of an event, which when it takes place, 
takes place as a unit with regard to time and is to be viewed as a common 
performance of several causal factors and conditions in their momentary 
unification. One may think of simultaneity but not of priority or posterio- 
rity. If any one speaks here of priority, it must lx; understood in a logical 
sense ( nppdda-paccayatthena ). IJ A rational explanation of the possibility 
of the occurrence of an event, mental or otherwise, lies not in any single 
efficient cause (ekn kdrana ) , whether it be God or Time or Fate, but in a 
conjuncture of circumstances or causal factors and circumstances (paccaya- 
sdmaggi, samavdya), a view, which is in different ways adopted in the 
Samkhya, Pu rva-mlmamsa, Nyaya and Vaisesika systems of Indian thought. 
Though the Pali scholiast Buddhagghosa pleads for the plurality of causes 
aneka-heluto vutti),'* Buddhist realism stands really for the unification 
( samanvaya or ekikaratia) or combination of causal factors and circumstances 
excluding the idea of mere juxtaposition or collection. The unification or 
combination must be sufficient to produce the result, which is to say, enough 
in itself to account for the possibility of the result produced. 

The general law of happening in terms of temporal sequence (tabbhana- 
tabbhavita ) ?0 with its causal implication was sought to be illustrated by a 
causal scheme of life exhibiting the twelve successive stages in the process 
of genesis, each denoted by a single term called niddna. The twelve terms 
are avidyd, setpskara, vijnnna, ndtna-rupa, sadayatam, sparSa, vedav.fi, 
Ijsn/i, upadana, bhava, jdti (jaitma), and jarn-maratia~soka-paridtvana- 
updydsdh) . The convenient mode of expressing the causal nexus between 
any two successive stages is because of this, that : avidyd- pratyaydl sarns- 
kdrah, satpskdra-pratyaydl vijnanatp, etc. Unfortunately this illustrative cau- 
sal scheme represented as a wheel of life (bhava-chakra) ,'- x has been mis- 
taken for the whole of pratitya-samulpdda conceived and formulated as a 
general law of happening. The illustrative causal scheme or chain of life, 
as its twelve terms and eleven links indicate, is suited only to represent the 
common experience of mankind and animal world in connection with the 
biological development of a living being and its bearings on the feelings of 

17. Dhammapada Commentary, i. p. 23. 

18. AtthasalirA, p. 59 : sumavaya-saiikkdto iumayo aneka-hetuto vutlitn 

dipeti, tena eka-kdraiiu-vddo pathedhile hoti. Samavayo ca nama sddhdraiui-phalu- 
nipphdflane atmammiapekkho. Tasmd eko kaltd nama nail hi. 

19. Atthasalini, p. 60 : sddha mna- phala-nipphadakal leva hi (hitalrhdvo so- 
muggi na anekesatji samodhdnamattain na ca andhdnatp dassunwni nama sadht - 
ra&a-pholafy. 

20. Abhidhammat t ha-sathgaka, Ch. VIII ; Atthasalini , p. 60 : assa bhdvena 

bhavo. , 

21. Abhidhar.ma-kosa, III. 16. 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 


581 


others interested in his welfare. If we stop at jara-mararui {decay -and- 
dcath), the scheme applies only to the biological career of an individual 
from its beginning to its end. The three terms, soka, t arid cv ana and upd- 
yasd (sorrow, lamentation and despair), represent the painful feelings of 
the kith and kin of a person on account of his death, and should, therefore, 
be omitted, as Vasubandh has done, while discussing the biological career 
of an individual qua individual. The continuity of the biological career car- 
ries with it the notion of sequence or succession of dtmabhdvas, bodily ap- 
jiearances or individual existences within limited durations. Before we pro- 
ceed further with the discussion, we should consider Vasubandhu’s interpreta- 
tion of prat itya-samutpdda in the Abhidharma-kosa and Yasomitra’s inter- 
pretation of the same in his Abhidharmakosa-vydkhyd. 

Vasubandhu and Yasomitra seem to interpret pratitya-samutpada, the 
former tacitly and the latter explicitly, under its four aspects, viz., (1) as 
representing the momentary character of all forms in which the nature ot 
reality presents itself to experience, i.e., as ksanika-pralitya-samutpdda, (2) 
as representing the continuity of the order of beaming, i.e., as prakarpka 
pratitya-samutpada, (3) as involving the idea of inter-relation between cause 
and effect, i.e., as sdmbandhika-pra°-samutpuda, and (4) as differentiating 
the successive stages in the career of individuals, i.e., as dvasthika-pratitya- 
samutpdda According to Vasubandhu, by the causal scheme of life Buddha 
meant the dvaslhika aspect, and by the twelve terms outlining the same, the 
twelve successive stages, each exhibiting predominance of a particular fea- 
ture. whether it be avidya, satftskara, or the like. At each stage is to be 
recognized a particular organic combination or development of the five 
aggregates. 25 

In this architectonic of thought conceived in terms of the three portions 
of time, out of the twelve nidanas the first two, namely, avulyd and sams- 
kara arc relegated to past, the last two, namely, jdti and jard-maranya. to 
future, and the middle eight, from vijhana to bhava, to present. The nidanas 
are classified also under three heads, viz., klesa, karma and vastu. Avidya, 
tr$na and updddna are to be treated as klesas, i.e., the mental properties or 
co-efiicients that stain or contaminate our nature, the nature of consciousness 
(citta). Satfiskara, and bhava stand for karmas or the volitional phases! of 
action shaping the destiny or determining the form of birth and rebirth. The 
remaining seven signify vastus or loci of klesa and karma ; these stand also 
for phalas or resultants. 24 * 

Viewed under the avasthika aspect of pratitya-samutpada, the process 
of genesis gives rise to the idea of an orderly sequence between successive 
atmabhavas or bodily appearances within limited spans or durations of life. 

21. Abh*dharma-koSa, III. 16. 22. Abhidharma-kosa, III. 25. 

23. ibid.. III. 25 r avast hikah kde$lo\yarfl, pradhdnyatvahga-kirtanam. 

24. Ibid. III. 27. 



582 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The junctures in the connected narrative of a continuous biography are 
called sandhis or pratisandhis. Here the past existence or episode is repre- 
sented as followed by the present, and the present by the future. So far as 
the past existence is concerned, we are required to take cognizance of these 
two distinctive features, viz., avid yd and samskdra. Here vidyd and avid yd 
stand for two kinds of knowledge running counter to each other, just as 
two enemies who are both men are hostile to each other in their intentions 
and actions . 25 The term avidyd does not imply the absence ( abhdva ) of 
vidyd or knowledge of some kind. 2 * The real difference between the two lies 
in the fact that the animal instincts and impulses, sex-urges and lower pas 
sions are subservient to one kind of knowledge -’ 7 and the higher instincts and 
impulses and nobler desires and ideals are led by the other kind. Vasubandhu 
defines the avidyd stage as the total natural disposition of the animal instincts 
and impulses, sex urges and lower passions of an individual in his past life, 
and the santskdra stage as the sum total of the effects of past deeds of an 
individual as determining his destiny .- 8 

As to the present life, the vijndna stage is the condition of the indivi- 
dual just at the moment of conception and at the inception of organic deve- 
lopment. The next stage, called ndma-rupa, covers the period of organic 
development, the development of the foetus in the womb, prior to the devc 
lopment of the six sense-organs. This is immediately followed by the sadii- 
yatana stage which is just prior to the stage of a pari a in which the organs 
of sense begin to function, bringing the individual into contact with the ex- 
ternal world and enabling him to communicate with and feel interested in 
persons and things other than himself . 2 ' 1 In the spuria stage the individual 
acquires the potentiality for experiencing different feelings. The vedand 
stage prevails when the individual begins to experience certain feelings for 
an object of enjoyment, and it is followed by the trsna stage when he con- 
ceives the longing for the object during its enjoyment . 30 The next is the stage 
of uppddna when the individual runs after the objects of enjoyment for 
obtaining them. In the bhava stage he begins to perform such deeds as may 
enable him to attain to the desired future state . 37 In relation to the future 
life, the Irstjd and updddna stages act as the avidyd stage, and the bhava 

25. Abhidhartna-kosa, III, 28 : vidya-vipakso dhaTmo’nyo’vidyamitT&miiddi- 

vat. 

26. According to Yasomitra, vidydyd abhdvo ’v'tdye ti lu nabhipretd. 

27. According to Yasomitra, klesatr-anugata hi avidyd. 

28. Abhidharma-koSa, III. 21 : purva-klesadasavidya, saifiskdrah purva-kar- 
tnmah. 

29. Abhddharma-kosa, III. 21-22 : sandhiskondhas tu vijndnatfl, ndmarupatp 
atahpararp prdk sadayatanoipdddt ; tat purvuni trika-sdmgamdt. 

30. Ibid., Ill, 22-23 : sparsah prdk sukha-duhkhddikarana-jridna-saklinah. Vit~ 

til} prdn maithunat ; tjsm bhogamailhuna-Tdginal}- 

31. Ibid., Ill, 23-24. 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 


583 


takes the place of the saifiskara. In the scheme of future life, the jdli stage 
is just another name for the vijtiana and the term jara-marana denotes the 
stages from the numa-rupa to the vedanti , M 

The poetical imagery depicting the avasthika pialltya-samutpada as a 
bhavacakra or wheel of life must be handled with caution. If in the order of 
sequence one atmabhava be followed by another and the second be neither 
the same as nor quite different from the first, there is no room for tire 
imagery of a wheel, tire series running as a, a 1 , a 3 , a 3 , a 4 . . . .a n . 

The imagery comes in only in so far as similar stages recur in the same 
theoretical order of sequence, in each atmabhava, and yet we are not to picture 
to ourselves the procession by the analogy of a single wheel in motion, it 
going on rather in a spiral or chain-like movement. 

Vasubandhu maintains that the above formulation of the law of avas- 
thika pmtitya-samutpdda was intended to set at rest all doubts as to the past, 
present and future existences of individuals as individuals.** 3 The typical 
questions raised concerning the three arc : Did I exist in the past or not, 
do I exist mw or not. shall I exist in future or not, after having been what 
1 am now what I am, what shall ( become after having been what I am now ? 
These questions as problems are said to have been discarded by Buddha 
in the Sabbasava Sutta on the simple ground that to admit the questions 
is to beg the questions, i.e., to admit the answers suggested in them. Arguing 
1 herefrom one is apt to arrive at one or the other of the following six conclu- 
sions : that one possesses an entity, that one does not possess an entity, that 
one know’s self by self, that one knows not-self by self, that one knows self 
by not-self, that there is a soul or percipient within him, and that soul is the 
only entity which perdu res through the whole series of bodily changes, not 
itself being liable to change. 

All that Vasubandhu means amounts to saying that by the above state- 
ment of the law the Blessed One both avoided and met the two extreme posi- 
tions of self-existence and self-extinction, in other words, of etemalism and 
annihilationism. To subsume an entity, be it soul or spirit, which remains 
unaffected by organic transformations is to take up an arbitrary position in 
a reality where all things change but the soul or spirit alone enjoys the im- 
ixyial or royal prerogative of remaining where it is, being always above) the 
law. Nowhere in the process of genesis, in no stage of individual existence, 
is to be noticed such disparity between one element of reality and another, 
i.e., between matter and spirit, body and soul. Wherever there is any bodily 
appearance or individual existence, there is an inseparable combination of 
the five aggregates, all being equally subject to one and the same law of 
causal genesis. But the question still is— how far will the procession go 
without coming to an end for good? Does or does not nirvdiia imply, in 

32. Ibid., Ill, 24. 

33. ibid. III. 25 : puTvaparantamadhye$u sammoha-vinivjtlaye. 



584 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


other words, the total cessation of the process of becoming meaning the 
uccheda or annihilation of individuality, of a changing individuality ? 

Once we assume that nirvdtja means the cessation of the eschatological 
process of individuality, there is no escape from the charge of annihilationism 
which was always denied by Buddha. If, from the eschatological point of 
view, we say with Ajita Kesakambala, a veritable Garvaka philosopher, that 
individuality ceases with death, and after death a person is not, it is a bold 
case of annihilationism. Suppose the next man comes and avers that to 
completely get rid of individuality one must utterly exhaust the karmic force, 
which is not possible through the effort of one life. Individuality ceases 
entirely to be only when a jxrfect man dies after experiencing the first stale 
of trance. The third man pleads for the second state and the ninth man for 
the eighth, and the Buddhist were to come at last to plead for the ninth 
state of samdpalti. Can we defend any of them against the above charge ? :i 4 
The Vedanta position is no better, if it be like this that individual selves 
become ultimately merged in the universal self like the rivers losing themselves 
in the sea, abandoning their separate entities. The Sawkhya irosition is 
worse if it means that when an individual reaches the highest conceivable statu 
of perfection, after death his soul becomes separated for ever from prakrti 
or matter, which contains the potentiality and possibility for all organic 
changes, including mental. Is this precisely the ultimate eschatological posi- 
tion to which we are led by the logical conclusion from the trend of Buddha’s 
avasthika pratilya-samulpuda ? 

We can well appreciate Buddha when he took Bhik$u Svatl to task for 
construing his philosophic thought as implying that vijndna alone runs from 
existence to existence, through the entire series of embodiments. By vijndna 
Svati obviously kept in view the Upani§adic vijndndlman or soul made up 
of a mass of intelligence ( vijhdna-ghana ) M or bare consciousness. But the 
criticism put into the mouth of Buddha goes to show that the word vijndna 
was taken to mean sense-cognitions and not that because of which these 
mental acts and developments are possible, i.e„ the bhavdt'iga citta or dlaya- 
vijndna, — the life-continuum, the individuated consciousness. 37 Even if 
Svatl’s vijndna were taken in this very sense, he could not be absolved from 
the guilt of misrepresentation. There is nowhere this suggestion that vtjAdna 
or citta alone can exist apart from being a component factor in some form 
or other of the organic unity of the five aggregates. 

We can similarly appreciate that in the Khandha Samyutta Bhifcju 
Yamaja is severely criticised for having given out that as he construed Bud- 

34. Majjhima, i, p. 7. 

35. Brakmajdla Suita, under ucchedavdda. Digha. i, p. 34 if. 

36. Bjhad At any aka Up., V, 5. 13. Note that fnajndna and vijndna are used 

as variants.- * 

37. Majjhima, i, p. 256 ff. 



PRATITYA-SAMUTPADA 


585 


dha’s doctrine, it meant the cessation of the process of individuality of an 
Arahant with death. To put it in his own words, “On the dissolution of 
the body a k$masrava becomes annihilated as an individual, after death he 
is not (i.e.,, does not evolve further).” The stereotyped Buddhist arguments 
employed to bring the upholder of the wrong opinion to a right way of think- 
ing are to these three effects : ( 1 ) that none of the five aggregates as con- 
stituents of an individual existence is a permanent entity : (2) that in no 
stage an individuality is identifiable either with a single aggregate or with 
a sum total of all the five aggregates ; and (3) that no individuality in any 
of its stages is conceivable apart (annalra) from the live aggregates. 118 

By the illustrative formula, because of avidyd, samskara, because of 
saytskdra, vijnana, etc. just one aspect of dvasthika pratilya-samutpdda is 
sought to be brought out. Viewing in the light of this particular formula, 
we arc to picture to ourselves an orderly sequence of the various stages of 
individual life with avidyu, samskara etc. as their distinctive features. In 
Theravada Buddhism, this formula is supplemented by another, namely, 
because of the cessation ( nirvdha ) of avidyd, the cessation of samskara, 
because of the cessation of samskara, the cessation of vijiidna, etc., to bring 
out another aspect of the same. Viewing in the light of this second illustra- 
tive formula, we are to picture to ourselves an orderly sequence of the various 
stages of individual life with avidyd-nirodha, samskiira-nirodha, etc., as their 
distinctive features. The nirvdtia stage is to be reached when there takes 
place a complete cessation of avidyd as well as of the instincts, impulses, 
passions and desires led by it (avijjaya asosa-virdga-nirodhd) . Considered 
from this point of view, nirvana, which is held out as the summum bormm 
of life, is negatively characterised as a state implying the exhaustion or ex- 
tinction of all dsravas, the complete cessation of avidyd and of duhkha. This 
has led many a critic of Buddhism, particularly John Caird, to think that 
Buddhism offers us but ‘ a heaven of nothingness ’ as the goal of life, which 
is to say, that in Buddhism the world has arrived only at a negative result. '** 
This is undoubtedly due to the sequential setting of the stages of life in terms 
of nirodha and k$ aya, instead of in terms of samudaya and paripiiri. 

In point of fact, whether such a setting be in terms of one or the other, 
behind it is the reality of causal genesis. the trend of life running through 
the successive stages of development. Neither the course of cosmic life, nor 
that of individual life, nor even that of the life of consciousness is negated 
thereby ; it is, on the contrary, posited. By negating it, we render the signi- 

38. Saniyutia, iii, p. 10911 

38a. The popular prospects of an eternal and everlasting life of bliss and 
glory in a paradise as held out by IBnayana Buddhism in the Buddhakhetta 
(Buddkavattisa ) , by MahayQna Buddhism in Sukhavati ( Sukharativyuha ), and by 
^ther religions in the Vaikuntha, the Heaven, and the like should not be brought 
in to bear upon the present discussion. Xhese must be relegated to the realm or 
poetic fancy. 



586 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


ficance of all such causal settings and thought schemes of existence and of 
life and experience nugatory. The negation of it means the denial of the 
factual reality existing by its own right on which these must have their bear- 
ings in order to be significant both in thought and in the life of efforts. 

To understand Buddha’s real trend of thought one may do no better 
than to take clue from its various malikas or architectonics. According to 
one of them, four are the express or implied aims of a life of efforts, namely, 
the stoppage (lit. non-production) of the appearance of those sinful and 
unwholesome states that have not as yet arisen, getting rid of such states 
that have already arisen, the inducement of those wholesome states that 
have not as yet arisen, and the preservation, non-confusion, augmentation, 
increase in magnitude, development and fulness of such states that have 
arisen. 39 Here the first two aims relate to nirodha or kfaya and represent its 
two modes, and the last two relate to satnudaya and denote its two modes. 
Does it not follow from this way of stating the matter that the aim, 
upon the whole, is the fulfilment ( pdripuri ) of all the higher possibilities ol 
life ? The question of negation arises only when we think of getting rid of 
and guarding against those diseased states and future diseases that stand in 
the way of the healthy development of life and its progressive course. 

But we must also consider here the implication of two other architec- 
tonics of Buddha’s thought. Going by them, we are to adopt two different 
modes in classifying the living individuals, one complementary to the other, 
one in which the individuals are assumed to be stationary, i.e., al rest , and 
the other in which they are taken to be changing, i.e., in motion. Accord- 
ing to one, they fall into these four classes : elevated ( unnala ), degraded 
( avanala ) , both elevated and degraded (i.e., elevated in one sense, some 
respects and degraded in another sense, other respects), and neither elevat- 
ed nor degraded. According to the other, which is really Buddhistic, they 
are to be classified as degraded-elevated ( avmata-unnata ) , degraded- 
degraded ( avanata-avanata ) , elevated-degraded ( urniala-avanata ), 
and elevated-elevated ( unnata-unnata ) Accordingly the individuals 
may be judged either as degraded though they appear to be at the present 
moment, they are tending towards elevation, or as not only degraded now 
but also proceeding headlong towards degradation, or as elevated though 
they be now, they are tending towards degradation, or, fourthly, as not only 
elevated now but also proceeding towards further elevation. Is it not 
evident also from the second classification that tfie aim of Buddhism is to 
lead life from elevation to elevation by arresting its course from degrada- 
tion to degradation? 41 Is the emphases laid here on the negative or the 

39. TheSe are known as caltaro sammappadhdm. See Sangiti Suttanta, Dtgha, 

j». p. 221. 

40. PuggaUirpanfiatti, iv. 20. 

41. This trend of Buddha’s thought goes against Stcherbatsky’s forceful opi- 



PRATlTYA-SAMUTPADA 


587 


positive aspect of the results of life's efforts, the passage of life from stage 
to stage being always the nature of reality behind all resulting efforts ? To 
do justice to Buddhas balanced mind and comprehensive view, one can say 
that in his thought schemes and methods of training, the emphasis has been 
equally laid on both the aspects. 

The Pali or Theravada illustrative formula is mostly two-armed ( anu- 
loma-prat iloma ) and rarely one-armed ( anutoma ); the? Sarvdsiivdda formula 
is invariably one-armed ( anuloma ), precisely as in the Vibhanga , Ch. VI. 
Whether one-armed or two-armed, the formula betrays the mental preoccu- 
pation about the general run of life under the sway of avidyd and irsnd . 
Under the aspect of cessation, Ux>, it suggests the mental preoccupation about 
ihe stoppage of the unwholesome and the elimination of the troublesome 
•actors, in short, negative results of life's efforts. In the Vibhanga chapter 
on paticca-scnnu t pdda alone, we have specimens of different causal formulas 
( paccaydkdras ) including those applicable to the course?, of life that starts 
hom kusala-nnilas : yl Here, too, the application of the law of causal genesis 
to the progress of higher or better life on the lokottara level of consciousness 
is barely indicated. It is clearly shown that if a course of life starts from a 
kusala-mula, play of avidyd , Irsnd and updddna has no place in it, in each 
H:ries prasdda (i.e. srdddhd , serene faith) is substituted for Irsnd and adhi- 
moksa (strong bent of mind) for updddna. Prasad a or sraddhd implies faith 
or belief in better states of existence and their realizability through right- 
directed efforts, etc., and samyak drsti, translated by ‘right view', whether 
iaukika or lokottara ** is rooted in it . 41 In that case, samyak sankalpa , trans- 
lated by 4 right resolve whether Iaukika or lokottara , may lx? taken to be 
rooted in edhimoksa. Unfortunately for Buddhism, it has nowhere been 
dearly shown what the illustrative formula of dvasthika pfatUya-samut - 
Pdda should be to set forth the procession of the better stages of life that 
start from vidya. The series from vidya to vedand running like that from 
avidyd to vedand , its continuation may be outlined by the following terms : 
samyak drsti, samyak sankalpa , samyak vdk, samyak karmdnta , samyak 
djiva , samyak vydydma , samyak smrli , samyak samddhi , samyak jndna , 
samyak vimukti 

nion (The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana , p. 29) that “the moral law conduces 
through a very long process of evolution the living world into a state of final 
quiescence, where there is f no life, but something lifeless or inanimate. In tliis 
s>ensc the Vaihha$ika outlook resembles the materialism of modem science.” For 
the modern scientist's view, Julian Huxley's Essays of a Biologist, first and last 
chapters (Pelican Series). 

42. I am greatly indebted to my esteemed cousin Mr. Birendra I-al Mutsuddi, 
author of the Abhidharmdrtha-satrigraha for drawing my attention to this. 

43. See Mahd-cattdlisa Sutta , Majjhima . iii. p. 231. 

44. Saddha-multkd sammadifthi, Sutnphgala-irildsim, i. p. 231. 

45. Dtgha , iii.. pp. 291 ; B. C. Law, Concepts of Buddhism , p. 36. 



588 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


In the progressive course of life which proceeds from health to health, 
from wholesome to wholesome, one may notice a twofold process of rtirodha, 
namely, apralisartikhyd (natural, temporary) and pratisattikhyd (through 
knowledge). 46 When the kusala states prevail, say, during the rupa and 
aiupa dhyanas, the akusalo states cease to be present then in consciousness, 
but these may make their appearances after the dhyana periods are over. 
Thus there are chances of lapses or recurrences, though not in identical forms. 
'The prescribed course of training is intended, therefore, to exhaust these un- 
happy possibilities to eliminate these chances. We reach the nirvana stage 
when these possibilities are completely exhausted and these chances are en- 
tirely eliminated. Thus the fulness of life reached through the progression 
of wholesome stages and the thorough elimination of obstacles on the way by 
means of two kinds of nirodha 11 may be taken to meet at a point, which 
seems to have led Nagarjuna to hold that the ultimate reaches ( koiis ) of 
saifisdra and nirvaiia are the same. 48 But how far will the process of life 
go without coming to an end ? 

If negatively nirvana and positively fulness be held out as the final goal 
of life’s efforts, the highest conceivable state of perfection reached by Buddha 
or any other man, does it follow from Buddlia’s doctrine of pratilya-samui- 
pdda that there is such a finality ? : Docs the recorded history of men bear 
testimony to that ? I would say. No. It is negatived also by the evidence 
of history. Theoretically only nirvana or fulness of life is the finality. 
History attests that there was a time when nirvdtia or vimoksa was claimed 
to have been realized through the first rupa-dhyana and during the first 
samapolti. World progressed and subsequently this was found to be wrong. 
It came to be claimed that some one else realized it through the second rupa- 
dhyana and during the second samupalti. Proceeding in this manner, and 
already before the rise of Buddhism, the claim was made in favour of the 
eighth samdpalti. This, too, was declared by Buddha to be inadequate, 
and he came to base, his claim on the ninth samdpatti. Thus the number 
of samdpattis swelled up from one to nine as well as the number of vitnok- 
fas.™ If the number could go up from one to nine, why should it not be that 
like the growing number of planets, it will increase from more to more with 


46. Abhidharma-kosa, I, 6 : Pratisatfikhya-nirodho yo visaipyogah pjthak 
Pjthak. Utpadalyanla-vighno’nyo nirodho ’ pralhanikhyaya. See for other defini- 
tions of these two nhodhas Satkari Mookerjee’s The bwldhist Philosophy o', Uni- 
versal Flux, pp. 5, 101, 244-46, 248-49, 252. 

47. The utility of airralisamkhyd-nirodha lies in preventing the rise of the 
hindrances that have not arisen, and that of pratisarrxkhya-ntioAha in getting rid 
of those which have arisen. Cf. Satkari Mookerjee, op. cit. 

48. i.e., ya ko(i mrvanasya sa kofi samsaranasya ca. 

I have used the word sarpsara in a somewhat different sense in my Ceylon lec- 
ture on Buddhism as personal religion, p. 9. 

49. Brahmajala Sutta, Digha, i. p. 36 ff. ; Digha, iii. p. 262. 



PRATlTYA-SAMUTPADA 


589 


each fresh realization or discovery ? Then, again, we are not to think, when 
we speak of the number of planets, only of one solar system. Even assum- 
ing for argument’s sake that under the present condition of human beings be- 
longing to our planet the state of perfection reached by Buddha was not 
the penultimate but the very ultimate one, it does not follow from it that 
there are not still better conditions of beings elsewhere in the universe. The 
uttaritara slogan of Buddha, precisely like the pardtpara slogan of the 
Upani$ads, is inconsistent with any claim to finality, unless it be a finality 
so far, a finality hitherto known and recognized as such. Just as in a numeri- 
cal series, 1, 2, 3, 4. .. .n, the n remains always the theoretical finality, the 
same as to nirvma, which is held before us its the final goal and which is 
bound to recede like an ever-retreating horizon as we advance towards it 50 

One more question still remains to discuss. How is it possible to turn 
the avidyd series of dvaslhika profit ya-somutpuda into a vidyd scries, if 
vidyd and avidyd be diametrically opposite in fact? They are mutually 
contradictory as logical terms, no doubt. But, in fact, avidyd, as we saw, 
dots not imply the absence of vidyd or knowledge of some kind. Just as two 
contradictory logical terms red and not-red, comprehend together the whole 
universe of discourse regarding the subject of colour, so vidyd and avidyd 
(not-vidyd) may he shown to comprehend together the whole universe of 
discourse regarding knowledge. Avidyd as a kind of knowledge, based upon 
a certain reading of the nature of reality, which impels us to follow the so- 
called normal course of life guided by our natural instincts and impulses, 
sox tirges and wordly desires and passions. Vidyd as another kind of know- 
ledge, based upon two readings, one on the lines of avidyd and the other 
on its own new lines, the latter inspiring us to change the direction of life, 
to follow a different course which is calculated to elevate our nature. The 
vidyd form of knowledge, too, may be shown to emerge out of avidyd, here 
avidyd and vidyd standing respectively for that which is not brought and that 
which is brought into clear recognition. In these senses indeed the terms 
avidyd and vidyd were used by the Buddhist Sister Dhammadinna (Dhama- 
dattii) when she spoke of the avidyd stage resulting as a counterpart ( prati - 
bhaga) by way of a reaction from the naduljkha-nasukha, of vidyd as a coun- 
terpart by way of a reaction from avidyd, of vimukti from vidyd, and of 
nirvana from vimukti.™ 


50. Barua, Ceylon I-ccture on Buddhism as personal religion, p. 8 ft. 

51. Culla-vedalla Suita : Majjhima, i. p. 304. According to Buddhaghosa, 
upckkhd pana andhukarabhibhutd duddipana, avijja ’pi tddisa vSti, ten 'ettha 
sabhdga-patibhdgo. 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 

{From faina Sources.*) 

By 

Mr. C. D. CHATTER JEE, m.a., University of Lucknow. 

Chanakya was born in a village called Chanaya in the Golla District 
(Gallavisae). 1 His father Chanaka was a Brahmana by birth (Mahano) but 
a Jaina by faith ( sdvao ) . The baby Chanakya was born with full-grown 
teeth (like Minerva bom in panoply!).- At that time were staying in his 
house some Jaina saints ( sahu ) who, when they saw it, predicted that the 
new-born babe was destined to be a king (ray a). Chanaka, who was reli- 
giously inclined, considered earthly kingdom to be a hell which his son 

* Mainly based on the Sitkhabodiia of Dcvendraganin, :t commentary on the 
Utlaiajjhayana , the first of the four Mulasuttas of the Svctambara Siddhanta . 
Other works consulted are the Chunni on Bhadrahahu’s Av assay a Nijjutti, the 
Ava&yaka Vjitti of Haribhadra Sun, and Hcmachandra’s Sthaviravalichartla , or 
Paris is ht apa rvan. Prakrit passages cited within brackets are from the Sukhabndhd 
(on the Uttarajjhayana , iii. 1, Nijjutti, 166). 

J. A vasyaka-Nhyukti-C hu rni, p. 563 ( Jainabandhu Printing Press. Indore 
1928); Avasyaka-Sulra f Vrtli], p. 433 Agamodaya Samiti Edition, Bombay 1916- 
17) ; Parisishlaparvan , viii. 194. 

No due is to be found in our sources with regard to the location of either 
the village or the district associated with Chftnakya’s nativity. Golla, however, 
may bo identified with Gola as mentioned in one of the Bharhut inscriptions (Cun- 
ningham, Stupa of Bharhut . p. 140. No. 21). Gola seems to be the name of a 
town, but it can also be the name of a district as well as of its' head-quarters. 

According to the Buddhist tradition. Chanakya was bom at Taxila (Vamsat- 
thappakdsim, p. 119, /. 35. Sinhalese Edition). Whether that famous dty was 
situated in a district (visae) called Golla or Golya is not known to us so far. 

In the Chunni on the Av assay a Nijjutti , the village where Chanakya was bom. 
has been mentioned as Chaniya and, strangely enough, the same name has also been 
given to Chanakya 5 s father in that work. According to the Jaina Brhalkathukosa 
(cxliii. 3), Chanakya, son of Kapila, belonged to the dty of Plitaliputra, which was 
his ancestral home. 

2. *' Putto se jfw saha dddhdhim " (Sukhabodha) . Cf. Shakespeare : 

“ The midwife wondered ; and the women cried, 

‘ O, Jesus bless us, he is bom with teeth ! ’ 

And so I was ; which plainly signified 

That I should ^narl, and bite, and play the dog. 

Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so. 

Let hell make crook’d my mind to answer it/* 

(King Henry VI, pt. iii. Act V, Sc. vi ) - 

Kaufilya:, ‘ the Crooked One/ might have thought also on the same line as the 
dramatist puts it through Richard, Duke of Gloucester. 



EARLY LIFE OF CIIANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


591 


should be spared (‘ madoggaim jmssai 'tti). He then took the drastic step 
of scraping out the baby's teeth ( damta ghatthd) as signs of royalty. ? * At 
this, the saints foretold that Chanakya would then rule by a substitute 
(‘ ettahe vi bimbamtario rdyd bhavissdi 9 tti). 

As he grew up, Chanakya was educated in the fourteen branches of 
knowledge then extant, in all of which he became highly proficient (urnmu- 
khabdlabhdvma choddctea vijjdthdndni dgamiydni ). 3 4 5 6 When he had com- 
pleted his education, his father married him in a respectable Brahmaiia 
family ( bhaddamdhamkuldo bhajjd pariniyd ). s 

Chanakya's wife once went to her mothers place (nidigharani) to attend 
her brother’s marriage celebrated with great pomp. Her three sisters and 
their .aristocratic husbands ( khaddhaddriiyd ) also came to the function 
attired in the finest dress, jewellery, and ornaments . 0 As a contrast, Cha- 
nakya’s wife entered in tattered garments and without ornaments, but 
tearing on her body the necessary auspicious marks of a married woman. 
Seeing her dress, her sisters at once burst into laughter of scorn, together 
with the assembled guests . 7 There she remained alone all the time, for 
nobody cared the least for her. She returned home dejected and weeping. 
When Chanakya heard the details from her, he understood the cause of her 
insult, viz, his poverty (niddhmiattam ) , and swore that he would acquire 
wealth anyhow (‘ dhimam uvajjindmi kenavi tivaena ’ ) . 


3. According to the Buddhist tradition, Chanakya himself had his teeth re- 
moved. Cf. Moggallana : 

“ Mat u yd pi vacho suit'd Chdrtakkabrdhmano sakam | 
ad h i matt as in e hail d ddiham bhinddpayi lato % ’ |! 

( Mahdmmsa , v. 6&fr-u0a). 

1. The fourteen vijjdlhdnas (branches of knowledge), according to the Jainas, 
are: (1) Six Amgas (subjects'), viz, (i) Sikkhd ( Phonetics), (ii) V agar ana 
(Grammar), (iii) Nirulta (Vedic Etymology), (iv) chhamda (Prosody), (v) Joisa 
(Astronomy), and (vi) Kappa (Ritualism); (2) Four Veyas (Vedas), (.3) 
Mbnamsd (System of Philosophy); (4) Ndyavilthara (Logic), (5) Pur ana (Mytho- 
logy; and (6) Dhammasattha (Legal treatise). (Cf, Sughab . on Utlaraj, iii. 1. 
Kautilya's Arthasdstra , Bk. i. Ch. iii. 

5. it may be noted here that, except the Jaina, no other tradition does ever* 
adumbrate that Chanakya had the good fortune of taking to himself a wife. Hi? 
haired for the fair sex is perhaps indicated in one of the aphorisms which is com- 
monly attributed to him. What had actually led Chanakya to be a misogynist 
i* not known, but at least two historical works in Pali literature, represent him 
as the ugliest human specimen and, hence, un negotiable in matrimonial market ! 
( Vainsatth p. 120, ll. 0-11. e.g. Sinh. Ed. ; Moggallana's Mahdv. v. 70b-71a). Accord- 
ing to a later Jaina tradition, the wife of Chanakya was a * dark beauty ’ (sydmd) 
named Yasomatl ( Bjhatkathdkosa , cxliii. 5). 

6. The word " khaddhdddniya ” which occurs in the Avassaya Cfiunni as well 
as in the Sukhabadhd, may be translated as ‘aristocratic' (mahebhya) , in which 
sense it has also been taken by Hemachandr^ (Paris, viii. 203 ; Avas. Chun., p. 563). 

7. Paris., viii. 206-208. 



592 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


At that time King Nanda 8 used to distribute large charities among the 
Brahmanas ( diymna ) on the full-moon day of the month of Karttika (Kat- 
iiya-pimtimae ).° Chanakya proceeded to Pat.aliputra forthwith and reached 
there early in the morning of the appointed day. He then entered the palace 
and occupied the every first seat (asane padhame nismmo) which was, in fact, 
kept there permanently for the members of the royal family ( tani cha tassa 
palRvaissa rdulassa sayu tkavijjai -Sukhab. ; tarn cha tassa sfdliydtassa ran- 
utssa said t havijjali- A vas. Chun.) King Nanda entered the hall accom- 
panied by his son, Prince Siddhaputra, 10 who asked the maid in attendance 
to give another seat to Chanakya. When it was given, Chanakya placed on 
it his drinking pot. He also placed his other belongings, to wit, the staff 
( damdayam ). the rosary (gamtliyori 7), and the sacred thread (janno- 


8. He is evidently the ninth king of his dynasty. Cf. " Tao Pddalipultam. 

tat limit hi Namdavahse navamo Namdardyd .** Sukhab. on U tiara), ii. 17. Sec 

also Avas. Sut . [Vrtt.], p. 693. 

9. According to orthodox Buddhist tradition as recorded in the Vamsatlhap - 
pakdsim , the royal charities were distributed daily and not on any particular day 
of the year ( Vdmsatth., p. 120, It. 12-19. Sinh. Ed.) From the same source it. 
also appears that, for the proper distribution of his charities, which amounted h> 
over a ciore annually. King Nanda (Dhanananda) had set up an ‘ Alms Depart- 
ment* {Dana gnu) and vested the power to control it in a ‘Board* (SarngJia) 
specially constituted for the purpose. It appears further that only the eminent and 
learned Brahmanas could be the members of that Board and that the most lea lut'd 
Brahmana scholar or one who would be held as such by those members, was to bo 
elected its ‘Chairman* {Samghabmhmana) . It was one of the duties of the 
Chairman, who appears also to have acted as the Controller of the Alms Depart- 
ment, to supervise daily the distribution of charities in the royal ‘ Alms-hall * 
where the king himself also used to come from time to time for the very same 
purpose. The Chairman appears to have held his office on the express condition 
that he would resign, if he were defeated in scholastic disputations by another Brah- 
mana of much superior learning. 

It was the misfortune of the last Nanda king that Chanakya came so far as 
Fataliputra to have polemical discussions in that great centre of learning, suc- 
ceeded in removing the Chairman of the Board of Almoners by talking advantage 
of the condition specified above, and occupied his place. As the king could not 
stand the repulsive appearance of the new Chairman, he practically had hirn 
removed by force from the alms-hall. He thus incurred the malice of that astute 
politician and brought ruin on himself and his family (Cf. Moggallana's Mahdv 
v. 72&-830 ; Vanisatth p. 120, ll 12-40 Simh. Ed.) 

10. According to the Jainas, Siddhaputra (Siddfiaputta) was the son of the 
last Nanda king. Hemachandra refers to him as 1 Nandaputra * but does not men- 
tion his name (Paris, viii. 218). According to the orthodox Buddhist tradition, 
the name of the son and heir-apparent of the last Nanda was Parvata, while the 
same, according to the Brikatkathd tradition, was Hiranyagupta or Harigupta 
( Vamsatth ., pp. 121 ff. Sinh. Ed.; Moggallana’s Mahdv., v. 86 IT. ; Chattcrjee, 
C. D., hid. Cult., i. pp. 220 and 223). 

The ninth Nanda probably had only one son, for in all the sources there is 
reference to only one, though mentioned under different names. 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


593 


vmymi) on three more seats as they were offered to him. Find- 
ing that Chaaiakya was vain enough not to vacate the royal seat and was even 
appropriating the other seats, the maid had no patience with his insolent 
behaviour and made him get up by a kick V dhitlho ? tti nichchudho }, 
whereupon he flew into a rage and uttered the following vow in the presence 
of the whole assembly : 

“ Like the high wind laying low by its invincible velocity the tallest 
tree, I will uproot. Nanda with all his riches and retinue and throw him 
down with the overspreading branches of his family in all its progeny and 
kinsmen.’’ 11 


11. “ Kosctia hJnilyaischa nibuddharnuhnh I 

jnit raise ha mitraischa virrtddhasakkam ( j 
utpafya Nandam purivartaydnri ! 
ma had non mil t>dyutivo'i*ravci*ah ” \\ 

{Suk hah. on Ullaruj. ii.i. 1. Instead of ‘ mahddrumam we find ‘ Italdddru 
wwii' in the An assay ft Chumii (p. S(YA ) . The former is undoubtedly a better read- 
ing.] 

Tlie imprecation uttered by Chanakya, which has hern differently c.\ pressed 
by different, writers, forms an interesting study by itself. In Jaina literature, it 
eeeurs for the first lime in the Avassaya Chimni in the form as given above, which 
luiv been apparently copied by Devcndraganin in his Sukkabadhd with slight 
unification. In his }\iribishlapmvan (viii. 225), the celebrated Jaina writer 
Pi-inachandra puis it as : 

“ Sakosa bh rityu, m sasuhritputrarh sabala vahamcm | 

N and a man niulayis^a m i mnhdvdyunva druynam ” (j 


One will be interested to note that, although in the Avassaya Chiotnt and the 
S jhhabadhd, the story of Chanakya and Chandragupta occurs in Prakrit, the inr- 
r-fccatiun as we find in them, is couched in Sanskrit. Evidently, this change has 
lx en made under the belief that a learned Brahma na like Chanakya is not expected 
tv -pi'ak in a language, at. least in public, which i: considered to be unrefined and 
intended for the masses. No such linguistic bias, however, i>j to be observed 
m Buddhist literature, for the two specimens of Die imprecation which is alleged 
to have been uttered by Chanakya at the time of his expulsion from the alms- hall, 
are in Magadhi (Pali). Thus, the annony mous author of the Vanisatthappakdsim 
Pir*i half of the! 101 h century A.D.), on the basis of the tradition as recorded in 
die two oldest Sinhalese commentaries, viz, the Sihalatthakatha of the Thcrava- 
&ns (3rd cent. B.c.) and the U liar a v ih draff haka l hd of the Dhammaruchikas (r. 
cent. A.D.), to which he had access, translates it from the original Sinhalese as 
Imaya cha chdturantdya pat ha vi yd Nandi no vaddhi ndmd md hotu li" (p. 120, 
f '*8-39. Sinh. Ed. ; the form * Nandi no ’ which stands evidently for 1 Nandassa \ 
hern retained, probably because it was to be found in the originals). Incident- 
ri,, y si may be pointed out here that, through this form of imprecation, which is 
ike oldest on record, an interesting side-light has been thrown on the fact that 
div 1 Nandas, who were of Siidra origin, were contemptuously called ' Nan dins ’ 
b * v Bnihinanas and also possibly by others of higher social standing. 

Following the traditions of the Theravxdins and the Dhammaruchikas, the 
djronicler Moggallana writes : 

39 



594 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Chanakya burning with indignation left the city of Pataliputra (niggao 
nay mao). He recalled the prophecy made about him by the Jaina saints 
that he would rule by proxy dsuyafn cha lena, 'binibamtario rdyd hohami * 
tti) 1 '. ("While wandering about in the guise of a Parivrdjaka ( Parivvdyagali - 
ngenam ) Ki in search of a person who would be lit for kingship, he came to the 

“ Tasmim hud d ho samufthaya yanhasuitan cha chhindiya | 
k undikam patihahnitvd indakilamhi tdvade || 

‘ V tuldhimdhotu tassevu * abhtsappesi brdhmano " | 

( Mahdv v. 81-82#). 

12. “ Brmbamtana 9 (Skt. bimbdntariiah) literally means 'screened by mir- 
ror \ Haribhadra, Devon dragan in, and Hemachandra appear to have used it in 
the sense of 4 a substitute ’ which is evidently its secondary meaning [Pans., viii. 
227). 

13. In the Dhcrrmasutras , the terms 4 Parivrajaha ’ and ' Bhtkshu ’ have been 
applied to refer to the Brahman as sometimes of the third and sometimes of the 
fourth Stage of Life called Asram'a (Gautama, iii. 2 ; Apaslamba, ii. 9. 21. 7 ; 
Vasishtha. vii. 2; Baudliayana, ii. 6. 11. 12). The Parivrdjakas are, thus, the 
Brahrruinas who have renounced their worldly life and, as the term indicates ( pwi ■ 
v raj-aka - a wanderer), have embraced the life of vagrancy. They are broadly 
distinguished as the E had and i has and the Tridandikas, according to the nature, of 
the staff, i.c., whether its top was single or triple, carried by them as an emblem 
of asceticism. In ancient literature, they have been represented as itinerant ascetic- 
philosophers, noted for their versatility, wisdom, and saintliness and visiting by 
turns the chief centres of culture, such as Vaisall, Champa. Snavasti, and Raja- 
griha, in quest of truths relating to Life and Death, Atman and the Supreme Bliss, 
Brahman and the Universe, and of their discussions with their comrade* in learn- 
ing. Although ‘ Parivrdjaka ', like 1 Char aka' is' a generic name for the Wander- 
ing ascetics in the Brahmanical system, in the Buddhist, and Jaina texts, the 
term is applied to both the Brahmaiia and the non-Brahmapa ascetics ( Mujjhim'i 
Mkdya . ii. pp. 22 ff. and 29 ff. ; for the Brdhmana Parivrdjaka . ib ■, pp. 4»lff. 
I\ T. S. ; etc.). Thus, the Jaina U vavaiya, or U papddika-Sutra (erroneously called 
Aupaputika-Sutra ) , while admitting the life in Bmkmahka as good for a kalpu. or 
cycle of existence ( Bambkaloe kappe devattde uvavattdro bhavamti ), to be the 
supreme end of all the Parivrdjakas , distinguishes the Brdhmtma (Mdhanapariv- 
vayd) from the Kshatriya Parivrdjakas ( Kattiyaparivayd ) and divides them 
into seven classes, viz, (i) the followers of the Sarhkhya system of Kapila ( Sankhd 
Kdvild). (ii) the followers of the Yoga system of the Bhrigu school ijogl Bhiu- 
vvu ; the Bhurgava Yogins were probably the followers of Bhrigu, whose technique 
of meditation is enunciated in the Bhriguvalli of the Taittinyopanishad ) , (iii) the 
Hariisas (Harind). (iv) the Paramahariisas ( Par amah wsd), (v) the Bahiidafcas 
(Bahu-udagd ) , (vi) the Kutibratas (Kulivvayd ) , and (vii) the Krishoa-parivra- 
jakas ( Kanha pa riv vayd ) ( U vavaiya, §§ 76 & 81). In certain non- Brah manual 
works, there are also references to the Parivrdjikds or female Wandering ascetics, 
both Brahmaiia and non-Brahmana, who used to take part also in the intellectual 
life of the country by discussions in philosophical circles. 

With regard to the dress and outfit which mark out a Parivrdjaka (Parivvfv 
yagaUrhga), so far as one could see them from outside, perhaps the best poetic 
description is to be found in the Rdrpdyaiia ( Aranyakanda , xlvi, 2-3). That epic, 
while laying stress on the fact that a Parivrdjaka isf a Brahmana (ib., xlvi. 30; 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


595 


village of the Peacock-rearers ( Moraposagd ) in the service of King Nanda. 
At that time, the daughter of their headman ( mayahara ) was expecting 
a child. Chaiiakya promised to appease her pregnancy-longing (do halo) of 
drinking the moon on condition that, should she give birth to a male child, 
he must be made over to him. As the father of the girl, finding no other 
alternative, accepted the condition imposed on him, Chapakya, too, satisfied 
her desire by a clever contrivance. He then left the place for an unknown 
destination. 

In due course of time, a son was bom to the daughter of the headman, 
when her father, remembering the wfciy in which her longing was satisfied, 
gave the name of Chandragupta (‘ Moon-covered ’) 14 to the new-born babe 

xlvii. 2), describes him as an ascetic, attired in saffron coloured robe 
{ kdshdya), having a tuft of hair on his 1 head (Sikht), wearing sandal ( upanahi ). 
and carrying an umbrella ( chhaltri ), a staff ( yashti ), and a water-pot ( havian- 
dalu). Articles not mentioned by its author are apparently those hidden under 
the upper robe, such as the brahmasdtra (sacred thread), the kaupina (loin-cloth), 
and the kafiveshtana (girdle), as well as those which could be optionally carried, 
such as the vrjaly (seat of Ku$a grass), the pair a (vessel), and the sikya (loop or 
swing madc^of rope) (Govindaraja on the Ramayana, Aranyakantfa, xfvi. 3). The 
non-Brahmana ParivTdjakas wore different kinds of dress, some of them, like the 
Digambaras, even going naked ( Achdakas or N aggdehariyas ) . 

Unlike the non-Brahmai.ia Parivrdjakas , dubbed 1 v r ishalapr a v r a jit a * by Kau- 
filya {At thus., Bk. iii. Ch. xx), such as the Sakyas or Sakyaputtras (Buddhists), the 
Ajivakas (a sect of the naked ascetics), and the Nirgranthas (Jainas), who belong- 
ed to different castes including even the Chasidfibs, and lived in organized religious 
communities, the Brahnia.ua Parivrajakus lived by themselves as individuals and 
not as members of any fraternity ( Gana or Samyha). They did not believe in 
organization as an aid lo spiritual life, which depended more upon ones own 
efforts in privacy aifl5 in solitude. AJJ classes of Parivrajakas were, however, at 
one in taking to the life of Wanderer as the indispensable requisite for spiri- 
tual life. A limit to their wandering was set only by the conditions of the season. 
In rains, they had u> keep to fixed habitations, lest by wandering they should tread 
upon sprouting life and be thus led to Pins' of violence. 1 here were abo 
codes of discipline for each of these classes of ascetics', viz. the Paltinokkha lor the 
Buddhists, the Ayaramga for the Jainas, and the Bhikshu-SiUra of different schools 
for the Rrahmaflas (P&gini, iv. 3. 110, 111). 

14. There is a slight discrepancy between the Buddhist and the Jaina tradi- 
tion with regard to the family and ancestry of Chandragupta Maurya. According to 
tile former, he belonged to the family of the Chief of the * Peacock-clan * (Mariya) 
and his father was a Chief himself, while according to the latter, his* maternal 
grandfather was the Headman ( mayahara) of the community of * Peacock- rearers * 
i Moraposagd ) . The later Jaina writers thus considered Chandragupta to belong 
to a professional caste and not to any tribe or dan, from which it may be assumed 
that they had no authentic information about the nature of the connection, if any, 
between the peacock and the name of the emperor a family. There is also nothing 
fin record to show what the earlier Jaina writers knew about the same. 

Whatever might be the significance of the clan-name Moraposagd (Skt. 
M ayurapas hakdh ) occurring in the Avassaya Chunni and the bukkobodhv , it is 
perhaps the only sensible interpretation of the Pali appellation Moriyd that has 



5% 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


come to our notice so far. In Pali literature, the word Moriya occurs invariably 
as the name of a Kshatriya tribe ; and it appears from the Vamsat t happakdsim 
t.p. 119, II. 10-16. Sinh. Ed.), the Makabodhivahisu (p. 98, P. T. S.) f the Mahd - 
vanmi of Moggallana (v. 94/>-101tf) and other Pali works that the Moriyas were 
a branch of the Sakyas who had separated themselves from the main body, shortly 
before the death of the Buddha. The tradition is so persistent and is also so 
consistent that it may be difficult to see eye to eye with Prof. B. M. Barua, when 
he brushes it aside as the result of the 1 Snkyti-phobia ? of the Buddhists (IruL 
Cult ., x. p. 32). When the Kosalan king Vidudabha threatened to massacre the 
Sakyas, some of the Sakyan nobk\s along with their families and followers entered 
into a forest of Pippala trees ( Pipphalivana) somewhere in the sub-montane tract 
of the Himalayas, while others migrated to other parts of Northern India. Those 
who had taken refuge in the aforesaid forest, adopted the name Moriya (from 
Pali mora, 4 a peacock’ ), because of the abundance of peacocks in their new settle- 
ment. Strange though it may seem, the adoption of a totemistic name by those 
migrants was nothing but an artifice to avert the impending national calamity, by 
passing themselves off as one of the many Austro- Asiatic tribes 1 living in the hills 
and jungles of the vast Gangetic basin, such as the Ajas (Goat Clan), the Sigrus 
(Horse-radish Clan), the V a yam sir, (Bird Clan), the Tarakshas (Hyena Clan), 
the Kulirigas (Sparrow-hawk Clan) and the like, mentioned in ancient literature . 
But this 1 clever ruse to conceal the identity was entirely misunderstood by the 
later authorities recording the Moriyan tradition, as is evident from the fact that, 
the Jaina writers were led to believe that the Moriyas were a community of 
’ Peacock-raisers \ ( M oraposagd ) . Grammatically speaking, the Prakrit. 1 Mom 

posaga’ is a rational interpretation of the Pali Moriya, if we stand only on the 
etymological meaning of the latter. 

Dr. F. W. Thomas draws our attention to the fact that the surname Maury a 
as borne by Chandragupta, is explained by the Indian authorities as meaning 
‘ son of Mum J , who is described a.-; a concubine of the king Nanda, while “ a more 
flattering account, makes the Mauryas an Himalayan off-hoot of the noble sect of 
the Sakyas, the race of the Buddha” {Comb. Hist, oj hid., i. p. 470). How for a 
Hindu king, it could be a flattering account, whether more or less, to be described 
as the son of a concubine passes comprehension, though we admit that the same 
was not the case with some of the non- Hindu rulers of India. To what extent the 
Hindu rulers were, sensitive to the purity of their descent, is evident even from 
the fact that led to the massacre of the Sakyas mentioned above. But surely all 
the Indian authorities do not agree that the emperor Chandragupta Maury a was 
the son of Mum. While some of them inform us that he was the grandson of 

Mura, others want us to believe that he was* her son. We are also at a loss to 

find out, where exactly Mura lias been mentioned as a concubine of King Nanda 
as stated by Dr. Thomas ; for, so far as we know, she has been represented cither 
as the queen* of the last Nanda king or as the morganatic, wifef of King Nanda 

alias Sarvarthaskldhi, the founder of the royal house* of the Nandas. But can wc 

possibly accept the theory that Chandragupta or his father was called Maury a. 
because he was the * son of Mura * ? According to Panini, the regular metronymic 

* Cf. Vishnu- Pur ana Commentary of Batnagarbha <" Chandragu plant” : Nan- 
darvaiva pal ny ant many a Murdsamjhasya put rath . Maurydnam pralkamam ). This 
work does not appear tj» be earlier than the first half of the eighteenth cent. 

tCf. U pod gala in the M ud ? drdkshflsa Commentary of Dhuodhiraja and also 
Ravinar taka’s Chdnakyakatha (v. 9). 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURY A 


597 


form for the son of Mara h Mattrah (iv. 1. 113 ; cl. Si:/ dh. Kama.. 1116), but not 
Maury ah which is the only regular patronymic form for the 4 son of Mura’ (iv. 
1- 151 J see also Ganapotha on the same ; Siddh. Kaum 1175).* We are, thus, 
left to choose between the iwo origins of the surname Maury a . It may be taken 
cither as the patronymic of the * son of Mura * and of his lineal descendants or 
as the phonetic variant in Sanskrit, of the Paii surname Mariya (mo*— mau ; 
riya --rya). None of the early Sanskrit writers, in whose works the word 
Maury a has been actually found to occur, lias taken it: to be a metronymic form 
as has been done by their successors belonging to the sixth cenl. a.d. and after. 

Tn Sanskrit literature., the word Mauryu occurs for the first time in the 
Mahdbhdshya ni Pylahjali (c. 150 b.c. cf. Patanjali on Panini, v. 3. 99) and 
laier on, in the historical portion of the original LLUarishya-Pinma (<'. 260 A.D.) 
to signify j h\; Imperial Mist try u dynasty. As the word M or i vfi i pi. ^ has been 
found to occur twite in the original Buddhist Canon, viz, in the posbNii vana por- 
tion of the Mahapai inibbana *Sm tanta (Dipjia-tfikaya. ii. pp. 1G6-1G7. 1 J . T. S.) r 

compiled sometime between b.c. IK? and 383, and in the Nandaptla-valUiu ( Pc la- 
rat thu, p. 57. P. T. S.), composed about b.c. 217, there cannot possibly be any 
doubt that ii. is the oldest form of that tribal name wbkh has been differently 
represented in different languages, viz. Maurydh in Sanskrit. Miuiyfi Minna and 
Mart, and even Mmiyd, i£ Prakrit, and Maria in (heck (Hindi. Mm at and 
Mur do). 

I hc :Sv>riation of Chandrngupia's family with the peacock is not only evident 
from the. authoritative Buddhist and Jainn works, but also from the monuments 
ol the Maury an and the post Mau ryan period. 'the peacock ensign <>t the royal 
house of the Maurya?-, about Lour inches in length, has been found in the Lauriya- 
NaiuUmgaih pillar of Asoka, in the unpolished portion below the ring-like projeo 
tarn buried under the ground, and a pair of peacocks is to be .seen on either side 
i u the lowest architrave of the Hast Gateway (outer face) of the Great Stupa, at 
Sanchi, reprr.-A nting the scene of Asoka s visit to tin.* Bodhi-trcc. In the pairs 
of peacocks. Giunwoflel finds a special allusion to the Maurya dynasty, since the 
pcactxrk was the canting badge of that, royal family (Buddhist Art in India, p. 70 : 
cf. Monuments of Sanchi , Marshall and Fouchcr. ii. PI. *2, see the explanatory 
note ou the Bottom Lintel). 

In the narrow compos- of this fxiper, it will not be possible for us* to assess 
hjpther the historical value of the Buddhist tradition relating to the origin of 
Chandragupta, which Dr. F. W. Thomas has summarily dismissed as a ‘ flattering 
account We should, therefore, l>c content with examining two more facts which 
liave a direct bearing on the subject under discussion. Firstly, the Theravadins 
aver that the Mori y as as a separate tribe, came into existence shortly before the 
death of the Buddha : and their affirmation seems to receive valuable support 
from the fact that, unlike the other autonomous tribes, nowhere, in the sermons 
of that great saint, the Moriyas oven incidentally have been referred to. Secondly, 
the reason that appears to 'have led the later Sanskrit writers, viz, Visfikhadatta. 
Somadcva, Kshemendra, Iravi Chakyar, Ananta lvavi, phunejiraja, and Ratna- 
garbha, to assume that Chandragupta warf a scion of the Nanda family, is a pass- 

* This was pointed out by me to Dr. Radhakumud Mookerji, when he was 
writing his book on Chandragupta Maurya and His Times (see now p. 16). It may- 
be noted, here that the metronymic form Maureyah which we can have by the 
application of the rule “ Stubhyo dhak" £Piaa>., iv. 1. 120), is irregular in face of 
the rule “ Avjddhdbhyo nadimdmshlbhyastamuiMikdbhyah” (Pan., iv. 1. 113). 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


598 

( Chathdagutto se namath kayam). Chandragupta grew up among the 
village boys whom he dominated by his superior bearings and signs of great- 
ness. Chanakya happened to come to the village again after a long inter- 
val, which he had profitably employed by secretly collecting gold by means 
of metallurgical process in which he was an adept (dhaubildni ) , 15 He was 
particularly struck by Chandragupta’s behaviour, which seemed to mark him 
out for kingship. He saw him already playing the role of a king at games 
with the other village boys, like one proficient in statecraft (rayaniie), and 
tested him by asking for some present . 1 ' 1 As the boy was prepared to grant 
it then and there, Chariakya asked for the cows but feared, lest he might 

age in the Purdftas, which tells us that the rulers' after Mahapadma Nanda 4 will be 
of Sudra origin' (* lulah piabhrili rdjdno bhavishydh Sudrayonayah ') . The vague- 
ness of this statement coupled with the fact that the word Maurya cannot be 
equaled grammatically to the Pali word Moriya , must have led those later Sanskrit 
writers to conclude that both the Nandas and the Mauryas were Sudras. They 
should have, however, borne in mind that a strong champion of the vartjdsrama - 
dhartna like Kautilya, who strove so hard to exterminate the Sudra royal family, 
would be least expected to raise- a Sudra to the throne (cf. An has., Bk. i. Ch. iii : 
Bk< viii. Ch. ii ; and Colophon), and that the word Maurya can never be usifd in 
Sanskrit as a regular metronymic form for the ‘ son of Mura \ 

The introduction of Murii as a historical character in Sanskrit literature, 
whether as the mother or the grandmother of Chandragupta, to explain the 
surname Maurya , is a hoax that has confounded the Indian and European scholars 
alike : and the sooner we realize this mischief of the later pandits, the better for 
our successors in the held of historical research. 

15. Cf. Hemachandra : 

“ Suvamoparjanudhiyd Clumakyo 'pi fwibhraman | 
gaveshayitumarebhe dhdtu vdd a visa rad an j| 

(Paris., viii. 241) 

Chapakya’s proficiency in Metallurgy ( Sulbadhatusdstra) and Inorganic Che- 
mistry is amply borne out by the knowledge exhibited by him in his Arlhasustra 
(Bk. ii. Chaps, xii, xiii, and xiv). The Sulbad hat usds Ira referred to in the Artha- 
sdstra is no longer extant. Chanakya also appears to have utilized his knowledge 
of metals, non-metals, and their compounds in studying their effects on the human 
system and to have written a separate treatise incorporating the results of the 
same. That valuable work had disappeared from India long ago without leaving 
any trace behind, though it was known to the early Arab writers to whose country 
it had migrated like so many other Sanskrit works (Zachariae, Wiener Zeitschrift 
fur die JCunde des Margenlandes , xxviii. p. 206 f. ; the Arabia form of the name 
4 Chapakya * is 4 Sanaq ') . 

16. Cf. Moggallana : 

41 Ddrakeh ’ eva nikkhamma Chandragutto kumdrako | 
gopaladarakd disva ndyakam akarurh tato || 

Rdfakt(dv ha yarn kilath kifanto so kumdrako | 
sendpati amachche cha katva goptUaddrake || 
kehichi upardjddi-adhikdram akdrayt [ 
majjhe tesarii sayam eva khattiyo va nisldati ’* 1 1 

( Mahdv ., v. 119*112). 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


599 


not bo able to carry them unopposed. Chandragupta retorted that the earth 
was for the heroes (vlrabhojja puhai). The answer impressed Chanakya 
so much with the boy’s quality for kingship that he could not resist the temp- 
tation of enquiring about his identity from his playmates. They informed 
him that Chandragupta was the son of a Parivrdjaka (‘ Parivvdyagaputto 
esrt). Thus, coming to know that Chandragupta was the same boy whose 
mother had been helped by him in the guise of a Parivrdjaka, Chanakya 
promised to make him king (‘ jdmu jd le rdydnam karemi *). He then made 
away with the boy forthwith from that place (so tern samarn pa Ido). 17 

With the riches he had accumulated by his knowledge of metallurgy, 
Chanakya now began preparations for overthrowing the. king Nanda.* 3 By 
spending money lavishly, he recruited men ( logo milio) for his army and 
invested ( rohiyam ) the city of Fatal iputra. King Nanda, however, with 
his superior military strength, surrounded the army of Chanakya and com- 
pletely destroyed (bhaggo) his vastly inferior forces. At this sudden and 
unexpected reverse of fortune, both Chandragupta and Chanakya took to 
flight with their army scattered. The king then sent some of his officers 
on horseback in their pursuit (asschim pachchhao laggd puma) with a view 
to putting an end to their ambitious career. When one of the pursuers; was 
about to overtake them, Chanakya concealed Chandragupta in a tank that 
was near and thickly overgrown with lotus (paumimsamde chhuhbhittd ), 
and himself assumed the guise of a washerman ( rayao jdo ). 1<J When the 

17. According to the Buddhist tradition, Chandragupta was taken by Chapakya 
to his own place of residence ( attano vusanaltkdnam netvd ), i.e., the city of Taxila, 
for education ( Vamsatth ., p. 122, 11. 12-13, Sinh. Ed.). 

18. According to Mogga liana and the anonymous author of the Vamsalthap- 
jukusim, Clianakya manufactured fraudulent silver coins ( kahdpana ) and buried 
them somewhere in the Vindhyan forest ( Vmjhd(avi ). The vast sum of money 
thus collected, was subsequently utilized by him in building up a huge army for 
the conquest of the Nanda kingdom ( Vamsalth .. p. 121, II. 17-20, Sinh. Ed.) 

Cf. Moggallana : 

44 Ataviiii tattha vasitva sambhare pariyesiya | 

Katva kahapajiarasiih’ sStikotippamanakaih ** || 

(Mahov., v. 92) 

19. Here we find a glaring discrepancy between the Parisishfaparvan and 
the Sukhabodhd. According to the former { Paris., viii. 257-278), King Nanda 
had sent two horsemen one after another in pursuit of Chanakya and Chandra- 
gupta. Before the first ptrauer named Sadi (!) could overtake them, Chanakya 
asked Chandragupta to conceal himself in a tank that was near and thickly 
overgrown with IoluaI, while he himself sat down on its bank in the guise of 
an ascetic. When the horseman reached there and asked Chanakya, whether 
he had seen a young man running off, the latter only pointed to the tank but gave 
no reply. The signal thus given enabled the horseman to understand where Chan- 
dragupta exactly was. When he removed his srword and armour and was about 
to plunge into water, Chanakya instantly seized the sword and cut him into two. 
Chandragupta then came out of the wateV, and the two made off with the horse 



600 


B. a LAW VOLUME 


horseman readied there and asked him about Chandragupta, Chanakya point- 
ed to the tank and said, “ He has dived into water and is still hiding there/’ 
When the horseman spotted Chandragupta (asavarena dill ho) t he im- 
mediately made over his horse to Chanakya and put down the sword 
( khaggam mukkam ) . But no sooner did he remove his armour with the 
intention of plunging into water ( java nigumdio jaloyarande kamchugam 
mellai) than Chanakya seized the sword and cut him into two ( khaggam 
dh cl lima duhakao). On being signalled, Chandragupta came out, and after- 
wards the two hurriedly left that place {paid yd). On the way, Chfuiakya asked 
Chandragupta. what he had felt, when the horseman had been directed to 
the tank. The boy cooly said, *’ Pei haps it is good, for my master knows 
best” (‘ hanidi evam cheva sohonam havai , ajjo cheva jdna'i ’ Hi). The 
reply highly satisfied Chanakya ; for it not only convinced him of the worthi- 
ness of the boy for the crown, but also of his unflinching devotion and loyalty 
towards him as his preceptor ( tao nena jam yam. ‘ jo go, na esa vipari- 
namdi ’ ) . ,Ji - 

In course of their wanderings, the two came to a village where in a 
certain house, they heard a boy crying, because his fingers had been scorched 
in his attempt to eat hot rice-gruel ( vilevl ) right from the middle of the plate 

of die hapless pursuer. While still continuing their flight, Chanakya asked Chyn- 
riragupta, what he had thought, when the horseman had been directed to the tank. 
The boy coolly said, w> Perhaps it is good, for my master knows best." The rejviy 
highly satisfied Chanakya, /or he was convinced that, even as king, Chandragupta 
would remain loyal and devoted to him. When the second horseman sent by King 
Natida was about to overtake them, Chanakya asked Chandiagupta to plunge irit-j 
the tank which they had reached by that lime, ami also scared away a wash tr man 
Burn that place by saying that the. king was extremely annoyed with his guild 
and that he would be killed by that horseman coming at Lop speed, should lie 
remain there any longer. When the bewildered washerman fled leaving his bundle- 
behind, Chanakya took his place. On being questioned as be foie, Chanakya direct- 
ed the horseman to the tank, and when the latter was about to dive after remov- 
ing his sword and armour, he suffered the same fate as the other. 

It may be noted here that the story of Sadi and Chanakya as given in the 
Pariiishlaparvtirt, is not to be met with in the Sukhahodhd. In the Artist}'** 
Chunrii. we come across another such story, but, unfortunately, it is difficult to 
form an idea even of its bare outline, because of the brevity. Haribhadra, Deven 
dragaijin, and Hem a chandra, l<x>, have also taken no notice of it, apparently be- 
cause of tiie same difficulty. Jn the Chunni, the story occurs in the following form : 
" Chanidailtto ya pautnasare nibuddho. inio upaspfisaU (?), sanndc hhanati . boh- 
yalli . uitmna nammli" (p. 564). We do not find any possibility of equaling it 
with the story of Sadi as* given above. 

20. Here follows a fantastic story common to both the Avassaya and 
U f Lara jjhay ana traditions. It tells us how Chandragupta was famished for want 
of food and how his life was saved by Chanakya. So says Devendraganin* 
“ Pachchhd ChamdaguUo chhuhdio. Chanakko tarn (havettd bhatlassatigao blhdh 
4 md ettka mjjejjd \ Modotlassa bdhim niggayas&a poffani phaliyarh dahtkurarn 
gahdya. gao . Jimntio ddrao Cf, Avas. Cfhu p. 564. 



EARI.Y LIFE OF CHANORAGUPTA MAURY A 


601 


in which it had been served to him . 21 The mother of the boy, an old lady 
Uheri ), who had also served the same frugal meal to her other sons, scolded 
him saying that he was as stupid as Chanakya and did not know how to 
eat (‘ Chariakkamamgula ! b hot turn pi na jfinasi’). Chajaakya, who was 
exceedingly surprised to hear his name mentioned and the compliments paid 
to him in so glowing a term, appeared before the old lady and asked her 
what she meant by that comparison. Then said she, “ Don’t you know that 
that fool of a Chanakya without securing his rear, rashly invested the capital 
of Nanda with an inadequate force and brought defeat on himself? lie 
should have started the campaign right from the frontiers, which he should 
have fust consolidated (‘ pasdtji padkamath gheppmhli') before advancing 
into the interior of the kingdom. So this greenly hoy also, instead of eating 
i hi: rice-gruel gradually from the sides, hurriedly eats into the hotter middle, 
with his lingers, which are thus burnt.”- 

Profiting by tier suggestion Until pmibhdviya >, Chanakya now altered 
i as strategy. He then went to Himavatkuta {Htmavuiiilakfulam) and made 
alliance ( nwlllkayu ) with its ruler named Par vat a {Par van tuyii) by promi- 
sing that the kingdom of the dispossessed Nanda would b? equally divided bet- 
wen him and Chandragupta V Namdarajjam samam samenam vibhath - 
juyumo ? ) .-■* Paivata agreed to the terms laid down by him i patlivannoik 

21. [Icmachandra takes tile in ( Skt. rile pi, ‘ rice-gruel ’) in the sense of 
mhbd (probably the same as the Hindi rnba ) . li might be. a preparation of granu- 
lated flour cooked with milk and sugar {Paris., viii. 292, 2% i . 

22. For the BuddhKl version of the story of the. old woman and her sore so e 
\ aw salt imppukdaim (p. 123, //. 6 16. Sirih. Fd. } and Mogga liana s Mahavatiisa 
* v . .141-146) . 

23. According to the Buddhist tradition, Paivata was Hie sun of King Dhnna- 
naiuia iVarhsalth., p. 121. /. 9. Sinh. Kd.». In the Btahmrmical tradition, he 
figures under l.h«* names of Parvataku ( 1 Mountain :c.r ’ ) , Parvatcndra ( Ruler at 
1,1 u Mountains’), and Parvalesa (‘Lord of the Mountains \) : and the sltory as 
given by the dramatist Visfikhadatta in his Mudrdrdkshasa (second half of the 
<»th century A.i>. ), the poet and actor Iravi Chakyar alias Ravinnrtaka in his C liana- 
kyukhthii . ( c. 1016 .U! ( the poet and pseudo-historian Ananta Kavi in his Mucha- 
ruksh usa pur e asunkut h ti (*:. 1600 A.r>. ), and the commentator Dhundhiraja m hi;- 
Mudrarakshmauyakhya <a.i>. 1713-1 1 ) represents him as a MU'dichha and the ruler 
of the Mlochdihas, whose kingdom lay at a distance of abort 900 miles north 
(? north-west ) of Pa talipot! a ( Palj&ptd i fidudh'hydm sal a vo jane). Being duped 
by ClfcTinakya with tlic false hope of getting a share of the 'Nanda kingdom, h. 
invaded Magadha with his* army composed of the Yavanas (Creeks), Sakas 
.Scythians), Kambojas (? itido-Iianians), Parasikas' (Iranian- ) . Kiniias (tribes- 
men of Tibet o- Borman origin). Khasas (polyandrous tribesmen of Tchu-C.arlnval), 
Knliitas ( Kolia* of the western Himalayas, originally of the Kulu valley), Sahara* 
t Austro- Asiatics), Ralhikaa (tribesmen of the north-west frontier), and Hu.ua*. 
and killed all the nine Nanda s in battle. He then ocaipied the city of Pufaiiputra 
? nd conspired with Rakshasa, the former minister of Lire Nanda*. to retain for 
himself the entire Nanda kingdom ; but tK'forc he could put: his plan into action, 
to lost his life from the effects of poison through physical contact with a vishatunya 



€02 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


teyu i) and promised to give him the military help required for the purpose. 
Then the combined forces of Parvata and Chandragupta invaded the territory 
of Nanda from its frontiers as planned before, and gradually* advanced into 
the interior. But their scheme received a complete setback, when they failed 
to occupy an important city which proved to be invulnerable oyaviumadhatto 
egatiha nay or am, na pwiai ) , because of its tutelary goddesses. Chaijakya 
then entered that city incognito in the guise of a Tridaiidin ascetic and saw the 
deities, the daughters of the god Indra, for whom it could not be conquered 
llmdakumariyao ditthdo, tasirii ianaena na padai ). 24 The citizens being 


(poison- maiden), who was, in fact, seni by Rakshasa to kill Chandragupta but was 
passed on by Chanakya to that treacherous Mlechchha king for the very same, 
purpose. 

Hermann Jacobi identifies Parvata with Parva, the eleventh king of the 
Kirata dynasty of Nepal, as mentioned in the Baud dhapdrvat iyavariisavaft, on the 
ground that in the reign of the seventh king Jitedasti, the Buddha visited Nepal, 
and in that of the fourteenth, Sthunka, Asnka also visited that country (Paris., 
2nd Ed., pp. Ixxv-lxxvi : cf. hid. Ant., vii. p. 90; xiii. p. 412). Parva! might have 
been a contemporary of Chandragupta, for Sthunka, great-grandson of the former, 
and Asoka, grandson of the latter, were contemporaries. 

While we do not question the historicity of Parva alias Pahchem, the 11th 
Kirata king of Gokarna, it passes comprehension, how an astute politician and 
strategist like Chanakya could count so much on the military assistance of a bar- 
barous Mongoloid ruler of a hill-s'tate for overthrowing the last Nanda king, when 
the war-veterans under Alexander, who had brought under their heels the vast 
tract of Asia stretching from the Hellespont to the Hyphasis, wavered for want 
of confidence in their success against the most powerful Xandrames, King of the 
Prasioi and the Gangaridai, and ultimately retired almost from the frontier of his 
kingdom. That makes us suspect whether the laLcr Jaina writers (c. 2fXV.il 50 a.d.) 
have tmly depicted the court tradition of the Imperial Mauryas, when they re- 
presented Parvata to be ‘a mountain-chief' { pdrvaliko raja) and * the ruler of the 
Himalayas* ( Himavatkulaparlhivah) . Anas. Slit- Writ, i, p. 434; Paris., viii. 338; 
cf. Sukhab. 14 .... gao Himavamtakudarh . tatlha Pavvaa rdyd' 9 \ Av assay a Chunni, 
p. 564). There is no information on record to show what the earlier Jaina writers 
knew about Parvata ; nor is there any reference to that king in the Kalhd litera- 
ture of the Jainas. 

24. The lndrakumdns, 4 Daughters of Indra ’, who are otherwise unknown to 
Hindu mythology, have been identified by Hemachandra with the Saptamdtphas > 

4 Seven Mother-goddesses' (Paris., viii. 303; Anas. Chun., p. 564; Sukhab . on 
IJttaraj. iii. 1.). Oddly enough, there are two groups of the Saptamdtphas , one, 
according to the Mahdbhdrata (ii*. 229. 10) , viz, Kfikl, Malinl., Bpmhita, 

Arya, Palala, and Vaimitra, and the other, according tp the Purdnas (Agni, Matsya, 
Markandeya, Varaha, Devi, etc.) and certain religious works of the Saivas, viz* 
Brahma#! (also Brahml) Mahcsvari, Kaumari, Vaish#av!, Varahl, Indrani (also 
Aindri), and Chamuruja ; and it is difficult to ascertain which particular group was 
admitted by the Jainas to be ‘ the daughters of Indra.' Both the groups/ of 
Saptamatjikds are believed to be the nurses or protectors of Skanda, s ton of Siva 
and the War-god of the Hindu pantheon ; but while in Saivism, the second group 
is worshipped with Skanda, we have no evidence? to testify to the worship of the 
first group along with the same god. It may be noted here that with the excep- 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


603 


unable to bear the strain of the siege any longer, approached the ascetic and 
asked him, how long it would still continue. He replied, “ As long as the 

city’s tutelary goddesses remain here.” The citizens thus being duped, dug 

out the circle of deities and had them removed from the city (nindviyao) , 
whereupon Chaijakya sent a message to Parvata and Chandragupla asking 
them to invest it at once.. When the overjoyed citizens had been completely 
thrown off their guard, the besieging army returned and invested the city 
afresh, which now fell (gahiyath nayaram). Under Chanakya’s leadership, 
the army then extended its conquests so as to occupy the territory of Nanda 
as far as Pataliputra." 0 Next the two leaders, Parvata and Chandragupta, 
marched with their army towards Nanda's capital, the city of Palaliputra, 
and besieged it ( PaAaUpatlam tao rohiyam). When the city was stormed, 
King Nanda surrendered near the gate called Dharmadvara and entreated 
t’hanakya to save his life.-" Chanakya permitted him to leave the city 

loading his clrariot with all the riches that it could carry. King Nanda took 

with him his two wives, his daughter, and as much wealth as he could carry 
in his chariot and left the city. On the way, his daughter (? Durdhara or 
Suprabha) fell in love at fust sight with Chandragupta ( kaijnu niggach- 
rhhathli puna puno Chmiidaguttam paloei), who also responded to her ges- 
ture. 

The amorous behaviour of his daughter did not escaire the notice of 
King Nanda. He gladly permitted her to marry Chandragupta by svaymi- 
i ara, as she was a Kshatriya princess.-*' Thus, having her father’s consent 

lion of Ohftnnmda, each of the seven Divine-mothers of the second group is but 
the deified female energy of same prominent male god of the Hindu pantheon. 

Being the protectors of the War-god, ‘ the Seven Mother-goddesses ' were be- 
lieved by the ancient Hindu kings to protect a sovereign who takes refuge in 
them, lipigraphic evidence tends to show that the Kadamba and the Chalukya 
kings of the earlier period recognized the Saptamatrikds and Skanda 1 as their tute- 
lary deities (Ind. Ant., vi. pp. 27 and 74 ; vii. p. 162 ; xiii. p. 137 f.) . As stated 
by Hemadiandra, even a town was believed to be invulnerable, if ‘ the Seven 
Mother-Goddesses*’ were worshipped there (Paris., viii. 303 ff. ) . Public worship of 
this group of deities in certain towns is* amply borne out by the lithic records dis- 
covered at Gangdhar and Bihar Sharif (Cor. Ins. lnd., iii. pp. 49 and 76). 

25. Cf. Paris,, viii. 311-312. 

26. * Dharmadvara ‘ seems to be the same as ‘ Mahdtlvara ’ of the Nidana- 
fcaths of the fat aka (i. p. 63, Fausboll’s Ed. and ‘ Brahmadvdfa ' of Kauplya’s 
Arthasastm (Bk. ii. Ch. iv). The significance of the word ' Dhammadara' in the 
passage, " Nariido Dhammaddrath maggot" (Sukhab.) , is not difficult to under- 
stand ; but Hemachandra appears to have put a new meaning to it, when he says, 
“ dharmadvdramaydehishta” , i.e„ "prayed for a lawful or safe passage.” (Paris., 
vui. 314 ; Avers. Chun., p. 564, l. 13, “ Dhammaduvaram") . 

27. No definite information is available regarding the caste of the Nine Nandas. 
According to the Jaina tradition, the first Nanda, who succeeded king Udayin, was 
the son of a oonrte«m by a barber named Divakirti and evidently therefore was of the 
barber caste (‘ ganikakukshijanma ’ and ‘ najntakutnara’ Paris., vi. 231-232; ndpi~ 
tadusa,' Ava&. Sui [Vrit . ], p. 690; ‘ mpitaganikdsuto’, Vividha-Ttrthakalpa, dd. 



604 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to marry, the princess got down and attempted to get into Chandraguptas 
chariot ; and as she was doing so, nine spokes of the wheel gave way {nava 
arcgf i hhftgga). Chandragupta took it to be an ill omen and therefore re- 
quested her to get down (‘ amamgalam ’ tti nivariya imam), Chanakya, 
however, considered it to be a good omen and allowed her to get into the 
chariot. Me inform'd Chandragupta that the breaking of nine spokes por- 
tended that his dynasty would continue for nine generations after him (' nava 
purisajugam tujjham mm so h oli').~* 


Jina Vijaya, i. p. 68). For. according to the VhhnnpMana and other authoritative 
texts, it is the caste of the father, and not of the mother, that determines the caste 
of a child, whether born in lawful wedlock or not (“ multi b hast id piiuh putta yarn 
fdtah sa tv a sah!' Vishnu . iv. 10, 12 ; cf. Art has., Bk. iii. Ch. vii). The information 
preserved in Jaina lilciauire cannot possibly be an instance of odium theologicum 
for, while the. Nine Nan das have nowhere been i .presented as. antagonistic to Jain- 
ism. at least one of them appears to have been a great supporter of that religion 
(JJathigumphd Inscription of K kora vela . 1. 12). In support of the A r assay a tradi- 
tion, which both Haribhadra and Hcmachandra have followed, it may be mentioned 
here that, when Alexander the Great vas gathering information about the king of the 
Prasioi and the Gangaridai, evidently a Nanda king, Poms is said to have iniornud 
him that the ruler of those two nations was hated and despised by his subjects, be- 
cause of the meanness of his origin, for he was the son of a barber (Curl>u«, Alex., 
Bk. ix. Ch. ii ; DiodAros, fiibl. Hist., Ch. xciii ) ; and it appears that the same opinion 
was also maintained by Chandragupta (Plutarch, Lives, Ch. lxii). Again, when the 
Puranas characterize the first Nanda as a * Sudrdgmb hodbhav ah' ( Bhagavalu ) and 
his descendants as the ‘ Sudrd bhumipdldh ’ ( Vishnu), the Jaina tradition only 
receives additional confirmation : for originally the barbers were considered to be 
a ‘ low-caste ’ people (* hinajachcha* Jdtaka. ii. p. 5, Fausboll's Ed.), follow ’mg a 
‘filth-cleaning’ pursuit (hinajarhrha ‘ malamajjann ' nakapitapiitto . JciL, iii. p. 452), 
and were undoubtedly classed amongst those Sudras who were allowed to live within 
the pale of the Aryan society V Sudrdnumaniravasitdndm' . Pagini, ii. 4. 10; cf. 
Amamkosa. Siidravarga, 10), whatever might lx* the theories regarding their origin 
or social grade, which were started at a later period ( ut { dhvandpita , Nupita, A d h f> 
Kapila. cf. SutaSathhUd of the Sfcandapurdna . 1. xii. 15, 32. Ananrl. Sans. Scries). 

But. this cumulative evidence pointing to the low origin of the Nandas has been 
practically set; at naught by certain later writers, such as Visakhadatta, Iravi 
Chakyar, and Dhundhiraja, according to whom the Ten Nandas, viz. King Sarvartlia- 


siddhi Nanda and his nine sons (nova Nanddh) were true-born Kshatriyas. AVhat 
had led tho.% scholars to increase the number of the Nandas and represent thorn to 
be Kshatriyas, is not known ; but we cannot possibly praise Hcmachandra of being 
consistent, when he has used the word ‘ Kshatrtya-kanya’ with reference to the 
daughter of the last. Nanda (F J aris.. viii. 320), forgetting that he himself has des- 
cribed elsewhere the eldest of the Nine Nandas as the ‘son of a barber, begotten 
on a courtezan ’ (Paris., vi. 231-232). 

No key to the solution of this historical problem has been afforded by the Bud- 
dhist authorities. According to the Vdimsatthappakdsim . Uggas'cna. the eldest of the 
nine brothers and founder of the royal house of the Nandas', belonged to some* un- 
known family (“ tesam hi jefiho pano annatakulassa putto see p. 117, 13- 

Sinh. Ed.). . _ . _ . 

28. It is evident from the Uttarajjhayaya tradition as recorded by ue\i 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


605 


Chandragupta and Parvata then entered the royal palace (rdulanm) 
accompanied by Chanakya, where they divided between themselves the king- 
dom and the vast riches of the ex-king Nanda. In the palace, King Parvata 
noticed a girl of exquisite beauty and became enamoured of her. As he 
expressed the desire to have her as his consort, Chanakya at once began 
preparations for their marriage. Unfortunately, that virgin was a poison 
girl ( visakannayd ) ; and although Chanakya himself had discovered that 
fact, he approved of the marriage knowing fully its consequence. During 
the ceremony before the sacred fire ( aggipariyamchaijc ) , when Parvata seiz- 
ed her hand, he was affected by the poison exuding through her perspiration 
and began to succumb to its fatal effects ( vhaparigao mariumanuidho 
Moved by the dying man’s pathetic cry, when Chandragupta came to his 
n scue ( Chmhdagulio * rumbhami 1 Iti vavasia) by a remedy, he was frowned 
oil it by Chanakya (bhiudi kayd). As no antidote was given, Parvata soon 
breathed his last. 

Chanakya thus acquired without any trouble the territories of both 
Nanda and Paivata ( d<> ri raj jam lassa jay uni ) and placed Chandragupta 
on the throne. This event, took place on the expiry of one hundred and 
fijiy-fwe years reckoning from the date of the earthly deliverance ( mukti ) 
of Lord MahfivTra. 30 

draganin, liiat the Imivrial Maurya dynasty comprised ten rulers, viz, Chandra- 
f;upta, the founder of the house, and his nine successors. This is perfectly in con- 
viiiana; with the Av assay a tradition which Hcmachandra has evidently followed 
(“ y/imi pnrusluiyugdni two a ydvat lavanvayah." Paris., viii, 326 ; Avas. Chun . 
p. 665 ; | Vrit. | . p. 436). Out of the five Purumis which have preserved 

the dynastic list of the Maury as, at least three, viz, Matsya, Vishnu , and Bhdgavala , 
give the number of those rulers as Un and only two. viz, Vfiyu and Buihmfajda, 
as nine. Thus, the well attested number is ten. 

29. According to the Mudrardksha&a (Acts 1 and II), after the murder of the 
old king Sarvarthasiddhi Nanda, his minister Rakshasa had sent a beautiful poison- 
maiden to the Suganga Palace thinking that Chandragupta would be snared by 
her exquisite beauty and world die eventually from the effects of jxiison by com- 
ing into physical contact with her. Hut the stratagem was discovered by Chanakya, 
who had her sent, instead to his treacherous ally Parvataka, and 'he latter lost his 
life through her. According to the Costa Romanorum (xi), an Indian queen in 
order to take revenge on Alexander the Great, had sent him a poison-maiden as 
Present ; but the life of that Macedonian hero was saved by his master Aristotle, 
who foiled the trick in time ( Ka/hasarilsugara, trans. C. II. Tawncy, i. p. 149 and 
note). In dealing with Toxicdugy tlie edeb rated physician Susruta (2nd cent, a .a), 
has also admitted the fact that the system of a vishakanyd is* charged with poison to 
such an extent that a man is apt to lose his life through having carnal knowledge 
of her (" vishakanyopayogddvd kshandj jah yddasu n mrahP Susmla-Samhiid t 
Kalpasthana, i. 3). 

30. So says Hemachandra : 

" Evant cka sri-Mahu vi ra mukler varskasate gate | 
pane hap un c h dsa dad h ike Chandragupta bhavannri pah " j| 

{Paris., viii. 339.) 



606 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


It has been pointed out by Dr. Jacobi {Parts., Intro, p. xx), that the date of 
Chandragupta’s accession as given by Ilemachandra, viz, 155 years after the demise 
of Mahavira, has been confirmed by Bhadresvara, who in his kakdvali writes : 
“ Evam cha M aha v 1 r a ymtt tisamayao panchdvm}(Mi)avarisasae nuchhanne ( uchch - 
hiipjie.) Nariidavamse Chamdagutto rdyd jdu tti 

It is evident therefore tliat Bhadresvara, t<x», is of opinion that the Nanda 
dynasty was exterminated and Chandragupta was placed on the throne on the 
expiry of 155 years reckoning from the date of the earthly deliverance (multi) of 
Mahavira. This traditional date, however, has been discountenanced by a number 
of other Jaina works, sudi as the Vkhdrasrmi Harivamsa-Pu rdna, Vividdha-Tuttui- 
kaltxi. Ttrlhoddhdra-Prakhyiaka , and Trailoky a-Piajnapli, according to which Maha- 
vira died 215 years before the Maury as came to power (60 years for Pataka f 155 
years for the Nandas). All these works were composed at different periods ranging 
from the 8th to the 14th century, like the Paritisht apart' an and the Kahdvati men- 
tioned above. 

As the accession of Chandragupta cannot be dated earlier than B.C. 324, hr 
having met Alexander the Great in the Punjab, in b.c. 326 or in the first half of 
u.c. 325, as an ordinary individual and not as the king of Ihe Prasioi and the 
Gangaridai (Plutarch, Lives, Ch. Ixii) , the date of Mahavira 's death as given by 
Ilemachandra and Bhad res vara, cannot possibly be earlier than B.c. 479 (B.C. 324 4 
155 years). As the Buddha died in B.c. 483, lie should be considered to have pre 
deceased Mahavira by at least four years, if b.c. 179 be accepted as the year of 
the latter’s death. But the case was just the reverse. For, not. only the Buddha 
and his personal attendant Sariputra who predeceased him, knew of the death of 
Mahavira at Pava and the schism in the Jaina Church that followed it, but they 
were extremely anxious, lest the infection should spread in the Buddhist Church 
and its members might behave in the same manner under similar circumstances 
l Digha-Nikdva, iii. pp. 209 ff. P. T. S.). The fact, may be proved in another 
way. Chunda. a Samanuddesa (novice) in the Buddhist Order, who happened to 
spend the rainy recess at Pava (Pdvdyam vassavuttho) like Mahavira, comes to ace 
the Buddha at Samagama, a village in the Sakya country, and informs Ananda 
that Nigantha Nataputta (Mahavira) has passed away recently at Pava ( Pdvdyam 
adhund kaldkato hoti) , that on his death, his followers have become divided into 
two hostile groups ( dvedhikajdtd bhandmiajdld) upholding widely divergent views, 
and that their quarrel has taken such a serious turn that they are now abusing 
each other ( vivddapannd annamannath mukhasattihi vitutfanld viharanti ). When 
the two brethren in their anxiety to preserve the integrity and prestige of -the Bud- 
dhist Samgha, approached their master to discuss the matter with him, the Buddha 
delivered two lectures to them, of which one was specially addressed to Chunda 
and the other, to his personal attendant Ananda. Of the two lectures, thei longer 
one which was delivered to Chunda, came to be recorded by the Dlghabhanakas 
( Digha-Nikdya, iii. pp. 117-141. P. T. S.), while the shorter one which was meant 
for Ananda, by the Majjhimabhanakas ( Majjhima-Nikdya , ii. pp. 243-251. P. T. 
S.). Thus, if we are to believe in the Jaina tradition as recorded in the Kalpa 
siitra (§123), that Mahavira passed away in the 4th month of the rainy recess, 
in the 7th fortnight, in the dark fortnight of Karttika on its 15th day (Divali day), 
in the secretariat buildings of King Has'tipala at Papa (Pava), we shall have to 
admit that he predeceased the Buddha, for the latter is definitely known to have 
discussed the future of his Sariigha with one who had also spent the rainy months 
in the very' same town as Mahavira, an/i was therefore fully posted with the latest 
developments in the Jaina Chunch as also their effects on the Jaina laity. 



EARLY LIFE OF CH \NDRAGUPTA MAURYA 


607 


The secular works of the Jainas in Prakrit and Sanskrit present at least 
two streams of tradition relating to Chandragupta and Chanakya, of which 
one is special to the commentaries on the Av assay a and the Utlarajjhayaiia 
and the other, to the Jaina Katha literature. The Av assay a tradition, again, 
is essentially the same as that of the U tiara} jkayana, though it differs from 
the latter in minor details. The germs of these two traditions are traced 
in the Nijjuttis, or concise metrical explanations, on the two scriptural texts 
mentioned above. They were subsequently developed by the addition of a 
variety of episodes by the earlier Jaina scholars, who have, it is believed, 
faithfully preserved the story as was told to them by their teachers in the 
Jaina Church. These stories or, more precisely, narrative themes, thus remain- 
ed in memory for many centuries, during which period they were, transmitted 
by successive teachers ( vdchaka ) through oral method. For how long exact- 
ly the traditions relating to Chandragupta and Chanakya continued to remain 
in memory, is difficult to ascertain ; but it cannot possibly be after the 


The date suggested by Bhad res vara and Hemachandra for the accession o»f 
Chandragupta Maurya (A.V. 155), is therefore dearly inadmissible aud so also 
is the one which adds sixty years more to it (A.V. 215). What seems to be prob- 
able is, that, the period intervening between the death of Mahavira and the acces- 
sion of Chandragupta Maurya was in reality 165 years, but which has been in- 
advertently recorded by some later chronicler as 155 years. We are, of course, 
not in a position to state definitely, whether he had in view the date when the 
youthful Chandragupta. under the guidance of his master Chanakya, first appeared 
in the role of a rebel in the frontiers of the Nanda kingdom, a few years before he 
actually ascended the throne (b.c. 321), and met with what wa«i perhaps the 

greatest reverse of his fortune.- Whatever the case may he, if according to the 

Buddhist chronology, the first Mauryan emperor ascended the throne 162 years 
a tier the demise of t he Buddha, a gap of three years between the death of Maha- 
viia and hi*' junior contemporary, the Buddha, cannot possibly be an unacceptable 
historical proposition. 

[B. C. 483 as the year of the Buddha’s death lias 1 been fixed by Wilhelm Geiger, 
J. F. Fleet, and I). M. dc Z. Wickremasinghe with the help of all the available 
chronological data bearing on the ecclesiastical history of Buddhism in Magadha 
and Ceylon up to the end of the 6th century a.d. ( Mahavatiisa , Geiger, Intro., 
pp. xxii ff„ P. T, S. Trans. Series ; Fleet, /. R. A. S., 1906, pp. 984-986 ; 1909, pp. 
Iff., pp. 323 IT. ; Wickremasinghe, Epig. ZeyL, iii. pp. 4tT). Fresh investigations in 
this direction have revealed the fact that in Ceylon, the Buddha Era commencing 

from b.c. 483 was in use up to the close of the 15lh century, when a reform of 

the calendar took place, B.c. 544 being adopted as the year of the Buddha’s death 
(John M, Senavcratne, /. R, A. S., Ceylon Br. t xxiii, No. 67, pp. 141 ff. ) . According 
to Fleet, the Buddha passed away on October 13, 483 b.c. (/. R. A. S., 1909, 
p. 22), while the same event, according to the present writer, look place on Sunday, 
April 26, 483 B..C. ( D. R. B bandar bar Volume , pp. 329-330) . Takakusu informs us 
that the 4 dotted record * kepi up at Canton to the end of the year a.d. 489 shows 
975 dots, and, hence, the Buddha died in b.c. 486 ( 486 -f 489 - 975) (/. R. A. S*. 
1905, p. 51). The occurrence of three extra dots is not unexpected, considering 
the crude method of keeping the record and the length of the period for which it 
had been kept.) 



608 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


famous Valablu Council of Devarddhi Kshamasramana, which was held 980 or 
993 years after the demise of Mahavira (died c. 486 b.c.), for the purpose of 
collecting and recording the sacred scriptures of the Svetambara Siddhdntc as 
well as their commentaries. 

The first occurrence of the Chandragupta tradition as a written record, 
is very probably in the Chunni ( Churni ) on the Avassaya Nijjutti , ;u on the 
basis of which, sometime between a.d. 740 and 770, the celebrated Jaina 
commentator Haribhadra Suri of the Vidyadharakula igachchha ) wrote the 
story of Chandragupta and Chauakya in an elaborate manner, incorporating 
in it much that is extraneous but which is believed to have been orally trans- 
mitted to him. It is to be found in his Avasyakasulra Vrilti. a Sanskrit 
commentary on the Avassaya, the second Miitasutta of the Svetambaia Canon. 
Nearly three centuries later, Devendraganin wrote out the story afresh in 
Prakrit, interspersed with Sanskrit and Prakrit verses, in his commentary 
on the Uliarajjhayana , the first Miiiasulla of the Svetambaras. His com 
mentary is popularly known as the Sukhabodha and appears to have been 
completed in a.d. 1083. That Devendraganin has ignored the story of Chan- 
dragupta and Chanakya as given in the Arasyakasulra Vritii . is more than 
evident, but it is equally true that his narrative is mainly based on the 
Avassaya Chunni, from which ho has extensively copied the Prakrit text 
of the story. He probably intended to reproduce the original narrative with 
a. i tain emendations in the manner preferred by his teachers or the ecclesias- 
tical group igachchha) to which he belonged. Another version of the story 
in metrical Sanskrit is to be found in the S t h av iravalic h a rita, or Parish s/j- 
taparvan , which was composed about a.d. 1165 by Ileniachandra Suri as 
an Appendix to his T ris has ht isolated pur ush acharita. It is mainly based on 
the Avassaya narrative of Haribhadra and consists of 276 slokas. It may 
be noted here that the ]X>rtion of the tradition which relates to the ix'riod 
after the consecration of Chandragupta. whether recorded by Haribhadra or 
by Devendraganin, is not of much value in history. 

The other stream of tradition which is special to the Jaina Kathd litera- 
ture, is best represented by the Brhalkathdkosa of Harishena, 31 the Arddhand - 
satkathdprabmdha of prabhaebandra, the A rdd h an akat k dkosa of Nemidatta, 
and the Kathdkosa of Srichandra. 53 Regarding the literary character of 
these works, it may be said that the Kathd kosas of Harishena and Nemi- 
datta are com]x>sed in metrical Sanskrit and that of Srichandra, in metrical 
Prakrit. No Kathdkosa in Prakrit prose containing the tradition has come 
to light so far, the one in Sanskrit prose being that of Prabhachandra. M 
these four Kathdkosas , the earliest and perhaps the most important is that 

31. Cf. Avasyaka-Niryukti-Chiirni , pp. 563-565 (Jainabandhu Printing Press. 
Indore 1928). 

32. |Cf. Br hat kathdkosa, ed. A. N. Upadhye, pp. 336-338. Bombay 1943. 

33. ibid., Intro., p. 57 f f. 



EARLY LIFE OF CHANORAGUPTA MAURYA 


609 


of Harisheua (a.d. 931) and the latest is that of Nemidatta (c. 1530 a.d.), 
while the other two belong to the intervening period. 34 All the four authors 
appear to have derived the tradition from an earlier Arddhand text of the 
Jainas composed in metrical Prakrit, viz, the Bhagavati- Arddhand 35 of Sivarya, 
otherwise known as Sivakoti and si v a kot y acharya , which in view of its 
linguistic and textual evidence might be assigned to the first century a.d. 36 
But the Bhagavati- Arddhand itself does not appear to be the primary source 
of that tradition, for it can be traced through that repository of tales and 
legends to another, of much earlier period. Hie fossils of the Chiinakya 
(Chandragupta) tradition, in fact have ban found embedded in the lite- 
rary stratum of the Pahmais (Miscellanea) which, as we know, are included 
in the Canon of the Svetambaras and in the Secondary Canon 37 of the Digam- 
haras. Of the ten Pdinnas, the two which might be taken to represent the 
nucleal stage of that tradition are the Bhaltapcfl'innd and the Smith dm, for 
it: is in them that the original of the story of Chanakya as a Jaina monk ( ! ) 
has bam found to occur for the first time to illustrate and uphold certain 
religious practices in the manner approved of and prescribed by Mahnvira, 
1!jo 1 Guilder of modern Jainism. :is The date of the P dinners is not definitely 
known ; but considering the fact that the renowned Digambara ascctic-philo- 
Hopher Kundakunda and his worthy disciple Umasvamin. who belonged to 
rile earlier part of the first century a.d/ 39 have thoroughly utilized the Anga 

31. •£* nd„ Colophon, rr. 11-12 ( A.D. 931-932) ; YVinternilz, History of 
Indian Literature. ii. p. 54-1. 

35. Also called Arad hand and Muliirddhmul. Cf. Mdldradfumii (with Sanskrit 
commentaries and Hindi transition) , v. 1556. Sholapur 1935. Dr. I’padhyc is 
sight in thinking that the language of this work is Saurasctii. Prakrit ( Brhalkalhd- 

Intro., p. 50). The language is. however, not unadulterated, foi a large per- 
centage of Ardhamagadhi words ran be traced in it. 

36. We have tentatively suggested this date, as it seems n> be only approxi- 
mately correct, hut further investigation on this point is desirable. There is 
nothing positive in the text itself to indicate that its author Si vary a flourished before 
the time of Kundakunda and Umasvamin as supposed by Dr. Upadhye ( Brhal - 
katkdkusa, Intro, p. 55 ; v. infra ) . 

37. The. Digambara term for it is A ngabdhya (‘standing outside the Anga ’ 
or ‘not included in the Anga 1 ). It is so called, because the texts in this collection 
-*c not considered by the Digambaras to be essential or primary. 

38. Cf. ChatuhSarcnidd imaremasamddhyan tarn Praktrnakadasakarii (Agamo- 
daya Samiti Ed., No. 46) Bhattaparinna, v. 162 ; Snmthara, vv. 73-75. 

39. If the Digambara Ifaft avail is to be believed, we shall have to assign 
f'uiawamin to the 1st cent. a.d. (v.s. 101 = a.d. 44). But the Patfdvafis , whether 
of the ■Svetambaras or of the Digambaras, are sto very contradictory that it is diffi- 
cult to place absolute reliance on the chronological data furnished by them. Since 
kmasvSmin (Umasvati or Svati) . according to the Digambara Pat (avail of the 
^anusvati-Gachchha, was the sixth in succession to Bhadrabahu (jll) who was 
the seventh pontiff after Mahavira and died in B.C. 53 (v.s. 4), and, according to 
the Svetambora Paffdvali of the Tapa-Cachchha, was the second in succession to 
■^rya-Mahagiri (died in A.v. 291 ; A.v. 249? according to the Kharatara-Gachchha 

40 



610 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and the Aiigabdhya texts of the Digambaras in thcii respective work, 40 the 
downward limit of the period to which the Painnas could be assigned, might 
be fixed at about b.c. 100 at the latest, 41 It is therefore unlikely that the 
archaic form of the story of Chanakya as preserved in the Painnas, is later 
than the beginning of the Christian era. 

Since the Avassaya , the 11 ttarajjhayana, and the Painnas have been ex- 
cluded by the Digambaras from their principal Canon as unauthoritative and 
extraneous, the representation of Chanakya as a Jaina monk might be the 
work of the Svetambaras. If this hypothesis be correct, we are yet to ex- 
plain why there should be two streams of tradition relating to Chanakya ' 
one being special to the commentaries on the Avassaya and the Uttar ajjhayatia 
and the other, to the Painnas , and why so many discrepancies are to be 
noticed between the two. 


Putt avail) who was' the eighth pontiff after Maiiavira (died c. 486 B.c.), we are in 
no way justified to fix for him. so late a date as the 2nd cent. A.D. (/«</. Ant., xi. 
pp. 246 and 251 ; xx. p. 351). In ail probability, both Kundakunda and Uinasva 
min belonged to the period extending from b.c. 75 to A.D. 50. 

40. The works of Kundakundacharya and Umasvamin are included in the 
third Veda ( Dravydnuyoga ) of the Digambaras. 

41. It is difficult to believe that a compendium of Jaina dogmatics and prac- 
tices of the nature of Umasvamin’s Tatt v dr l had h igama-Sutr a, which holds in Jain- 
ism the same place as the Vtsuddkimagga in Huddhism, could have been written 
even before the scope and character of the Anga and the Ahgabahya were definitely 
settled by the Digambara Church. 

That II mas vat i or Utnasvamin was a Digambara ascetic is beyond cavil ; but 
it is' equally true that in his work, he has scrupulously avoided the points disputed 
by the Svetambaras and the Digambaras. The original commentary on the TaUvdr - 
ihddh ign ma^Su t ra ( Bibliotheca Indica , ,1903-5)* which ill a large measure supports 
the Svetambara beliefs and practices, is considered by the followers of that school 
to be the work of Umasvati himself. How far the Svetambaras are justified in 
claiming the authorship of Lhat commentary for Umaisvati, is difficult to say, but 
we must liave the frankness to admit that the credit of writing commentary on one's 
own work, lias been given to more than one author even by us. Thus, m spite 
of clear indication given in a verse occurring in it, the Arlhasdstra , as we find it to- 
day, has been ascribed by us to Kautilya, though, in reality, it is the commentary 
on that work written by a certain Vishnugupta, wherein the verses/ comprising the 
original Artkasdstra have been mostly rendered in prose, while of the remaining 
verses some have been commented on and some retained in their original form. 
Such instances are not uncommon. We have attributed to Dhananjaya, the Avaloka 
on his Dasarupaka, which we have also admitted to have bee., written by him under 
the name of Dhanika, the pseudonym adopted by him for the purpose of writing 
that commentary ( Goltinghche gelehrte Anzeigen , 1913., p. 301). Likewise, we 
have assigned to the chronicler Mahanama the Tikd on his Mahdvamsa . even ignor- 
ing the textual evidence proving the contrary (Tumour, Mahdwanso, Intro, p. liv) . 
These arc some of the glaring instances of our credulousness ; and if we ascribe 
the original commentary on the Tattvdrthfidhigama-Sutra to its author Umasvamin 
disregarding the vital objections of the Digambaras, we shall be in no way creat- 
ing a precedent through it, for the practice has been already well established by us ! 



PLASTER 


By 

Prof. STELLA KRAMRISCH. Ph.D. 

Whether an Indian temple is built of wood, brick or stone, the work is 
done with precision. Bricks and stone are carefully laid and joined (suyuk- 
tya ; ‘ Visnudharmottara ' III, ch. XC1, 12). Tile stones are frequently kepi 
in position without any cementing material. 1 2 Iron clamps are used for wooden 
joints, if need be and where the masonry is dry the stone blocks are lucid 
together (Deogarh) with iron dowels. Sudhasila, plaster, and Vajralepa, a 
glue cement and coating, were applied ; there is no lack of prescriptions how 
to prepare them. Vajralepa is a hardened glue mixed with other substances 
such as conch shell txiwder or white earth (caolin). Vajralepa is made either 
of purely vegetable substances, gums, resins, and viscous residues, or else it is 
produced from animal substances, hides and horns ; to the latter could be add- 
ed a mixture of metallic substances, or of lime. Vajralepa which means 
‘ diamond plaster ’ is so called because it is specially durable and firm ; it is 
recommended for these qualities, in the ‘ Silparatna ’ (XIV. 58-75). in a pas- 
sage which deals with the different kinds of lime plaster (sudha). The 
careful process of mixing the several ingredients with the granulated and 
powdered lime from gravel and conch shell lasted from two to four months 
with the result that the plaster was not only durable but also that it had 
none of the stark deadness of effect which for instance whitewash imparts. 
It is a rich and creamy white, discreetly shining, like polished ivory or 
some ancient enamel.* Under this white, smooth, polished plaster, stone and 

1. The practice of building with cyclopcan stones (of. Jarasandha-ka-baithas. 
Rajgir (Kratnrisch, in Vol. VI, p. 235 of Springer’s * Kunstgeschichte ) persisted 
in the Hindu temple ; in the courses of dry masonry of carefully dressed and relatively 
very large stones (Gupta temples in Central India : early Calukya temples in the 
Deccan, early Cola temples in South India)'. In the Calukyan temples, dry ma- 
sonry, with no cementing materials between the stones, was employed in the earliei 
sandstone buildings (H. Cousens, ‘The Calukyan Architecture,’ ASI. NIS. Vol. 
XLII). This is also true o( the medieval temples of the Deccan built of amygda- 
kridal trap (H. Cousens, ‘ Mediaeval Temples of the Deccan,’ /ISf. IS. Vol. XLVIII) 
of thnsu in Gujerat (J. Burgess-H. Cousens, * Architectural Antiquities of Northern 
Gufierat’ ASWI, Vol. IX, p. 29) and of Orissa (M. M. Ganguli, ‘Orissa and 
Her Remains’, p. 257). 

2. Some of the most perfect temples in Central India, at Khajuraho, have 
their ia&ng stones of fine sandstone embedded in lac (lakh), apparently vegetable 
Vajralepa ; ftmnam concrete being generally used in the core. Iron clamps are also 
freely employed; (B. L. Dhama, ‘A Guide to Khajuraho', p. 4). In the Panjab, 



612 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the Kafirkot stone temples arc cemented with lime mixed with quartz (Cunningham, 
ASI, VoL XIV. p. 26). 

The earliest preserved dry masonry is the stone facing of Stupa I, Sand ; the 
earliest occurrence of lime mortar in historical times is in the brick foundation of the 
Vi$UU temple at Besnagar ( ASIAR . 1913-14, p. 205). Brick temples have fre- 
quently a thin layer of a day mixture as an adherent between the bricks (P. Brown, 
‘Indian Architecture Pt. I, p. 16). The brick temples in Sirpur, C. P. t seventh 
century, were completely covered by a thin layer of white plaster. The bricks are 
carved (ASIAR. 1909-10, p. 11). 

The 4 Brhat Samhita ’ Ch. LVII, 1-3 and the ‘ Viijnudharmottara \ Part III, 
Ch. XVII. 1-15, among the ‘ early ' texts, give the ingredients of the various kinds 
of Vajralepa which were used in stone and brick buildings. Vajralepa formed also 
the ground for wall paintings ; this is described in detail in the ‘ Manasollasa * or 
4 Abhil^itartha Cintamani ' (Pt. II, Ch. III. 132 40), a compendium compiled in 
the twelfth century. 

Four and five recipes respectively of the preparation and ingredients of Vajra- 
lepa are given in the 1 Brhat Samhita' and in the ‘ Visnudharmottara \ Two of the 
preparations are purely vegetable, one consists of aninialic glue and vegetable sub- 
stance, the fourth contains metallic substances and into the fifth (V. Dh. l.c., 10-11 ) 
a concoction from cowhides, etc., and lime has been mixed. 

These different kinds of Vajralepa. the ‘ adamantine glue \ are used for external 
application, on stone and brick buildings, according to both the early texts. V. Dh. 
ib. 12-13, indicates that these mixtures arc also used for cementing the slones or 
burnt bricks of the buildings. 

In the ’ Mahasollasa \ II. iii. 132-40 (Cf. also the * Naradu Silpa Saslra' of 
which two chapters on painting are translated by V. Raghavan, JISOA. Vol. Ill, 
p. 19 f. ) , the walls, to which lime plaster (sudha) has been applied should then be 
coated with a paste of hide-glue mixed with white earth (caolin?) in three layers, 
and above it another final coat of the same paste mixed with powdered conch, etc. 
'Inis passage dearly shows that the ‘ adamantine glue coaling 1 or ‘ plaster ' ihc Vajra- 
lepa, is applied in several thin coats above the lime plaster, Sudha. The final coat 
of Vajralepa, when completely dry, forms the ground of wall paintings. The 4 Ma- 
nasollasa 1 describes as further use of the Vajralepa that it is mixed with all colours. 
In that case, the glue of the boiled buffalo skin is collected on small sticks and al- 
lowed to harden. It is then put in an earthen pot with water arid melted. This 
pure glue is to be mixed with the respective pigments. It is thus a tempered medium 
for painting on the Vajralepa-ground (the reference in V. Dh. III. Ch. XL, to a 
decoction of hides, may imply this too). 

The wall paintings, according to the 4 Visnudharmottara 1. c., are executed on 
plaster. The plaster there, in the main, consists of bricks, variously powdered, mixed 
with clay and carefully prepared with gum resin, bees wax, liquorice, molasses. 

J murjga * bean and other vegetable substances. Sand, etc., has to be added in due 
proportion ; the mixture is allowed to consolidate for one month, and is then applied 
to the wall and left to dry. If this dry plaster is not perfectly smooth, it is coated 
with clay plaster mixed with resin and oil which is carefully smoother and polished. 
On this dry, smooth wall the paintings are produced acc. to Ch. XL, Pt. III. of the 
' Vissiudharmottara \ 

The kinds of glue Vajralepa, given ib., Ch. XCII, are not referred to in con- 
nection with the preparation of the ground of the wall paintings which is a brick 
and clay plaster with a certain amount of resinous and viscous substances in its 
fabric. M 



PLASTER 


613 


brick are often combined in one and the same structure, stone in the lower 
parts and brick above, a practice found not only in South Indian temples, 
but also in the Deccan as in the Temple at Kokamthan, Ahmednagar.* On 
the superstructure, the Sikhara, of this temple the figure-symbols are cut or 
lormcd in the plaster only, while the carvings on the Kailasanatha Tem- 
ple at Conjeeverarn are of stone with their ornaments and lesser details 
carved in plaster . 1 The calm radiance, as of moonlight or snow, of the 
white temples is extolled in inscriptions/ In this whiteness, it appears, their 
‘sattvika ’ quality, their conformity with the pure Essence (sat), shone forth/* 

Tiie ‘ Silparatna/ XIV. 58-75, describes different kinds of lime plaster., mainly 
from powdered, etc., gravel but also of powdered shell and width a proportion of sand 
to which the following liquids are added : the sap of various milky trees, Asvattha. 
Butea Frondosa, Kadamba, Myrobalan and Mango-juice, or curd, milk, cocoanut 
water, ghee, as well as ripe bananas, pulse, rice gruel, etc., according to the differ- 
ent types or desired qualities of the plaster. Last of these varieties of plaster, Vajra- 
lepa is described. 100 parts are lime, 2 parts resin (karala), and small quantities 
of ghee, bananas, coconut. -water, pulse. Asvattha sap. and jaggery. 

Vajralepa acc. to the ‘ Silparatna ’ is a high grade lime plaster with two per 
cent, resin in its composition, and other binding and adhesive substances. 

ICoomaraswamy, * Indian Architectural Terms \ JAOS , Vol. 48, p. 26,3, says 
of Vajralepa, the adamantine medium, that it is actually glue. It should be dis- 
tinguished from Sudha, plaster. This is correct, but when various glue-substances 
are mixed with the plaster, the whole mixture is also called Vajralepa. 

Various recijjes for producing an ‘ adamantine plaster ’ were used in the millen- 
nium, from the ‘ Brhat Saiphita ' and ‘ Visnudharmot tara * to the f Silparatna " in 
different parts of India. Lime plaster particularly described in the ‘ Silparatna ’ and 
the ' Manasollasa/ both of them South Indian text books, is also briefly mentioned in 
‘ V r . Dh/ ITI. Ch. XCI. 15, as Sudhii- si 1;H. where its u^e is advised in temples, l>ut not 
in houses. The same chapter (13-14) speaks of Vajralepa which is described in 
detail in the following chapter, as cementing material for baked bricks and stones, 
whereas mud cement is prescribed for unbaked bricks. 

3. Cousens, * Mediaeval Temples of the Deccan, op. cit p. 50. The walls 
are of stone, the Sikhara or superstructure is of brick. The carvings in stone are 
overlaid with plaster : in the brick portion, the carving is solely in plaster. 

4. Carving in plaster, and also in terracotta gives precision and dignity to 
these substances ; cf. the carved bricks of brick temples from the Gupta age 
(Deogarh. Paharpur, etc.) to those of the nineteenth century in Bengal. 

5. “ The temple resembling a mountain shines white as ihe mass of the rays 
of the risen moon”. Mandasor (in Lata) Inscr., a.d. 473-74, line 16, 'Indian Anti- 
quary’, Vol. XV, p. 196. This temple was consecrated to Surya. 

An inscription from the I-ak§manji Temple, Khajuraho, dated in the Vikrama 
year 1011, or 954 a.d. praises this temple in verse 42 as a “ charming, splendid house 
of Vi$nu which rivals the peaks of the mountains of snow ” ; * Epigraphies Indica,' 
Vol. I. p. 111. — An inscription of the early 13th century speaks of repairs to all the 
temples in the city. They were also made resplendent by being newly plastered. 
Chebrolu Inscription, Kistna District, ‘ Ep. Ind/ Vol. V, p. 149. 

6. The 3 Guajas are Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Their colours arc while, red 
and black, and their inherent tendencies are ascending, expanding and descending, 
respectively. The three Gunas are the tljree constitutive qualities of Prakjti, the 
nature of the world. 



614 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


This luminous splendour corresponds to the ascending tendency within the 
* sattva guija which is expressed by the vertical of the high superstructure 
of the temples and the total disposition of their mass. From the broad base 
they are built up towards the high point in the centre above even their 
mountainous superstructure or Sikhara. 

Bricks and stone arc frequently combined in one and the same building. 
The body of the temple is of brick and the door frame oi stone, 7 or the body 
of the temple is of stone and the superstructure of brick, 8 9 10 or in a single 
architectural relief panel, the major part is stone and it is completed in brick 
on one side. 8 These varied combinations, for reasons of added strength or 
decreased weight or for the sake of expediency, are due to the relation of the 
craftsman to his work and towards the means of making it. Once he has 
taken the stone for instance from the earth and the tree from the forest and 
its living context, with expiation and apology for his interference, he takes 
on himself the responsibility for giving them appropriate use in the new 
context. This is to set up the temple as an image of the Purusa and as Ilis 
dwelling. The natural connection has been severed, the earth has been burnt, 
the stone has been cut, the tree has been felled and they arise as the temple 
and its parts. Their texture survives and it is given consideration by the tra- 
ditional and hereditary craftsman. It would, however, amount to a retro- 
gression from the state of grace into the state of nature were one to expect tliat 
the ' material ’ would guide the builder. On the contrary, brick and stone 
alike, or in combination, may disappear under a coating of plaster, which 
might partly have been coloured too." 1 

The ‘ material ’ does not demand from the I lindu craftsman in his treat- 
ment of it a consideration of its nature for it has ceased to exist as such. 
The wood of a living tree fulfils a different function from that of a carved 
image, pillar or vaulted beam. It has been converted to its new function 
by a series of processes, by art as well as by magic. As little as Indian 
thought knows of ‘ matter ’ so little is the craftsman concerned with the 

7. Sirpur. C. P. 

8. This is frequent in the later South Indian temples. 

9. Paharpur, Bengal : ASIAR, 1926-27, PI. XXX11 a : Kramrisch, * Indian 
Sculpture', p. 215, 

10. To what extent each stnictural temple was originally plastered, or plast- 
ered arid painted, is difficult to say. The cave temples of the Deccan, however, al- 
most without exception were originally coated with plaster and painted, on their 
plain and straight, as much as on their carved and modelled surfaces. Ellora, es ' 
peri ally in the Dasavatara cave, Badami and Ajatjta have still painted plaster pre- 
served on their images ; especially in Ajanfa, the large Bodhisattva figures in the 
sanctuaries of caves I and II, and on carved capitals and pillars, etc. 

In temples no longer in use whatever plaster there may have been has since 
disappeared dr perhaps never existed at all, whereas it has been overlaid by the use 
of whitewash in those still in worship. 



PLASTER 


615 


material for the sake of its effectiveness. He knows, on the other hand, its 
texture and the various qualities which make it suitable for one special 
purpose and not for another. He does justice to them and applies his 
knowledge and sensibility to the lustrous malleable metals for instance or to 
-;he stones of different hardness and light-absorbing power in their carved 
surfaces. These qualities act as evocative influences by the contact with his 
hand and eye and they make more close his identification, by his work, with 
his vision. It is in the form of his work and its intense consistency. This 
does not belong to any single statue or image only, for all the carved form, 
figure or architectural unit, however small, is part of a comprehensive whole, 
the temple. It may show itself as made of wood, brick or stone or else be 
covered by a coat of egg-shell like plaster and painted detail. Sometimes, 
as in the Kailasanatha Temple at Conjeeverarn, the detail is carved only in 
the thick plaster which overlays the stone, such embellishment far from being 
supernumerary tends to focus attention on every part to which it clings. 

Stone, brick or wood and also plaster and paint are substances of reali- 
sation. In them the image or vision takes form, settles down, imbues their 
grain and fibre and gives them the new life, as part of the temple, the seat 
of God. All the same these substances are true to this name also in an- 
other sense. In them ‘subsists' their grain and texture, the frame-work given 
to them by Yama, and it carries with it the memory of their original state. 
This finally outlasts its own particular substance ; the curves of light woods 
for instance such as bamboo and branches, retain their resilience whether 
they are cut in brick or carved in stone. 

"The clay is permanent but things constructed with the clay are not 
so'*’ ( ‘ Brahmavaivartta Purana \ I, XXVI11. 28). The clay persists in na- 
ture, however, many things made of it may perish. On the other hand, 
even when substances other than the clay are used, its feel, its qualities, and 
the ideas associated with it, persist ; the form which resulted from a long and 
intimate contact remains a living memory and by it such other substances 
are shaped which are substituted for definite reasons. The clay, the brick, 
the wood and to some extent too the ‘ cyclopean * boulder of stone have each 
outlasted their original state and also their actual employment in the form 
and proportion of the temple. 

The well known transfer of the const ruction forms of one material into 
the other is so caused. The curves of the bamboo for example are copied 
in bent wood and cut in brick and stone. In any material, it is the bending 
nature of bamboo stems or wooden branches, yielding the elements and the 
form of the arch. Whatever the material, it is made into the same form and 
conveys the same meaning. It is the form by which the memory of the 
original is made permanent. 

The inherent quality, the subtle nature, of bamboo for instance, is thus 
restituted by giving it a permanency which its physical nature could not 



616 


B. C. LAW* VOLUME 


guarantee. This is done by art. This permanence, in art. is a quality of 
the form and belongs to memory. The transfer of form from the one more 
perishable, to the other, less perishable substance is a restitution of the 4 subtle ' 
body, of the original clay or wood. Though all things made of clay or wood 
might perish including clay and wood themselves their subtle nature is ex- 
pressed in stone. It is the way of redemption, a relative guarantee of immor- 
tality which things constructed are able to give. 

The substance of which the temple is built gives body to the indwelling 
Essence ; from this point of view it is immaterial what it is, and it is also 
immaterial whether different substances are combined or the one is overlaid 
by the other, provided that the Essence imbues and impresses the form. 

By their new destination, wood, clay, stone and plaster, etc. are transub 
stantiated. 'Ihis comes about while they are being worked on. Tn this, how- 
ever, they are not altogether passive, for they offer their obstacles as well 
as their particular facilities and these contacts are felt and remembered by 
the craftsman. Sensibility contributes its own share to a wider memory 
which comprises all those associations that have accumulated round the 
bricks or the wood in their traditional employment. A triple memory, that 
of traditional knowledge, of sensibility and of piety helps to preserve the 
subtle body, that is the particular quality and aptness of the several sub- 
stances, severed as they are from their natural life and habitation, in a more 
permanent body which has but one ultimate destination. 



ON THE SUCCESSORS OF KUMARAGUPTA I 

By 

Mr. NALINI NATH DAS GUPTA, m.a. 

Kumaragupta I of the Imperial Gupta dynasty ceased to rule in 455 A.D., 
the date supplied by his latest available silver coin, after a pretty long reign 
of 41 years. Him succeeded his son, Skandagupta, who successfully repulsed 
the attack of the Pu§yamitras, 1 probably of the Narmada region, just before 
the death of his father, and thus re-established the falling fortunes of his 
family. There is no knowing if the succession of this great hero was as a 
matter of necessity accelerated by the dangeis that lurked behind the Gupta 
throne, or as a matter of right, he being the eldest of the sons of his imperial 
father, but coupled with the omission, indubiously deliberate, of his mother’s 
name in all extant records is the fact, highly significant, that he is called 
Gupta-v am suikti- vira h in his Bhitari Pillar inscription. No stress would nor- 
mally be*, required to lay upon his claim to belong to the Gupta lineage, had 
not the claim been calculated to lx: sufficiently feeble or impaired. Of him, 
again, his Kahaurn Stone Pillar inscription of the year 461 a.d. speaks in the 
same strain Guptanam vamsa yasya , i.e. who belonged to the family of the 
Guptas. This repeated solicitude on the part of the son of Kumaragupta I 
to recognise him as a true member of the Gupta dynasty renders it almost 
sure that he was born not of a Mahadein. That Kumaragupta I, like his 
father, Candragupta II, had two wives is also perhaps indicated by his ‘ Two 
queen's type ’ coins, which are classified by Allan as of 4 Pratiapa type \ In 
the Bihar Pillar inscription of Skandagupta (?), there is in its first part 
(11. 2-3) an allusion to a minister whose sister had become Kurrwagupta’s 
wife, and one might be tempted to conjecture that she was perhaps the mother 
of Skandagupta, but has recently been suggested by Dr. R. C. Majumdar 
that the inscription belongs not to Skandagupta but to a successor of Pflru- 
gupta, evidently Kumaragupta II, and it is he w r ho is the Kumaragupta of the 
first part of the inscription. 2 

There is, however, reason to believe that Skandagupta’s mother came of 
a family that had eventually proved inimical to the Guptas. Referring to 
Skandagupta, the Bhitari a Stone Pillar inscription tells us that 44 who, when 
(his) father had attained the skies, conquered (his) enemies by the strength 
of his arm, and established again the ruined fortunes of (his) lineage ; and 
then crying 44 the victory has been achieved," betook himself to (his) mother, 
whose eyes were full of tears of joy, just as Krsoa, when he had slain (his) 

1. If that be the correct reading of the text.. 

2. Ind. Cult X, p. 172. 



618 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


enemies betook himself to (his mother) DevakI.’ The simile contained here- 
in does not suggest that the name of Skandagupta’s mother was DevakI, as 
it was first propounded by Robert Sewell." The force of the comparison of 
Skandagupta and his unnamed mother with Kisna and DevakI respectively 
can only be maintained by supposing that like Krsna, who had slain his 
maternal uncle (Karnsa) and thus saved the Yadava family from impending 
destruction, Skandagupta also worsted a powerful relative on his mothers 
side and saved the Gupta empire from imminent ruin'-'. This relative might 
have been the leader of the so-called Pusyamitras or a member of that tribe 
or only one who had joined them in their design against the Guptas, but in 
any case he had met discomfiture at the hands of the valiant Skandagupta. 
And this is apt to explain why, at the news of the defeat of the enemies by 
her son, the eyes of Skandagupta's mother were full of tears and why, again, 
the tears were of joy. 

Skandagupta ruled vigorously over the destinies of the Gupta empire for 
twelve years from 455 to 467 a.d., and had his successor in his step-brother, 
whose reign, admittedly, was an extremely short one extending only over a 
year or two (467-68 a.d.). Piirugupta, and not Puragupta, was his name, 
and Anantadevi that of his mother. The supposition that she was a Iva 
damba princess, daughter of Kakusthavarman, who is placed between circa 
435 and 475 a.d ., 3 4 5 6 may safely be discarded, for it makes the father-in-law at 
best a junior contemporary of the son-in-law. To Puru ( gupta i was assigned 
by Allan the gold coin of the Archer type with the legend Svl-viknuntih on the 
reverse, which has of late been attributed to Budha (gupta) by Mr. S. K. 
Saraswati/* with whom I, however, fail to see eye to eye on this point. While 
the first letter of the king’s name beneath the left arm lias had yet to be re- 
examined, the second letter has unmistakably the appearance of a ra, rather 
than of a dha . But in any case, the coin testifies to that one other Imperial 
Gupta sovereign than Samudragupta,* Candragupta II and Skandagupta did 
assume the biruda of Vikrama . Kumar a gupta 11 , too, it is relevant to add 
here, had the biruda of Kramadiiya , which as is found in case of Skanda- 
gupta, was probably a variant of Vikramaditya , and Vikrmndditya may, 
therefore, be said to have been a common biruda of many a member of the 
Imperial Gupta dynasty. The shortness of Purugupta’s reign, unless it was 
accidental, has had to be explained by the comparatively long reigns of his 
great-grandfather, grandfather and father and then the inter-regnum of his 
step-brother, which show that he had the lot to cortie to the throne at a very 
advanced age. But the shortness of his reign mbit not be constituted a 

3. Historical Inscriptions of Southern India , p. 349. 

3a. Cf. also Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar, in Ind-, Vol. XVIII, p. 212, 

4. Dandekar, History of the Guptas , Poona, 1941, p. 102. A 

5. Ind . C«&, I, p. 691. 

6. Journal of the Numismatic Society aj India, Vol. V, 1943, pp. 136-37. 



ON THE SUCCESSORS OF KUMARAGUPTA I 619 

reason for denying his separate existence from his step brother. The identi- 
fication of Piirugupta with Skandagupta, which was first proposed by Dr. R. 
C. Majumdar 7 to be controverted by R. D. Banerji, s has recently b(*en re- 
vived by Mr. Krishna Dcva f ,J labouring under the idea that of Purugupta we 
have no coins, and having drawn considerably from the apocryphal Manjusrl - 
Mtda-Kalpa. But apart from the coin in question of the Ilocy Collection, 
which has been ascribed by Mr. Saraswati to Budhagupta, there are in a pri- 
vate collection at Patna two gold coins from Cava, 44 * on which the name Pu r a 
is very distinct.” 10 Even bereft of all coins, Purugupta, born of Anantadevi, 
cannot be one and the same with Skandagupta, whose mother >vas in all like- 
lihood not the Mahadevz . 

If Allan's attribution of the coin with, the Sri-vikramah legend to Puru- 
gupta be rejected, nothing is left there to regard him identical, as Allan did, 
with the Vikramaditya of Ayodhya, lather of Baladitya, who is said to have 
later on become a zealous patron of Buddhism through the influence of Vasu- 
bandhu, or to suppose that he had his capital at Ayodhya. Dr. Dandekar 
accepts Mr. Saraswati s ascription of the coin to Budhagupta and yet believes 
in Allan's identification of Purugupta with the Vikramaditya of Ayodhya of 
Paramartha’s description. 1 1 * 

The name of Piiruguptn's queen was Sri-CandratlevTe- arid she was the 
mother of Narasimhagupta. His coins give him the biruda of Baladitya. 
Tlic fact that his seal has been found at Nalanda may. if at all, indicate his 
association, through his patronage, with the University, then in its making, 
but if the statement of Paramfutha be construed to mean that Narasimha- 
gupta Baladitya, son of Purugupta, was even before his accession a Buddhist 
disciple of Vasubandhu, it is an absurdity. In his own seal, Narasimha- 
gupta’s religious persuasion is dearly indicated by designating him a pauma- 
bhaga(vala ). 13 Paramarthas story of Baladitya is either fictitious, or the 
identification of his Baladitya cannot, in the present state of our knowledge, 
be made out. 

A Nalanda seal reveals the fact that MahAiajadhiraja Budhagupta was 
a son. of Purugupta, and not of Kumaragupta I, whose biruda , Mahendm - 
ditya , has hitherto been responsible for equating it with Hiuen Tsangs Sakrfi- 
ditya, the name of the father of the pilgrims Buddhagupta. Purugupta had 
thus (at least) two sons, Narasimhagupta and Budhagupta. The son of 
Narasirhhagupta, by Sif-MitradevI, was, as evinced by the seals both from 

7. Ind. Ant.. XLVII, 1918, p. 161 f. 

a Am Bh. Or . Res. Inst ., I, pp. 73 75. 9. Ep. Ind., XXVI, pp. 237-38. 

10. An. Bh. Or. Res. Inst., I, pp. 73-75. 

H. Op. cit., p. 125. 12. A. S. Ann. Rep. t 1934-35, p. 63. 

13. Nalanda and Its epigrapkical material (Mem. A. S. I.), by Ilirananda 

Sastri, p. 65. • 



620 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Nalanda and Bhitari, 1 * Kumaragupta II, whose son, again, according to 
another Nalanda seal, was the Maharajadhiraja Visougupta. 15 Of one Ku- 
maragupta, presumably Kumaragupta II, son of Narasiriihagupta, we have 
the date 473 a.d. in a Sarnath votive inscription, while another votive ins- 
cription from the same site gives the date 476 a.d. for Maharaja Budhagupta. 
The latter, as we know from his coin, ruled up till 495 a.d. at least, and after 
him came Vainyagupta. whose Gunaighar inscription is dated in 507 a.d. In 
510 a.d. the Imperial Gupta monarch was Bhanugupta. the- last known re- 
presentative of the dynasty. 

A genealogical table drawn in the light of the above data stands thus : 
Name unknown = Kumaragupta I — Anantadevt 

I i 

Skandagupta Purugupta : Sri-Candrad.:;vi 

455 -467 a.d. 467 -68 A.D. 


Narasiriihagupta 

= Sri-Mitradevi 

! 

i 

Kumaragupta II 

473 a.d. 


Budhagupta 
476- -495 A.D. 

i 

i 

Vainyagupia 
507 a.d. 


V i$rmgupta Bha nugupta 

510 A.I>. 

The difficulty of accommodating the three generations of kings, Nara- 
siriihagupta, Kumaragupta II and Vi$nugupta, within the brief space of only 
eight years, is on the surface of things, while the accession of Budhagupta 
after the reign of his grand-nephew, Visnugupta, is also an event not of 
common or usual occurrence. And in order to get out of these difficulties. 
Dr. R. C. Majumdar has lately suggested that Kumaragupta of 473 a.d. was 
a different person from Kumaragupta. the son of Narasiriihagupta and father 
of Visnugupta, and that ail thtr-e three kings came after Budhagupta. 111 The 
genealogical scheme, according to this theory has to be represented as fol- 
lows : 


Purugupta 


• l i 

Kumaragupta (II) Budhagupta Narasiriihagupta 

473 a.d. 476—495 A.D. v | 

Kumaragupta (III) 

I 

VigQugupta. 

But apart from the fact that Kumaragupta (.II ) , as a son of Purugupta, 
exists only in surmise, Dr. Majumdar’s scheme presupposes, on one hand. 


14. Ibid; p. 66. 

16. bid. Cult., X, pp. 172-73. 


15. Ep. Ind, f XXVI, p. 235. 



ON THE SUCCESSORS OF KUMARAGUPTA I 621 

That the two consecutive elder brothers, Kumaragupta (II) and Budhagupta 
could not have any sons to succeed them, and places, on the other, the three 
successive generations of kings, Narasimhagupta, Kumaragupta (III) and 
Vi$QUgupta, between 495 ajx, the last known date of Budhagupta, and 507 
A.ix, the date of Maharajadhiraja Vainyagupta, whose existence as a member 
of the Imperial Gupta dynasty wc cannot deny. In other words, Dr. Majum- 
dars hypothesis, although ingenious in conception, does not improve the situa- 
tion at ail, and as such we are required to approach the question by falling 
Ixick upon the genealogy as drawn previously, but striving at the same time 
to render it, if possible, more agreeable to a normal outlook. Thus although 
the name of Budhagupta first occurs in a Sarnath inscription of G. E. 157 
( - - A. I>. 476), wc must note that he is styled as simply a Maharaja therein, 
and if it has any significance, he has to be regarded only as a governor of the 
Sarnath region at that time. This will reduce the duration of Budhagupta’s 
reign by a few years which may conveniently be allotted to the reigns of his 
immediate predecessors. The first known inscription manifesting Budhagupta 
in imperial, glory is one of the Damodarpur inscriptions dated in G. E. 163 
■ - a. ix 482). Or, if we cannot subscribe to such a view, we may tenta- 
tively shift the reign of Visnugupta to the period just following the reign of 
Budhagupta and lx fore that of Vainyagupta. 

Too much has been made in recent years of the evidence of two epi gra- 
phic records, viz. the Tumain (about fifty miles to the north-west of Eran ) 
inscription of Ghatotkacagupta of G. E. 116 ('■ = a.ix 435) and the un- 
published Mandasar inscription of Prabhakara of V. S. 524 ( A. d. 467 ). 
Ghalotkacagupta, we know, was either a son or brother or step-brother of 
Kumaragupta 1, and, according to a day sea! found at Basarb, he held 
some oflice at the court of the Yuvaiaja at VaiSli (Basarh) during the 
reign of Candiagupta IT. And in 425 while the king ( nr pat i ) 

Kumaragupta, “ who resembled the great Tndrn, embraced and protected the 
whole earth, like a virtuous wife, with his mighty hands, 1 and “ was shin- 
ing (i.e. ruling over) the earth like the Smti in the winter,*' Ghatotkaca- 
:upta was, according to the Tumain inscription, the governor of Airikina 
(Eran) or Eastern Mahva. There is absolutely no indication whatever 
in the Tumain inscription that “Ghatotkaca Gupta was then trying to be 
politically independent, by severing all loyal connections, which he owed, 
in his capacity of a provincial governor, to his sovereign in Magadha.” 18 
And it is indeed a dangerous hypothesis to set forth that “ the internal 
dissensions among the scions of the Gupta royal family thus appear to have 
started even during the times of Kumaragupta l/' 10 

Similarly there is nothing in the summary given of the Mandasor in- 
scription of Prabhakara, whose commandcr-in-chief ( Dattabhafa ) was the 


17. Ep . IrM., XXVI, p. 117. 
19. Ibid., p. 119. 


18. Dandekar op. cit., p. 119. 



622 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


son of the general ( Vayuraksita ) of Govindagupta, to bring home that 
" immediately after the death of Skandagupta in 467 a. a, Govinda Gupta 
refused to acknowledge the suzerainty of the Gupta emperor of Magadha.”- 0 
Such a theory owed its inception to R. D. Banerji,** who suspected that the 
absence of the name of Skandagupta in Prabhakara’s inscription must have 
been pregnant with a lot of meaning. But the late lamented Professor had 
himself admitted later on that, 41 It is not clear from the wording of this 
inscription whether Govindagupta was alive in V. S. 524 -467 a. d. or 
not 11,22 Even supposing, in the absence of the full text of the inscription, 
that Govindagupta, a contemixjrary of the father of an officer of Prabha- 
kara, was in life in 467 a. l>., one must now cease to attach any immoderate 
importance, if not warranted by any specific attestation, to the. omission 
of the name of the paramount sovereign in an inscription. Does the Pa had - 
pur inscription, for instance, of the year 478-79 a. d. ( where the name of 
the Imperial lord is conspicuous by its absence, prove that the local chief- 
of Pundravardhana had by that time refused to acknowledge the suzerainty 
of the then Gupta emperor ( Budhagupta )? All that, we know of Govinda 
gupta is that Maharaja Govindagupta, son of Candragupta II and Dhru- 
vasvamini, was for some time the governor of some province, probably of 
Vaisall (Basarli), and that he was subsequently tiarisferred to Malava 
( Western ) as its governor during the reign of either Kumaragupta I or 
of Skandagupta." 3 In the imagination of Dr. R. N. Saletorc, Govindagupta 
was the suzerain lord of the Gupta empire in 413-15 a. r>.. and governor of 
Malwa in 467-68 a.d. ! 21 

But who was Prabhakara? As he is, in the Mandasor inscription, 
called Gupt-mvay-wi-druma-dhumaketuh (the destroyer of the enemies 
of the Gupta family ), he is rightly supposed to have been a feudatory of 
the Imperial Gupta dynasty,-’ 1 and governor of Dasapura ( Mandasor 
Dr. N. P. Chakravarti suggests that he was perhaps the successor, if not 
the son, of Bandhuvarman,- 7 and [Perfectly entertaining as the suggestion 
is, it explains why, like all other records of this family, the Malava era has 

20. I hid-, p. 120. 21. /lgfi of the Imperial Guptas, p. 51. 

22. Ibid., p. 66, App. I. 

23. It has been suggested by Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar that, “ As Indra is 
represented as being suspicious of Govindagupta’s power, the latter seems to have 
been a supreme ruler.” (List of Inscriptions of Northern India, No. 7, p. 2, foot- 
note 5 ) . But if it is not an innocent and artless effort of the writer of the epi- 
graph to magnify Govindagupta by the employment of any figurative language, 
the Indra of the text would look to contain a covert allusion to the contemporary 
Gupta emperor who was then suspicious of the growing power of the provincial 
governor. 

24. Life in the Gupta Age t pp. 27-30 and p. 35. 

25. Bhandarkar’s List of Inscriptions of Northern India , p. 2, footnote 4, 

26. R. D. Banerji, Age of the Imperial Guptas , p. 66, App. I. 

27. Ep. lnd. t XXVI, p. 131, footnote 4. 



ON THE SUCCESSORS OP KUMARAGUPTA I 623 

been used in the inscription of Prabhakara, too. It cannot be divined at 
present if Prabhakara ( <167 a. d. ) continued to be the governor of Dasa- 
pura in 473 a. d., the date of the second part of the Mandasor inscription 
composed by VatsabhaUi according to which a part of the temple of the 
Sun built at Dasapura in 436 a. d., when Kumaragupta I was the Imperial 
lord and Bandhuvarman was the governor of the place, by a guild of silk- 
weavers from the Lata visaya fell into disrepair through the indifference of 
several kings ( attyaih pdrthivaih ), and after thirty-six years it was res- 
tored by the same guild. But we must not doubt that' the allusion to the 
‘ several kings ’ in Vatsabhatti’s inscription applies to Kumaragupta I, Skanda- 
gupta, Purugupta and Narasirhhagupta,-* and as such Western Malava 
did never cease to have been included in the Gupta empire till at least 473 
a.d., when Kumaragupta II was the paramount sovereign. 

As to other provinces and feudatories, the use of the Gupta era and of 
the phrase Gupta- nrpa-rdjya-bhuklau ( in the enjoyment of sovereignty by 
the Gupta Kings ) in the copper-plates, dated in 475, 482 and 510 A. D. of 
the Paribrajaka Maharaja Hastin of Dahala ( Mod. Bundelkhand region 
of Central India and the area covered by the eighteen forest kingdoms ) 
shows that the ruler was all through a feudatory of the Guptas. An inscrip- 
tion found in the Rewa State, bordering on the Mirzapur district of the 
If. P„ and issued from Jayapura records the grant of a village to a Brah- 
min by Maharaja Laksmana in the year 158, which is referrable to the 
Gupta era and would thus correspond to a.d. 477. ::M The grant recorded 
in the Barwani ( in Central India ) copper plate inscription is issued by 
Maharaja Subandhu in the (Gupta) year 167 (--a.d. 486) from 

Mahi$mat.i. which is either Mahesvara or Mandhata on the Narmada."" 
If the employment of the Gupta era in these two charters is not without 
significance, both Lak§mai;ia and Subandhu were feudatories of Budha- 
gupta. Budliagupta, again, according to the Eran Stone Pillar inscription 
of Maharaja Matrvisnu and Dhanyavi§pu. was recognised as the overlord 
of Eastern Malava in 484 a. d., when his viceroy, Surasmicandra. was. 
ruling the country between the Kalindi ( Yamuna ) and the Narmada. In 
the east, the P&hadpur and the two Damodarpur copper-plates prove his 
domination over the Pund ra vardhana bhukti. In the west, in Kathiawaci 
and Gujarat, Bhafarka Senapati of the Maitraka family and his eldest son, 
Dharasena I, both of whom may be placed between 460 and 500 A.D., did not 
even assume the title of Maharaja, while the second son of Bhatarka, Maha- 
raja Dronjasiriiha, refers himself as Parama-bkaftaraka pad — anudhyalah 
in his Bhamodra Mahotta copper-plate of the year 183 ( = a.d. 502), and 
speaks, in another inscription, of the (same) paramount sovereign as having 

28. Cf. Dandekar, op. cit., p. 135. 

29. A. S. I., ,4mm. Rep., 1936-37, p 88, and Age of the Imperial Guptas, p. 64. 

30. Ep, Ind., XIX, pp. 261-63. 



624 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


personally attended and performed the coronation of Dronaskhha ( akhila - 
b h uv cm a- matulal ~ aika-svamina f mroma-svamwd svayarn — upahita-rdjy — 
abhi$eka). Tliat this Paraina-svami or paramount sovereign of Drojiasimha 
is no other than a Gupta potentate is indubious , 31 and he is either Budhagupta 
or his immediate successor. 

Have not the evidence furnished by these: inscriptions tire cogency of 
casting to the winds the i>opular idea of the disintegration of the Gupta em- 
pire since the days of Skandagupta ? “A period of anarchy and misrule in 
the annals of the Guptas, beginning with the death of Skandagupta," 33 is 
almost an idle fancy, although it is perfectly true that the homage rendered 
to the Gupta overlords by some of these feudatories, who had usurped the 
prerogative of issuing land grants and even coins, and also refrained from 
referring to the name of the imperial suzerain in their official charters, was 
merely nominal in charactei and perhaps in some cases the shadow of a shade. 
But however titular might have been the cmpciors, the available records 
demonstrate that the empire of Kumaragupta I, extensive as it was, did not 
materially suffer dismemberment before the beginning of the sixth century a.d. 

Probably the only extant record that goes against, this conclusion is the 
Balaghat copper-plate inscription of the Vakataka Prthvi«ena II," 3 which 
states that the sovereignty of his father, Narcndrasena, was acknowledged by 
the lords of Kosala (i.e. Mahakosala, the upper Mahanadl valley), Mekala 
(probably the upper Narmada valley) and Malava. And it has been inferred 
from it that Narendrasena, believed to be a contemporary of Skandagupta, 
had immediately after the death of the latter, extended with the help of his 
son, his sway over these provinces taking advantage of the tragedy of Skau- 
dagupla's death. 31 But Narcndrasena, the grandson or greet -grandson of 
Rudrasena II, who was the brother-in-law of Kumaragupta I, could hardly 
be a true contemporary of Skandagupta, the son of Kumaragupta I, nor the 
history of Malava shows that any part, of it seceded from Gupta overlordship 
any time before 473 a.t>. If the statement of the Balaghat inscription is not 
wholly a poetical exaggeration, it would seem that the Gupta governor of 
Western Malava, perhaps of the family of Bandhuvarman, the militant atti- 
tude of which is throughout displayed by the employment of the Malava in- 
stead of the Gupta, era in their records, changed allegiance to the Vakatakas 
after 473 a.d., and became a subordinate ally of Narendrasena. but in that 
case, we are to suppose that Western Malava was later on wrested by the 
Hfipas not from the Guptas but from the Vlakatakas. 

The immediate successor of Budhagupta was either Vispugupta or more 
probably Vainyagupta. There is no proof, as I have distinctly said in my 

31. Dandekar, op. cit., pp. 144-47. 

32. Ibid, p. 124. 33. Ep. Ind., IX. p. 271. 

34. Dandekar, op. cit., p. 117. Dr. Saletore has gone to the extent of making 
Narendrasena a cousin of Skandagupta,’ Life m the Gupta Age, p. 36. 



OK THE SUCCESSORS OF KUMARAGUPTA 


625 


paper on ‘ Vainyagupta \ 371 to identify him with Hiuen Tsang’s Tatliagupta- 
raja, a name unknown to sober history, but it is amusing to find myself re- 
presented as having “ identified Vainyagupta with the Tathagata Gupta of 
Yuang Chwang ”, “simply because an inscription of his reign bearing the 
date a.d. 506-7 and some Nalanda seals bearing his name have been found." :it! 
Not to see in Vainyagupta a member of the Imperial Gupta dynasty at this 
hour of the day is dogmatism that does not count in history. After Vainyagupta 
came one Rhanugupta (510 a.d.). and he met a signal defeat at the hands of 
Toramapa, the leader of the Ilunas who dared not make any inroad into the 
Gupta territory for more than half a century past. Toramaina s son, Mihira- 
kula, was destined to be overpowered by Yasodharman. who can no more be 
regarded as to have had a meteoric career. The Bihar Kotra {in the Raj- 
gadh State, Malwa) inscription of Naravarman describing him as aulikara 
definitely points out that Yasodharman, 07 who had the aulikara-tdiicana, be- 
longed to the family of Naravarman (418 a.d.), Visvavarman (424 a.d.), 
Bandhuvarman (437 a.d.) as also Prabhakara (467 a.d.) of Dasapura. 
Yasodharman first recovered Malwa from Mihirakula after the 15th regnal 
year of Htina monarch (the date of the Gwalior inscription of Matrceta), 
and gradually by 533 a.d. extended his empire upto the Lauhitya region. It 
is, therefore, Yasodharman, rather than the Hujnas, who directly dealt the 
death-blow to the empire of the Imperial Gupta dynasty. 


35. Ind. Cult., V, p. 301. 

36. Saletore, Life in the Gupta Age , p, 47. 

37. Or YaSovaiman 7- JBGRS. XXIX, 1943, pp. 127-28 

41 



THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE EARLY KINGS OF 

NEPAL 

By 

Dr. R. C. MAJUMDAR, m.a., ph.d., f.r.a.s.b. 

t 

\ The chronology of the early kings of Nepal is one of the various intrigu- 
ing problems of ancient Indian history. As is well-known, quite a large 
number of inscriptions, found in Nepal, supply us with the names of a long 
line of rulers and many of these records are also dated. The chronological 
problem, therefore, resolves itself mainly to an interpretation of these dates. 
But opinion differs widely on this point. In order to understand these differ- 
ences ol : views it is necessary to state that the early records of Nepal can be 
broadly divided into two groups. The second group starts with the records 
of Aimsuvarman dated 30, 32, 34 etc. and ends with the inscription of Jaya- 
deva II dated 153. There is a consensus of opinion that all these dates 
between 32 and 153 refer to one and the same era. The first group comprise* 
the rest of the records, the date in none of which is less than 300. It is the 
reading and interpretation of these dates that has given rise to differences 
and difficulties. Pandit Bhagawan Lai Indraji, who first dealt with this sub- 
ject, referred them to the Vikrama Era. 1 Dr. Fleet took them all to be years 
of the Gupta Era. 2 S. Levi propounded the view that they all belong to a 
special era current in Nepal and he fixed its epoch to be 110 A.D.- 1 

Dr. R. G. Basak, the latest writer on the subject, has expressed an alto- 
gether different view 1 after considering those of his predecessors, and we may 
begin by considering it in some details. lie agrees with Indraji in referring 
the "dates of Manadeva and Vasantadeva to the Vikrama era, but differs from 
the latter in the reading and interpretation of the dates of Sivadeva’s records. 
He talqes the hundredth figure in these? dates to be 300 instead of 500 and 
refers them to the Gupta era. He thinks it quite probable that “the des- 
cendants of Vasantadeva began to use .... the Gupta samvat from the 
time when Samudra-gupta forced the Nepal king to pay allegiance to his 
lord-paramountcy. .. . and to accept the era introduced by his family from 
the beginning of his father Chandra-gupta Is reign (in 319-20 a.c.) This 
would be quite a reasonable view if it were based on facts. Unfortunately 
it is not so ; for Dr. Basak himself refers the dates 449 and 489 of the Kisi 
pidi and Tsapaligaon inscriptions to Vikrama era. Thus down to about 

1. IA. XIII. 411 ff. The inscriptions were edited by Indraji in IA. IX. 163 ff. 

2. Cl I. III. Introduction, pp. 177 ff. 3. Le Nepal III, 4£ff, 73 ff« 

4. HNL 274 ff. (HNI— History of North-eastern India.) - 



CHRONOLOGY - OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 627 

432 a.d. i.e. long after the death of Samudra-gupta and his son, the Vikrama 
era, and not the Gupta era, is found to be in use in Nepal. As a matter of 
fact, even according to Dr. Basak’s view, the earliest known record in Nepal 
dated in the Gupta era is the inscription of ’Sivadeva dated 318. This takes 
us near to the middle of the seventh century a.d. when the Gupta empire 
and along with it the Gupta political influence had long been a thing of the 
past. As things stand at present, we have therefore to presume, according 
to Dr. Basak’s view, that the kings of Nepal did not use the Gupta era during 
the height of the Gupta power when they themselves were subject to its 
authority, but adopted it only after the decline of the Gupta empire and 
probably long after its downfall. It is obvious that such a view does not 
commend itself on general grounds. 

Dr. Basak has definitely discarded Levi’s view of a special Nepal era 
starting in 1 10 a.d. Unfortunately he does not appear to have possessed 
a first, hand knowledge of Ixivi's book” 1 written in French, and has not only 
failed to understand his arguments but even sometimes represented them in 
an altogether wrong way. It is essential, therefore, that we should clear up 
this point before we proceed further. 

According to Dr. Basak Levi’s theory is based on the astronomical data 
furnished by the inscription of Manadeva, dated samvat 386. Levi, we are 
told, “ arrives at the conclusion that such a combination of astronomical 
phenomena was only possible on Tuesday, the 1st May, 496 a.d. Hence he 
starts a working hypothesis that the dates in samvat in the early Nepal ins- 
criptions are to be referred to a Lichchhavi era, then in vogue, which had 
its smiling point in the year 110 a.d.” 

The Uuth is just tire opposite. As a matter of fact S-fivi first i>ointed 
out' - that Fleet, while referring the year 386 of Manadeva’s inscription to 
Gupta era, found these astronomical details applicable to the resulting date 
viz. 28tli April, 705 a.d. He then remaiked that these astronomical data 
do not really enable us to fix any particular date, for they would be found 
applicable to many other years. He! then observed that these astronomical 
details would as well fit in with his own theory, which would refer the date 
of the inscription to 1st May 496 A.D. Thus, far from concluding that the 
combination of the astronomical phenomena was only possible op this date, 
I-evi expressed the diametrically opposite view, 

It is curious that Dr. Basak docs not refer to the real argument 8 on 
which Levi's theory is based. This may be summed up as follows. The 
Kisipidi Ins. (No. VI of L6vi) dated in samvat 449 refers to prattmm-asadha 
i.e. the first month of A$&Jha, showing that there was an intercalary month 

4a. In addition to what is stated in. the paragraphs immediately following cf. 
fn. 15, j.9 and 31 below. 

5. Nepal, III, pp. 7ff. 


6. Ibid., pp. 49 ff. 



628 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of Asatjha in that year. Now, sivadeva, one of whose records is dated sam- 
vat 520, was a contemporary* of Airhsuvarman and thus belonged to the first 
half of the seventh century a.d. Samvat 449, which is 71 years earlier, would 
thus fall about the middle of the 6th cent. ad. Now there were only three 
years in the whole of this century in which there was an intercalary Jfoadka 
month, viz. 481 Saka (559-60 A.D.), 501 saka (578-9 a.d.) and 520 Saka 
(597-8 ad.). As the last two dates would bring Sivadeva, who flourished 
71 years later, much later in time than Amsuvarman, the first alone is accept- 
able. Hence assuming that 449 samvat is equivalent to 482 Saka, the Nepa- 
lese era must have begun in saka 33 current or 110 a.d. 

Evidently Dr. Basak was unaware of this process of reasoning on which 
Levi based his theory. For in criticising it he comments that Levi s theory 
is incompatible with the date of Sivadeva which Levi wrongly read as 520 but 
which is really 320. As has been stated above, the whole theory of Ix*vi was bas 
ed on the assumption that Sivadeva s date was 520. Dr, Basak is also quite 
wrong when he says that 4 Levi himself also doubted the reading of the sym- 
bol for hundreds, specially the element 5 of 500 which seemed to him as 
written in the manner of 3 (‘ en numiere du 3-’). Hero, again, Dr. Basak s 
presentation of Levi's views is diametrically opposite to the truth. Levi has 
discussed at length 7 why the particular numerical symbol should be read as 
500 and not 300. He maintained that in this respect Indraji was quite right 
and wondered how “without a word of explanation or justification, and 
without even pointing out the divergence ” from the reading of Indraji. 
Bendall should have read the numerical symbol in Golmadhi-tol inscription 
of Sivadeva as 300. Thus l^evi not only read the symbol as 500 in the two 
inscriptions noted by Dr. Basak, but also in the inscription of Sivadeva, 
which Dr. Basak has accepted as dated in 318 without any reference to Levi s 
view. Levi points out that in this symbol, the symbol for 5 is attached and 
placed to the left of the symbol for hundred. While discussing the Dharam- 
pur inscription he observes* that ‘ here the element 5 of 500 is exactly similar 
to that of the Khopasi ins., but the sign for the hundred, instead of being 
a double curve, like (English figure) 3 ( 'en manierc du 3) of Khopasi is 
somewhat like (English letter) S turned on its axis (une sorte d's retoume 
sur son axe). It is thus obvious that Dr. Basak had a very imperfect ac- 
quaintance with,, and often took a very^ distorted view of, L£vi’s statemciAs 
and arguments. This is most unfortunate, as Dr. Basak’s elaborate aad 
learned disquisition on the chronology of Nepal in*a scholarly work is likefly 
to be regarded as a good summary of the existing views on the subjedft, 
particularly by those who arc unwilling or unable to consult the origina 
writings of the previous scholars. I have therefore felt it necessary to discuss 1 
the point at some length. 


7. Ibid., pp. 73 ff. 


8. Ibid,-, p. 68. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 


629 


Coming back to the main question of chronology, it would appear that 
the solution of the whole problem hinges upon the interpretation of the first 
numerical symbol of the dates in the inscriptions of Sivadeva (who lived in 
the first half of sixth century a.l>.), read as 500 by Levi, and as 300 by Dr. 
Basak. For a few other inscriptions, which are obviously earlier, are dated 
between 386 and 489 a.d. If the dates of Sivadeva’s inscriptions are taken 
to be 500 to 520, we must agree with Levi that all the dates form a series 
belonging to one era, and that era must have begun some time about 100 
a.d. and not impossibly in 110 a.d. On the other hand if Sivadeva’s 
dates range between 310 and 320 they evidently belonged to the Gupta era 
and the dates of earlier kings, between 386 and 449 A.D., must be referred 
to a different era. This would most probably be a well-known era like the 
Vikrama era, as suggested by Indraji and endorsed by Dr. Basak, or the 
Saka era, for there would then be no adequate grounds for assuming the 
existence of a special Nepal era. % 

Levi, as noted above, has discussed at length why the particular symbol 
should be read as 500 and not 300. The symbol for 300, he says, is regularly 
formed by adding two strokes to the proper left of the vertical stroke of the 
symbol for 100. As Buhler observes, from 400 onwards the hundred-figures 
are formed by a juxtaposition of the symbol of hundred and the particular 
numerical figure from 4 to 9. Ixivi then points out that in the inscriptions 
of Sivadeva the symbol for hundred is like English figure 3 and to this is 
joined another symbol consisting of a vertical line with two strokes attached 
to its proj)er left, the lower of which ends in a curve. This symbol, according 
to Levi, represents 5, and he supports his view by pointing out a similar 
symbol for 5 in Buhlcr’s Plate IX, Col. VII. In his opinion, therefore, the 
two symbols reproduced in Buhler’s PI. IX, cols. XIII and XIV against 300 
have different connotations, the former meaning 300 and the latter 500. There 
is undoubtedly a great deal of force in Levi’s arguments, and it is a pity that 
Dr* Basak did not discuss the point, but simply took it for granted that the 
symbol denotes 300 and not 500. It must be admitted, however, that Levi’s 
arguments are not convincing. In the first place, the symbol in the ligature, 
which he takes for 5, no doubt resembles the symbol for 5 reproduced in 
Buhler’s plate IX, Col. ’VII, but that refers to the Kushan period. It has 
no resemblance whatsoever with the symbol for 5 used in Nepal inscriptions, 
e.g. in the Stele I of Harigaon which is almost a contemporary record. Sec- 
ondly, the ligature representing 400 in Nepal inscriptions shows a full form 
of 100 with the vertical stroke on the proper left, whereas according to Levi’s 
theory, this element is dropped in the case of 500. This is, no doubt, a 
possible view, and the shortened form of 100, reduced to a figure like English 
3, may be due to modifications in course of a century. On the other hand 
it is equally possible to hold that the figure like 3 joined with a stroke to 
a vertical line on the proper left is a modification of the old symbol for 100, 



630 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


so that with the two strokes, on its proper left, it may be regarded as the 
symbol /or 300. The curve noted at the end of one of the strokes may, be 
due to changes in course of the two or three centuries that intervened be- 
tween the two series of records. In support of this it may be pointed out 
that the symbol in the Dharampur ins. shows a closet resemblance with the 
old symbol for 300 and may represent an intermediate form. While there- 
fore, wc are unable to agree with Dr. Basak that the * symbol for 300 is 
clear and correct’, we find it equally dilficult to accept it definitely as 500 
in spite of the authority of Indraji and. Levi behind it. No final solution of 
the problem is perhaps possible so long as wc do not come across a record in 
which the date is not merely written with the symbol but also actually 
expressed in words. Until then we have to be satisfied with a tentative chro- 
nological scheme based upon general historical facts which we next proceed 
to discuss. 

It is well-known that the list of early kings of Nepal is supplied by a 
number of local chronicles, known as the VathsdvaUs. But these cannot 
be accepted as reliable historical data unless supported by more positive 
evidence. Fortunately, the Pasnpati temple inscription of king Jayadeva. 
who flourished in the eighth century a.d., together with a few other records, 
helps us to check at least a. certain section of the Vamsavalts, and this, ftw 
the present, must form the starting point in any discussion of the history 
and chronology of Nepal. 

The Pasupati temple inscription" begins with an account of the mythical 
kings of solar origin, from whom was descended Licchavi, the eponymous 
hero of the Licchavi race which we are told ‘ exists even now Passing over 
a specified number (which, however, cannot be made out on account of the 
damaged state of the record) of unnamed kings we come to Supu$pa bom 
in Puspapura. Twenty-three kings are said to have followed Supu$pa, and 
then came the illustrious Jayadeva. Eleven kings, not named, followed, and 
then came Vrsadcva. Here for the first time we get a regular list of suc- 
cession of six kings ending in Vasantadeva. 

It is extren^ely unfortunate that the verse which follows immediately 
after the account of Vasantadeva, cannot be made out in full, as a number 
of letters in the middle have peeled off. It begins w : th the words ‘ Asyantare- 
py-Udayadeva-iti kfitHdjjdta and ends with the name of' * Narendradeva 
preceded by ‘ sea .’ But the intervening six tetters which undoubtedly brought 
out the relation between the two kings are missing. Indraji read these letters 
as ‘ Strayodasa tala ’ and interpreted the verse so as to mean “ afterwards 
came thirteen (rulers) sprung from king Udayadeva, and then Narendra- 
deva But for this meaning he had to take the preceding word as jatd in 


9. IA. IX, 178. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 631 

the plural, though his own lithograph and the original rubbing clearly show 
that there is no a-kma sign after t in jata. As a matter of fact Fleet, who 
had the advantage of consulting the original rubbing of the inscription, says 
that there is no justification at all for the reading ‘ strayodasa \ He shows 
other good grounds against the reading and concludes with the suggestion 
that: the missing letters 'contained nothing but an epithet, or perhaps two, 
of Narendradeva, and that, so far from thirteen rulers having intervened 
between him and Udayadeva, he was the son of Udayadeva Levi, who 
had a fresh copy of the records prepared for him. agrees with Fleet and says 
that the wo>d jata, which is clear, is followed by two doubtful letters and a 
lacuna of *1 letters corresponding to Indraji’s 4 trayodasa lata \ lie there- 
fore suggests that we can only read and translate it as follows : “ From king 
(Udayadeva was born .... Narendradeva ”. JL Dr. Basak, without any refer- 
ence to these views, naively suggests, 14 An emendation may bd proposed for 
the lacuna after the word 4 trayodasa ’ by means of the word nrpa as an epi- 
thet to Narendradeva- -thus making the whole of the second line read thus : 
itila s trayodasa- ( nr pas ) “ ca Narendradevah" so that, ’taking trayodasa 

as an ordinal and not as a cardinal number * “Udayadeva and Dhruvadeva 

evidently an error for Narendradeva) were resfxctively the twelfth and 
the thirteenth kings after Vasantadeva \ y£ Dr. Basak evidently believe? 
that ‘ trayodasa ' is clear and definite in the record, and the lacuna only 
logins after it. ‘But Indraji’s own lithograph as well as the observations 
of Fleet and Levi based on independent study of other facsimiles leaves no 
doubt that there is no warrant at all for the reading trayodasa , taken as 
granted by Dr. Basak. 

We have, therefore, at least for the present, to dismiss altogether the 
idea that 13 (11 according to Dr. Basak) kings intervened between Vasanta- 
deva and Udayadeva. The meaning of the expression 4 asy-mlare ’ which 
connects these two kings cannot be precisely determined but there is little 
doubt, as Levi has shown, ia that Fleet’s reconstruction of the history of the 
period is hardly acceptable. According to Levi Vasantadeva’s reign was fol- 
lowed* by a critical period in the history of the Licchavi royal family of 
Nepal, involving usurpation of the royal power by Arhsuvarman. and Jisnu- 
gupta, until it was restored by Narendradeva, son of Udayadeva. 1 * Although, 
lacking in. conclusive evidence this view appears to be the most satisfactory 
for the present. 

The genealogy of thb early kings of Nepal, given in the Pasupati temple 

in. CJL III, Introd. p. 187. 11. Nepal, II, 162. 

12. HNL 281. 

13. Fleet placed Manadcva after Sivadeva and Arhsuvarman. This is so dearly 
opposed to palTOgraphical and historical evidence as shown by l>r. Tawi and Dr. 
Basak that it need not be seriously considered. 

14. Nepal, II, 163, 



632 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


inscription, may thus be represented as follows, with the omission of the my- 
thical kings at the beginning. 

1. Jayadeva 


11 kings 


13. Vpjadeva 

I 

14. Sankaradeva 

I 

15. Dharmadeva 

I 

.16. Manadeva 

I 

17. Mahideva 

I 

18. Vasantadeva 


19. L'dayadcva 

I (?) 

20. Narendradeva 

The kings Nos. 13-16 are referred to in an inscription of Manadeva (King 
No. 16, dated samvat 386. l " Two other records of Manadeva, dated 297 and 
413, 19 and one of Vasantadeva (No. 18) dated 435' T are also known. 

During the interval between Nos. 18 and 19 ruled several other kings 
whose natives are known from epigraphic records.. First we have Sivadeva 
l and his great Mahasamanta Axnsuvarman. The latter gradually usurped 
all the royal authority and ruled like an independent king. His records are 
dated 30, 32, 34 and one is probably of the year 45. Whether these dates 
.are to be referred to the Har?a era, beginning in 606 A.o., as is generally held r 
or to a Tibetan era commencing in a.d. 595 as Levi suggests, will be discussed 
later, but there is no doubt that Amsuvarman lived in the second quar- 
ter of the seventh century a.d. as Hiuen Tsang refers to him as a recent ruler. 

15. Indraji No. 1 ; Levi, No. 1. Dr. Baaak refers to this inscription as frag- 
mentary ( HNI . 242) ignoring the fact that the concluding lines which could not 
be read by Indraji were restored by L6vi. 

16. Levi No. II, Indraji No. 2. , 17. Indraji Na 3. 



. CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 633 

Two other kings who followed Sivadeva and Arhsuvarman, namely, Ji$tiu- 
gupta and Sivadeva II, are known from records dated respectively in the 
years 48 and 119. There is no doubt that these dates are to be referred to 
the same era as is used in Amsuvarman’s records. 1 " 

Sivadeva II is the son of Natendradeva who has been identified by all 
scholars with king No. 20 in the genealogical list given above. Levi also 
refers to Chinese accounts according to which Narendradeva was on the 
throne in or about 643 a.d. ,! * He must have thus a fairly long reign cover- 
ing nearly half a century. His grandson Jayadeva II issued a record dated 
in year 153 of the era used by Arhsuvarman, and thus Narendradeva, his son 
and grandson, together, must have ruled for a century or more. 

The Chinese accounts tell us that the father of Narendradeva was re- 
mover! from the throne by his younger brother, and Narendradeva was con- 
sequently forced to fly to Tibet. This, as well as the usurpation of Arhsu- 
varman and Jisyugupta who did not belong to the Licdtavi family, indicates 
internal troubles. One of tire VathsavaHs also refers to an invasion of the 
Kiratas who ruled over the kingdom for some time. 

Evidently this troublesome period is indicated by the author of the 
Pasupati temple inscription when after referring to a regular succession of 
six kings up to Vasantadcva he suddenly goes at a jump to Narendradeva, 
son of Udayadeva. He does not say, as he did on two previous occasions, 
that he is passing over or leaving out of account a number of specified kings, 
but simply draws a veil after the reign of Vasantadeva and lifts it again with 
the accession of Narendradeva. 

It is a reasonable presumption, therefore, that llic period of interval 
between Vasantadeva and Narendradeva saw the disappearance of authority, 
at least for all practical purjjoses, of the Licchavi dynasty. The epigraphic 
records have preserved the name of the Licchavi king Sivadeva, who was 
cither removed or whose power was reduced to a phantom early in the seventh 
century a.d. by his great vassal Arhsuvarman. A little more light is perhaps 
thrown on this period by the Vamsdvalis. 

The different Vamsavafis agree in their account of the first 28 kings of 
the Licchavi dynasty. What is more important, they correctly give the 
names and order of succession of kings Nos. 13-18 mentioned ini the Pasu- 
pati temple ins. It also mentions one Jayavarman early in the list. From 
such alternatives as Sivavarman or Sivadeva varman given in the same list 
this Jayavarman may be equated with Jayadeva (No. 1) of the Pasupati 

18; For the inscriptions referred to in this para, cf. the list in HNI. 248 ff. 

19. Nepal, II, 164. On p. 162 I-evi puts the date as 645. Dr. Basak places 
Narendradeva about 690 a.d. (HNI. 285) without any reference to the Chinese evi- 
dence cited by Levi. * 



634 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Ins. though the VamsavaRs put 13 kings in the intervening period, instead 
of 11 as mentioned in the latter. This close resemblance of the Vamsdvalis 
with the epigraphic records certainly gives their account of the Licchavi 
kings an authentic character, and it would not be unreasonable, therefore, 
to seek light from them regarding the period following Vasantadeva. 

The three successors of Vasantadeva are named in all the V ami avails 
as Udayadeva, Manadeva and Gunakamadeva. Levi refers to a record, with 
characters resembling those of Vasantadeva, which contains the first part of 
a name ‘ Yuvardjoda . . . .’ and which he reasonably restores to Yiwardjodayc- 
dev a i.e. prince Udayadeva. The same scholar also suggests that king Gana- 
deva, mentioned in a record of the same period is the same as Gunakama- 
deva who is mentioned as the second king after Udayadeva in the Vamsa- 

All the Yarns avails agree in naming the next three kings as Sivadeva, 
Narendradcva and Bhimadi va. After that there is some difference. Accord- 
ing tx> three of them the next two kings were Visnudcva and Visvadcva, and 
the son-in-law of the latter, Amsuvarman, founded the Thakuri dynasty. 
Another Vamsavali, however, says, that during the reign of BhTmadeva- 
varman, the Ahirs, who ruled over Ne[)al before the Licchavis, reconquered 
the country, and after three of them had ruled, sivadevav^rman restored the 
Licchavi authority and was followed by Amsuvarman.- 1 

The discrepancy in the Venus avails is perhaps due to the political troubles 
through which Nepal passed at this time, and it is not easy to reconcile the 
varying accounts. Curiously enough, the name of the three Ahir kings, 
Visirugupta, Kfenugupta and Bhumigupta, all end in Gupta, and we know 
from epigraphic records that one Jisnugupta certainly ruled immediately 
after Amsuvarman. Although, therefore, the Ahir invasion is passed over 
in three VamsavaUs, there may be some historical truth in it. It is, how- 
ever, just possible, that the Ahir rulers did not all precede, but followed, or 
were partly contemporary to, the last Licchavi rulers named in the Vamsih 
vails . Levi’s suggestion that Visvadevavarman of the three Vamsdvalis is 
identical with Sivadevavarman of the other Vamsavali , is eminently reason- 
able, 22 as both are said to be followed by Arhsu varman. The fact that the 
name of this king is definitely known to be Sivadeva from epigraphic record 
gives this solitary Vamsavali , which names him, ai.a refers to the Aliira in- 
vasion, a more authentic character than the rest. Now the three VamsavaUs, 
which ornit all references to Ahir invasion, name Vi$nudeva as the successor 
of BhTmadeva, whereas the other Vamsavali names the first Ahir king who 
succeeded BhTmadeva as Visgugupta. It may be suggested, therefore, that 
these two, Visgudeva and Visnugupta, were identical and his name shall 
be removed from the succession list of Licchavi kings. In other words he 

20. Nepal II, 120-1. 21. lb&., 92, 122. 22. Ibid., 124. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL C35 

reigned over a part of Nepal at the same time as Sivadeva, whof ultimately 
defeated him or his successor. 

Thus on the strength of the VamsavaUs we may make a provisional list 
of the successors of Vasantadeva as follows 

1. Udayadcva 

2. Manadeva (II), 

3. Gu'gakiimadcva { tlaj.iadeva ? ) 

4. Sivadeva 

5. Narendradcva 

6. Bhimadeva 

7. sivadeva {Ahir invasion 1 

8. Amsuvarman (founder ot the Thakuri dynasty) 

It is known (rom the inscriptions that Sivadeva (No. 7) was a senior 
contemporary of Amsuvarman. Levi has made a suggestion that the kings 
named Sivadeva, i.e. Nos. 4 and 7 of the above list, were really one and 
tiie same jierson, and Nos. 5 and 6 did not really rale, but their names weie 
preserved as mere links for tracing the succession of future kings. He points 
out that three Vemsavatis represent No. 4 as a king of considerable import- 
ance, mention many legends about him and refer in detail to his numerous 
religious endowments. On the other hand, Sivadeva, who ruled immediately 
before Arhsuvarman, is known from epigraphic records to have made a large 
number of religious endowments. Indeed no other king of Nepal is known 
to have issued so many giants of this kind. This argument,- 3 no doubt, 
contains a great deal of force, but against this has to bo placed the unani- 
mous testimony of all the V a/nsuvalis which separate the two kings bearing 
die name sivadeva. 

It would thus appear that we can reasonably legard the interval bet- 
ween Vasantadeva and Sivadeva- -Aaiisuvarman as occupied by the reign of 
six (or according to Levi three) kings. Now Sivadeva lived in the first half 
of tlie seventh century a.d., and a record of Vasantadeva is dated 435 samval. 
Interpreting this date by the Vikrama and Saka eras, the interval between 
tlie two would respectively be about 250 and 115 years. There can be hardly 
any question that the latter is a more reasonable period of interval than tlie 
•former. Accordingly, at (he present state of our knowledge, it would be 
most reasonable to refer the dates in the records of Manadeva and Vasanta- 
deva to the Saka era. As regards the special Licchavi era of 1 10 a.u., sug- 
gested by L6vi, it is only 33 years later than the Saka era, and it would not 
materially affect pur conclusions so far as the dates of Vasantadeva and Iris 
predecessors are concerned. Only, if we read the date of sivadeva’s record 
as 500 + X L&vi’s suggestion becomes a more, probable one, though the saka 
era would not be altogether unsuitable even in that case. 


23. Ifnd., 123-4. 



636 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Bhagawanlal Indraji referred the dates of Manadeva and Vasantadeva 
to Vikrama era, and this view has been endorsed by Dr. R. G. Basak. Both 
were no doubt influenced by the presumption, now proved to be without 
a basis, that thirteen or eleven unnamed kings after Vasantadeva preceded 
Narendradcva. There is, however, one important fact in favour of the 
Vikrama samvat which was unknown to Indraji and has been overlooked by 
Dr. Basak. Reference has already been made to the Kisipidi inscription 
dated 449 which refers to an intercalary A§adha month. Levi’s theory of 
the Licchavi era of 110 a.o. was mainly based on this data, as there was an 
intercalary Asad ha month in 559 A.n. It appears, however, from the astrono- 
mical tables supplied by L. D. S. Pillai that there was an intercalary Asdtiha 
in 449 Vikrama samvat current, but not in 4=19 Saka current or expired. 
But considering how often such astronomical data have played tricks in chro- 
nological calculations in the past, it is difficult to regard this as a conclusive 
evidence, when it is in conflict with the results obtained from general histori- 
cal study. When we remember that we are dealing with a period before 
Aryabhata introduced a regular system in astronomical calculations, and the 
many unknown factors involved such as the error of calculations, wrong or 
different system followed in different localities, etc., it would not perhaps 
be wise in regarding the astronomical data as a decisive factor in chronologi- 
cal considerations. As an instance in point we may cite the inscription of 
Amsuvarman dated 34 which refers to an intercalary Pausa. Fleet, who re- 
ferred this date to Harsa era, justified his theory by pointing out that ‘ there 
was a mean intercalation of Pausa' in a.d. 640. L6vi on the other hand 
held that this intercalary Pausa could only occur in 629 A.o.- 1 ' But accord- 
ing to the Table X of S. Pillai’s Indian Chronology, the latest authoritative 
treatise on the subject, there was no intercalary Pausa either in 629 or in 
640 a.d. As a matter of fact, according to Pillai, instead of there being an 
intercalary Pausa there was a Pausa ksaya i.e. no Pausa month at all in 
629 a.d. Nevertheless these astronomical facts should be borne in mind and t 
considered by persons competent to form an authoritative opinion on them. 

It would appear from what has been said above that the facts so far 
known make it wry unlikely that the earlier dates should be referred to 
the Vikrama samvat, and that there are no adequate grounds for referring 
them to a sijecial Licchavi era. 

For the present, therefore, we may accept as the most reasonable assump- 
tion, that the records of Manadeva and Vasantadeva are dated in| the Saka 
era. 

The reign of Manadeva would accordingly cover the period 464 to 491 
a.d. with a few years more, perhaps, both at the beginning and at the end. 
This is the period when the decline of the Gupta empire let loose the forces 
of political disintegration in N. India. This fits in with the warlike acti- 


24. CII. Ill, Introd. p. 179. 


25. JA. 1894, Part II, p. 62. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 


637 


vities of Manadeva referred to in his records. It is interesting to recall in 
this connection that a Maukhari king (either isvaravarman or I£anavarman) 
and the Later Gupta king Jivitagupta I are said to have fought against some 
enemies in the Himalaya region. It is not unlikely that they fought against 
the Licchavi kings of Nepal early in the sixth century a.d. and we may well 
believe in that case that Manadeva had already established a strong political 
authority in Nepal which proved a menace to the safety of the neighbouring 
regions in the south. 

We may thus offer the following tentative chronology of the Licchavi 
kings of Nepal up to the usurpation of Airiisuvarman. 

1. Jayadeva (2nd century A.D.) 

2 . 1 


vlt kings' (.3rd and 4ih centuries a.d.) 


13. Vrs; 


ideva 

i 


14. Sankaradcva 

I 

15. Dharmadeva 

I 

16. Manadeva 

I 

17. Mahideva 

I 

18. Vasantadcva 


= c. 400-460 a.d. 

c. 460-495 a.d, 
c. 495-510 a.d. 
c. 510-520 a.d. 


49 . 


20 . 


21 . 

22 . 


23 . 


24 . 

25 . 


Udayadeva 

I 

Manadeva II 

i 

Ganakamadeva 

(Gapadcva) 

i 

Sivadeva (?) 

I 

Narendradeva (?) 

i ' 

Bhimadeva (?) 

1 

Sivadeva acc. c. 


520-610 a.d 


610 A.D. 


■ i 

Daughter = Aihsuvarman (Usurper) 



638 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The date of Aiiisuvarman's usurpation offers another intriguing problem 
in Nepal chronology. His charters are dated in the years 30, 32, 34 and 39. 
An inscription, referring to him as the reigning king, contains a date of 
which the decimal figure is certainly 40 but the unit figure has been doubt- 
fully read as 1 or 5. It is obvious that these dates cannot be referred to 
either the Vikrama or Saka era or to the Licchavi era, proposed by L6vi. 
The view generally accepted is that these dates are to be referred to the Har$a 
era. But, as Levi has pointed out,-' 1 there are serious difficulties in the way 
of accepting this theory. In the first place while there is no positive evi- 
dence that Ilarsa ever conquered Nepal, the Chinese accounts leave no doubt 
tliat Tibet at this time exercised suzerainty over Hint country, and it was 
consequently detached from Indian politics. Secondly, the theory is in con- 
flict with the positive statement of 1 linen Tsang that Arhsuvarman was dead 
before he visited Nepal. For, according to the theory of Ilarsa era Atmu- 
varman was alive even after G46 a.i>., while JHiucn Tsang visited these parts 
in about 637 a.d. In order to get rid of this difficulty it has been suggested 
that Iliuen Tsang did not actually visit Nepal but based his account on re- 
ports which were either inaccurate or misunderstood by him.-' But this ex- 
planation can hardly be regarded as satisfactory, particularly as wc have no 
definite evidence of the Ilarsa era being used in Nepal. Iliuen Tsang’s 
statement runs as follow’s- 1 * : — 

“ I"he king is a kshatriya and belongs to the family* of Licchavas. His 
mind is well-informed and he is pure and dignified in character. He has a 
sincere faith in the law of Buddha. Lately there was a king called Arhsu- 
varman who was distinguished for his learning and ingenuity. He himself 
had composed a work on sounds ( Sabda-viaya ) ; he esteemed learning and 
respited virtue, and his reputation was spread everywhere.” 

1 have quoted this at length just to show that Iliuen Tsang’s account 
of the two kings of Nepal is not a mere scrappy hearsay report, but gives 
some personal details. Even assuming that he did not visit Nepal personally 
— though there is nothing to justify this view —there is nothing to indicate 
that he had not a fairly accurate account of the country. His detailed des- 
criptions of the physical features and climate of the country, the manners 
of the people and the religious establishments imply that he either visited 
the country or had detailed and faithful account of it from others. During 
his tour in the neighbouring region and long residence at Nalanda he must 
have come across persons resident in Nepal and competent to give him relia- 
ble information. To disregard Iliuen Tsang’s testimony would, therefore, 
be a mere gratuitous assumption, in order to uphold a theory which is not 
supported by any positive evidence. Besides, as we shall see later, other 


26. Nepal, II. 152. 

28. Beal — Records, II. 81. 


27. I A. XIII, 422. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 639 

Chinese Texts indirectly corroborate Hiuen Tsang by mentioning Narendra- 
deva as king of Nepal c. 643 a.d. 

S. Levi, the only eminent scholar who has refused to accept the theory 
of Har§a era, lias offered a solution of his own. An inscription of Aihsu- 
varman, dated 34, refers to an intercalary Pausa month, and Levi, as stated 
alx>ve, shows by astronomical calculation that this year corresponds to the 
year 629-30 a.d. The starting point of the era used by Arhsuvarman would 
thus fall in the year 595 A.r>. and I^evi suggests that this was: probably the 
epoch of a Tibetan era commemorating either the accession of Strong-tsan or 
the birth of his son Srong-tsan-Gampo.-" As both these Tibetan kings un- 
doubtedly exercised suzerainty over Nepal, such a theory is quite a reasonable 
one. But its chief drawback is the fact that we have no knowledge of any 
such Tibetan era, and until its existence is proved by independent evidence 
Levi's theory cannot command general acceptance. 

S. Levi has cited authentic Chinese evidence to show that the Chinese 
embassy which visited Magadha in 643 a.d., passed through Nq>al and was 
received with honour by its king Narendradeva.™ This shows that 
Ariisuvarman had ceased to reign before that date. It thus confirms the 
testimony of Hiuen Tsang and renders untenable the theory that Amsuvar- 
man's dates are to be referred to the ITarsa era. SJ At the same time Levi's 
own theory of the Tibetan era of 595 a.d. hardly fits in with it. For we have 
an inscription of Jisnugupta. who succeeded to the powers and authority of 
Ariisuvarman, dated in the year 48. In this record J isnugupta acknowledged 
Bhattarakri-raia Dhruvadcva as his lord-paramount. In another record, the 
date of which is lost, he refers to Bhattaraka Manadeva as evidently occupy- 
ing the same* position. A third inscription of Jisinugupta, without date, does 
not mention any of these kings but refers to his augmenting victorious reign. 
It is a reasonable assumption that these three records indicate the gradual 
advance in the position and status of Jisnugupta. We may consequently 
hold that Ji$nugupta began his reign about the year 48, acknowledging the 
nominal suzerainty, first of the Licchavi king Dhruvadeva, and next of 
Manadeva, and ended by discarding altogether such an unnecessary para- 
pharnelia and reigning absolutely in his own name. Jisnugupta may thus 
be presumed to have ruled for some years after the year 48. Now there can 
be no question that this date refers to the same era as was used by ArnSu 
varman. According to Levi’s theory this date corresponds to 643 a.d. We 
may reasonably hold that Jispugupta’s reign was extended at least a few 
years beyond 64?* a.d. But according to the Chinese evidence cited by L6vi 

29. Nepal, II. 154. 30. IbUf., 164. 

31. Dr. Basak who refers the dates of Ariisuvarman to the Har$a era is 
altogether silent about the theory of Levi and of the Chinese evidence referred to 
by him. * 



640 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


himself, Nattendradeva was the king of Nepal in 643 a.d. This considerably 
weakens the theory that the dates in the charters of Amsuvarman and Ji^nu- 
gupta are to be referred to a Tibetan era commencing in 595 a.d. 

Wc may also consider the iw&sibility that the date in Amsuvarman’s 
charter are his own regnal years and that the reckoning was continued by 
his successors. This is a quite reasonable and probable view, but is rejected 
by S. L6vi 3 * on two grounds ; first, that no record earlier than the 30th year 
is known, and secondly that as the Harigaon Stele inscription of ArhSuvar- 
man, dated year 30, refers to some details of his coronation, the era can 
hardly commemorate his own accession. The objections cannot, however, 
be regarded as decisive. The first is a mere negative evidence. Asl regards 
the second, the inscription merely refers to 4 abhiseka-hastt * and ‘ abhise- 
kdiva ’ in general terms, and although probable, it is by no means certain 
that the details of the donations in the record refer to the items of his own 
coronation. So the possibility of the dates of Arirsuvarman’s charters being 
his own regnal years cannot be altogether dismissed. It is not necessary to 
suppose that Amsuvarman deliberately founded a new era. As often hap- 
pened, it is possible that the reckoning of his regnal years was continued by 
his successors and thus an era grew into being. 

Another possibility must also be kept in view. The Nepal Sathval, 
an era even now in use, commenced from 879-80 a.d., and, in the absence 
of any authentic information or even reliable tradition explaining its origin, 
it has been suggested by Levi that the epoch of the new era might simply 
be the new year after the completion of 800 years of the Saka era. 3 - 1 In other 
words, they simply left out the hundreds at the commencement of the 9th 
century of the saka era. If this theory be accepted, we may hold that some- 
thing similar might have taken place after the lapse of the first five hundred 
years of the Saka era. Amsuvarman’s known dates might, therefore, be treated 
as 530 to 545 of the Saka era corresponding to 608-623 a.d. which would 
agree with 1-Iiucn Tsang’s statement that the king died some time! before his 
visit to Nepal (c. 637 a.d.). We must, however, bear in mind that the 
dates of Sivadeva and Jayadeva II, viz. years 1 19 and 145 are also evidently 
dated in the same era and it is, therefore, necessary to suppose that though 
after 500 Saka the hundreds were omitted, the reckoning was continued un- 
interrupted for the next three centuries, until the new Nepal Samvat came 
into use in the 9th century, and the same continuous reckoning was again 
adopted and has continued uptil now. 

On the whole it must be admitted that none of these theories about the 
interpretation of the dates of Amsuvarman’s charters can be regarded as 
convincing. But the theory of Har$a era, which is now generally favoured, 

32. Nepal, II, 152-3. ' 33. Ibid., 179ff. 



CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY KINGS OF NEPAL 641 

appears to be the least satisfactory, as it is contradicted by known facts 
deduced from Hiuen Tsang’s narrative and the Chinese annals. The theory 
of regnal years seems to be least open to objection at the present state of 
our knowledge. Nevertheless it would be unwise to lay stress on, far less 
to adopt definitely, any one of the above theories. For the present we must 
rest content with the information supplied by Hiuen Tsang that ArhSuvat- 
man's reign ended immediately or shortly before 637 A.ix, when the pilgrim 
probably visited Nepal, or 642-3 a.p. when he visited E. India for the last 
time. 

In concluding this long dissertation we must admit that it has not been 
possible to achieve much by way of ijositive results, but the main problem 
and the various issues arising out of it have been placed in clear perspective, 
and all the theories, specially those of I^vi, which arc very important but 
evidently little known to Indian scholars, have been fully explained and 
properly examined. This, it may be confidently hoped, would facilitate the 
future study of the history and chronology of Nepal. 


42 



GULERIA PAINTINGS 


By 

Dr. HIRANANDA SASTRI, m.a., m.o.l., 

Gulerias form a chief clan of the old Katoch rulers of Kangra, the 
famous historic stronghold of the “Trigartta v territory of the Punjab. One 
of the heroic rajas of this Trigartta, namely, Susarmachandra, figures in the 
Mahdbhdrala as fighting on behalf of the inveterate Duryodhana against 
the Rafodavas. Who built this stronghold and when, we do not know. 
Tradition ascribes it to divine agency probably on account of its impreg- 
nability and great age. Nagarakota is an antique name, of it and Kangara. 
a comparatively modem appellation designating not only the fortress but 
the whole district, so called after the fortress. The connotation of this 
term is obscure just as is that of Katoch. To etymologise these terms as 
Kan-gatfha ( the head or chief fort ) and Kale-uchcha ( foremost in the 
army ) will be too pedantic for acceptance. This stronghold of Kangra 
played an important role in the history of the India of the Mohammadan 
epoch and a patriotic Hindu cannot but mourn its fall to the invader : is 
fund hi men lut hui Nagarakola ku is nind hi men jdld rahd\ Soman di ha bht 

The Gulerias left the parental stronghold vi z. Kangra and settled in 
Guler, which is about a day's journey from it, in the Ii5th century of the 
Christian era. They were called after this locality in accordance with the 
usual custom of taking names from the place of residence as, for example, 
Pathaniya from Pathdna or Pratishthdna , Dogra from Duggar (ancient: 
Dvigartta ), or Balauria from Balaur. 

During my official tours in the district of Kangra, I visited Haripur, 
the capital of Guler, and made the acquaintance of Raja Raghunatha Sib- 
gha, the late ruler of the locality. lie very kindly showed me his valuable 
collection of paintings chiefly consisting of the portraits of his ancestors 
and allowed me to have them photographed for the Archaeological Survey 
of India, Northern Circle, Lahore. One of these ix>rtraits is believed to 
represent a Guleria chief who was considered a charming personality, so 
much so that the members of a Mughal harem, so goes the story, expressed 
a desire to see him. He was consequently taken to their august presence 
but, unfortunately for him, blindfolded ! These paintings are not yet 
published and it is highly desirable that they are brought out for the use 
of scholars interested in the pictorial art and history of India. The said 
Raja allowed me the use of the Diliparmjim , the only manuscript copy of 
which lay. in his possession. This valuable piece gives an interesting ac- 
count of the Guleria chiefs and I noticed its contents in the Journal of The 




Kangka Painting, No. 1. 



Kangra Painting. No. 






GULERIA PAINTINGS 643 

Punjab Historical Society many years ago. At the same time I was able 
to get a few pictures of ndyikSs and rdgmis, some of which I have publish- 
ed already. 

Kangra gave birth to many beautiful pictures now lying scattered in 
several museums and various collections, official or private. Consequently, 
these paintings are known to be the product of the school termed after 
Kangra. Guler is a part of Kasgra and a number of paintings have been 
found here. Whether the Guleria chiefs had their own chiteras ( i.e. chit- 
rakaras ) or not. is not known for certain, but principal rulers of these hill 
states had them as a rule and Kangra must have had them too, for I myself 
saw the descendants of a famous painter of Kangra, namely, Sajanu, about 
the time of the well known seismic catastrophe of 1905 when I was there, 
and collected many khakas from the family. In all probability the paintings 
of Kangra were indebted to the Uslads who gave us the Mughal paintings 
too well known to mention here. 

Kangra paintings are usually in the profile and the painters who 
wrought them did not come out successful in their efforts to depict the full 
face. These paintings are known for their technique, brilliancy, colour and 
line. The best ones are undoubtedly good illustrations of exquisiteness and 
are well featured and proportioned. The Guleria paintings are likewise. 
There is no need to differentiate them from the Kangra school. The portraits 
of the Gulerias which I have seen display all these characteristics and reflect 
great credit on the ustdds who made them as well as the patrons who 

encouraged them. The said collection of the ruler mentioned above had, 

besides portraits, paintings of ragims, nayikas, flowers, deities and other 
subjects. They all require special treatment in a separate volume. 

Two of these paintings which have not been published before and 

are masterpieces of the Kangra Art, are reproduced here in token of my 
great appreciation of the devotion to the muse of the history and art of 
ancient India which the scholar to whom this volume is being presented has 
been evincing all along. One of them 1 call * Expectancy ’ and the other 
‘Delusion’. Both these pictures of the Kangra qulam are remarkably well 
drawn and exquisite. The colouring is excellent, the pose of the figures, 
very expressive, and the drapery fine and smart, so much so that the dress 
is visibly transparent : the velvety bodice with its colour is clear under the 
dupatta. The rest of the dress and also the face, are executed with equal 
delicacy. The background of the lady expecting her lover at the dead of 
night is wonderfully exhibited and with the streak of lightning that the 
ustdd has cleverljs put in, forms a striking contrast to the charming figure. 
The other picture, VipralabdhS (‘Delusion’), depicts equally successfully 
the state of mind of the bewitched lady and, incidentally, brings to our 
thought the forlorn state to which this superb art of Kangra has now dwindled 
with hardly any hope of revival, as those who wrought them did not come out 
successful in their efforts to depict the full face. 



644 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Two of these paintings which have not been published before and are 
masterpieces of the Kangra qalam, are reproduced below in token of my ap- 
preciation of the devotion which Dr. B. C. Law has all along been evincing 
to the cause of Indology. As I have said before, both are remarkably exqui- 
site and well-posed. In ' Expectancy ’ the drapery is visibly transparent. The 
bodice does not hide the beauty of the figure it covers and the skirt is clear 
under the deep blue gossamer dupatta. The rest of the dress and also the face 
and person, are executed with equal delicacy. This portrayal of the lady 
waiting for her lover amidst the brewing storm at the dead of night, is strik- 
ingly effective. The streak of lightning that the uslad has cleverly put in to 
lessen the dark intensity of the night, vividly brings out the contrast between 
the charming lady, her jewelry, her drapery, her lovely features and graceful 
form, and the dim, weird background. 

The Vipralabdhd (‘Delusion’) is apparently a portrayal of the idea 
containing in the following verse from the Gita-Govinda : 

Mtafa faaferc gfaerr mu. i 

Lord Krishna has suddenly disappeared leaving Radha in bewilderment 
Thinking that the Lord is hidden in the flowery tree, she stands holding the 
blossoming branch in her hand, sighing for the vanished lover. This picture 
is in softer tints harmoniously, but just as delicately, used and is an equally 
successful depiction of the state of mind of the bewitched lady. 

Both paintings serve to illustrate the high degree of perfection that the 
superb pictorial art of Kangra had reached and we cannot but regret the 
forlorn state to which it has now dwindled, with hardly any hope of revival. 





VEDIC PLANTS 

By 

Dr. GIRIJAPRASANNA MAJUMDAR, M.sc. ph.d., f.N.i. 

Introduction 

The Vedic Indians were a civilized people. They settled down to 
pastoral life, and evolved working knowledge of the things that formed their 
immediate environment, and plants formed one such environment, in order, 
to utilize them to the best of their advantage. They lived in villages, towns 
and cities, in fixed dwellings and houses which were furnished with simple 
furniture. Their food and drink ingredients consisted mainly of cereals, 
pulses, fruits, soma and other plants and plant products which they culti- 
vated in fields and gardens. The Vedas bring the Vedic man and woman 
before us perfectly well dressed, caring for dress and creating an art for dress- 
making, washing, etc. Boats and chariots were their main conveyances for 
water and land transport, and their trade and commerce flourished with plant 
products as the chief merchandise, and even tna$a and kr$nata were used as 
some sort of currency for exchange and barter. They developed agriculture, 
arbori-horticulture, sylviculture, etc. and enjoyed their leisure hours in play- 
ing dice or in cultivating music, both vocal and instrumental. They made 
utensils, war weapons, agricultural implements, and also practised medicine. 

All these required a knowledge of plants and plant products. It is rightly 
said that ‘ utilitarian side gave tire first impetus to the scientific study of 
Botany ’. At this early stage Descriptive Botany, or the External Morpho- 
logy as it is called, and some knowledge of nursing and maintenance of 
growth of plants (rudimentary knowledge of plant physiology), became neces- 
sary for the proper identification of plants and thefir successful cultivation, 
particularly so when their number became unusually large. An account of 
their achievement in this line will be given elsewhere 

In the present contribution an attempt has been made to make a list, 
identify as far as practicable and classify the plants occurring in the Vedic 
literature as contemplated and enumerated by Macdonell and Keith in their 
classical work, the Vedic Index. 


2. Identification 

The trees, shrubs, herbs and other plants mentioned in the Vedic lite- 
rature are enumerated below in an alphabetic order with their Latin syno- 
nyms, distribution and uses : • 



646 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vaiic name . 

Jjitin Synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

1. Abaya 

1. Brassica yuncea 
( --napus), 
seeds dark ; 

2. B. alba, seeds 

white (Cruci- 

fer®) 

A. V. iv. 35, 5 ( Whitney, 
292), used against, super- 
natural agencies. 

Cultivated in In- 
dia, white ones 
cultivated at Fe- 
rozepore in the 
Punjab. 

Oil, medicine . 

2. Adara 

Zingiber officinale 
(Zingiberacece) 

A. V. iv, 35, 5 (Whitney 
207 ; Zimmer 70 ; Weber, 
18, 138). 

Throughout the 

warmer parts of 
India. 

Medicine , spice. 

3. Adhyapda 

1. Mucana pruri- 

ens (Legumi- 

nos-T) 

2. Phyllanthus 
urinaria 

3. P. niruri 
Kuphorbricace® 

Sat. Br. xiii, 8, 1, 16 ; men** 
tioned with many other 
plants. 

From the Himala- 
yas' in the plains 
to Ceylon, As- 
sam, Burma etc. 

■ hotter parts 

of India. 

Medicinal. 

4. Ajasrngi 

1. Odina Wodiar 
( Anacardia • 
cere ) 

2. Gymnema 
Sylvestre 

( Asclepiadaceae) 

A. V. iv. 37 ; prescribed as 
demon destroyer. 

Hotter parts of 
India from ex- 
treme N. W. 
along the foot 
of the. Hima- 
laya, ascending 
to 4000 ft., to 
Assam eastwards. 

Wood, medicine. 

5. Ala * 

Weed of cornfield 

A. V. vi. 16, 3. 

.... 

6. AJabu, Alapu 

Lagenaria Vulgaris 
( Cucurbitacea? ) 

A. V. viii, 10, 29, 30; xx, 
130 ; 1. 2 ; alapu. Mait. 
Sam. iv. 2, 13 ; vessel made 
of it. 

Indigenous in In- 
dia. 

Vegetable, fruit 

and utensils. 

7. Masala 

Grain creeper 

A. V. vi. 16, 4. 


8. Amala, Ama- 
laka 

Phyllanthus emb- 
lica 

(EuphorbiaceaO 

Jaim. Up. Br. i, 38, 6; 
Chand. Up. vii, 3, 1 
( Vamalaka). 

Throughout tropi- 
cal & sub-tropi- 
cal India, wild 
or planted. 

Medicinal, fruit . 

9. Amula 

1. Gloria^ superba 
(Liliaceae) 

2. Cascala sp. 
(Convolvula- 
cexe) 

A. V. v. 32. 4; the plant 
is described as rootless. 

I consider it: a cascata sp. 
which is commoii in the 
Indus Plain ; • used for 
poisoning arrows. 

Throughout tropi- 
cal India, from 
N. W. Himala- 
yas to Assam 
ascending up to 
5000 ft. 

Poison. 

10. Agtfika 

Nymphaea alba 
(Nymphaeace®) 

A. V. iv, 35. 5; 17, 16 ; 
edible plant leaf and root 
egg-shaped. In the Pip- 
palapada ed. Paundarika 
is mentioned in its place. 

Kashmir, Siberia, 
Europe. 

Flower , personal 

decoration , edi- 

bles. 




VEDIC PLANTS 


647 


Ve.dk name . 

Latin Synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

11. Anu (rina) 

Panicum milia- 

ceum (Grami- 
ne®) 

Vaj. Sam. xviii, 12 ; Bjhad. 
Up. vi. 3, 13. 

Cultivated or natu- 
ralised through- 
out the hotter 
parts of India, 
grains white. 

Food grains, fod- 
der diet . 

12. Apamarga 

Achyranthes as- 
pera (Amaran- 
taccse) 

A. V. iv, 7, 6 ; 18, 7 ; 19, 
4 ; vii, 6, 2 ; Vaj. Sarii. 
xxxv, 11 ; Tailt. Br. i, 7, 
8, 1 ; Sat. Br. v, 2, 4, 14 ; 
xiii, 8, 4, 4 ; Nirukta, iv, 
17, 2. 

Tropical Asia, Af- 
rica, Baluchis- 
tan. 

M cdicinaly rit uat. 

13. Aparajita 

Clitoria tomata 

( Leguniinoseje ) 

A. V. ii, 27, 3 ; for prospe- 
rity and long life. 

Tropical zone from 
the Himalayas 
to Ceylon, Bur- 
ma, etc. 

Spell, amulet. 

14. Arka 

Calotropis gigan- 
tea ( Asdepia- 
daceac) 

A. V. vi, 72, 1 ; Sat. Br. ix. 
1, 1, 4. 9 ; arka-panpa, 
arka palasa, j, 2, 3 ; 12, 
13. 

Throughout India, 
ascending to 

3 000 it. in the 
Himalayas, from 
the Punjab to 
Assam, drier 

places. 

Medicinal. 

15. Aralu 

Oroxylum indicum 
(Bignomiacea?) 

A. V, xx, 131, 17 ; in R. V. 
It is said that axle of 
chariot was sometimes 
made of its wood. 

From the Hima- 
layas to Ceylon 
up to 3000 ft. 
Timber , medicinal. 

16. Arataki 
Arafu 

• 

1. Prosopis spiri- 
gera ( suggested 
by Weber) 

2. Acacia Surna 
(Lcguminoseai) 

A. V. iv, 37, 6. 

The Punjab, Sind, 
Western Penin- 
sula. 

Timber , Fuel. 

17. Arundhati 

■— SahadevI 

Sida cordi folia 
S. rhombifolia 
(Malvaceae) 

• 

a 

A. V. iv, 2, 1 ; v. 5, 5, 9 ; 
vi, 59, 1, 2 ; vii, 7, 16 ; 
xix, 38, 1 ; healing pro- 
perties, as febrifuge, in- 
creased milk of cow, pro- 
tection of cattle (A. V. 
vi, 59, 1), climber, hav- 
ing stem, of golden 
colour, (A. V. v, 5, 5.7), 
also called si lari, and 
l&k$a appears to have 
been a product of it 
(Whitney’s notes on A. V. 
iv, 12). 

Tropical and sub- 
tropical India. 

Medicinal, Milk 

producing , Sour- 
ce of Ldksd. 


648 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name . 

Latin Synonym 
and Family. 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

18. Asmagandha 

Withania somni- 
fera ( Solana- 

ceac) 

Sat. Br. xiii, 8, 1, 16. 

Throughout drier 
subtropical In- 
dia, west Hin- 
dustan. 

Medicinal. 

19. Asvattha 

Ficus religion 

(urticaceac) 

R. V. i, ,164, 20 ; vessels 
made of Asvattha. R. V. 
x, 97 f 5 ; tree, A. V. iii, 
6, 1 ; iv, 32.4 ; hardwood 
for kindling fire, A. V. 
vi, U, 1 ; Sat. Br. xi, 5, 
1.13 ; starts life as an epi- 
phyte on Khadira, some- 
times strangles it A. V. 
iii, 6 ; its berries eaten 
by birds, R. V. i, 164 
20.20 ; described as 

‘ crested ones ' (sikhandin) 
A. V. vi, 374. 

One of India's 
greatest trees, 

wild in the sub- 
Himalayan for- 
ests. 

Religious. 

20. Asvav&Ia 
Asvavara 

Saccharum spon- 
! tancum 

(Gramineac) 

Mait Sain, iii, 7, 9 ; Kath 
Sam. xxiv, 8 ; Kapi^Um. 
Sam. xxxviii, 1 ; Sat. Br. 
iii, 4. 1, 7. 

India, Ceylon etc., 
warm region of 
old world. 

21. Asvavati 

One of the four 
principal medi- 
cinal plants can- 
not be identified 

R. V. x, 97, 7. 

.... 

22. Auk$agandhi 

Fragrant plant 

A. V. iv, 37, 3, mentioned 
along with Guggulu and 
Naladi as fragrant plants. 

.... 

23. Avaka 
(aquatic 

plant) 

Blyxa oryzetorum 
the only species 
that grows in 
Kashmir. Its 

later name is 
Saivala identi- 
cal with sipala. 
Saivala is Blyxa 
griffithii, not 

found in the 
Punjab. sipala 
is mentioned in 
Asva. Gr. Sutra 
ii, 8 ; iv, 4 
(Hydrochar idea*) 

A. V. viii, 7, 9; 37, 8-10; 
Taitt. Sam. iv, 6, 1. 1 ; 
v, 4, 2, 1 ; 4, 3 ; Vaj. 
Sam. xvii, 4 ; xxv, 1 ; 
Mait. Sam. ii, 10, X ; Sat. 
Br. vii, 5, 1, 11 ; viii, 3, 
2, 5; ix, 1, 2, 20, 22; 
xiii, 8. 3, 13 ; Gandharvas 
eat it, A. V. iv, 37, 8. 

Kashmir. 
Pot herb. 

24. Badara 

Zizyphus Sp. 
(Rhamneai) 

Kath. Sam. xii, 10 ; Mait. 
Sam. iii, 11, 2 ; Va;. 
Sam. xix, 22. 90 ; xxi, 30 ; 
Taitt. Br. i, ft 5, 1 ; Sat. 
Br. v. 5, 4 ; 10 ; xii, 7, 
1, 3 ; 2, 9 ; 9, 1, 8 ; etc ; 
Jaimin. Br. ii, 156, 5. 

Throughout India, 
N. W. Frontier 
Sind, . base of 
the Himalaya to 
Ceylon. 


VEDIC PLANTS 


649 


Vedic name . 

Latin Synonym 
mid Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature . 

i 

Distribution 
and uses 

25. Baja 

Brassica Sp. 

A. V. viii, 6, 3. 6. 7. 24 

Punjab, and cul- 

(white & yel- 
low variety) 

(Crucifereae) 

( Whitney, 494 ) —used 

against demon of disease. 

tivated in India. 

26. BaJbaja 

1. Elensine indica 

2. E. Coracana 

(Gramme®) 

A. V. xiv, 2, 22, 23 ; Taitt. 
Sam. ii, 2, 8. 2 ; Hath. 
Sam. x, 10; Mait. Sarii. 
ii, 2, 5 ; used for sacri- 
ficial littcT, fuel (Kath. 
Sam); in R. V. viii, 53. 
3, basket and other things 
made from this grass (in 
Danastuti ) . 

Cultivated in the 
plains of India. 

Medicinal, fuel, 
furniture & 
utensils. 

27. Bhahga. 

Cannabis sativa 

In R. V. ix, 61, 13 it is an 

Wild in N. W. 

(hemp) 

(Urticaceac) 

epithet of Soma ; A. V. 

xi, 6, 15 ; Sahkh. Aran. 

xii, 19. 

Himalaya, Cen- 
tral Asia. 

28. Bilva 

Aegle marmelos 
(Rutaccie) 

i 

i A. V. xxi, 136, 3 ; Ait. Br. 
ii, 1 ; Sat. Br. xiii, 4, 4, 

8, etc; Mait. Sam. iii, 

9, 3 ; sacrificial post ill 
Taitt. Sam. ii, 1, 8, 1. 2 ; 
cf. sat. Br. i, 3, 3. 20; 
Ait. Br. ii, 1 ; amulet, 
sanlch. Aran, xii, 20, el. 

Wild, ascending to 
4000 ft. in the 
Western Hima- 
layas, in dry 
hilly places from 
Jhclum to As- 
sam. 

29. Bimba 

Cephalandia in- 

dica ( Cucurbi- 
taceae) 

sea. 

Jiaimin. Up. Br. iii, 5. 6. 

Throughout India. 
Medicinal. 

30. Canaka 

Cicer arietinum 

Vaj. Satn. xviii, 12. 

Cultivated in tem- 

(See under 
Khalva) 

(taguminosKc). 

perate and tro- 
pical countries. 
Pulse. 

31. Canda 

• 

Audropogan aci- 
culatus 
(Gramme®) 

I 

A. V. vi, 139, 3. 

Plains and lower 
hills of India 
from Kumaon 
to Sikkim in the 
Himalayas. 

32. Citrapargi 

— 

A. V. ii, 25, 3, with spotted 
leaf, protection of foetus. 

.... 

33. Darbha with 

1. Eragnostis Cy- 

R. V. i, 191, 3 ; with Sara 

Plains of India 

its 2 varieties, 

nosuroides 

& Kusara . A. V. vi, 43, 

from Peshawar 

Kharadarbha & 

2. E. tcnella *<= 

2 ; viii, 7, 20 ; x, 4, 13 ; 

to Sind, to 

Mrdudarbha 

E. riliaris 

(Grammes) 

• 

xi, 6, 15 ; xix, 29, 1, etc., 
used for calming of anger, 
A. V. vi. 43. 

Burma. 

Ritual. 

34. Dasavrk$a 

A tree according 
to Roth. 

A. V. ii, 9, 1. 

.... 

35. Dhava 

Anogeissus lati- 

A. V. vi, 5, 5, luted for heal- 

From the Hima- 

folia 

(Combretaceac) 

ing up of wounds. 

laya to Ceylon 
up to 3000 ft. 
Medicinal. 




650 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name . 

i 

Latin Synonym 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

36. Dfirva 

Cynodon dactylon 
i Gramineae ) 

R. V. x. 16, 13; 134, 5; 
142, 8 ; Taitt. Sarii. iv, 
2, 9, 2 ; v' } 2, 8, 3 ; Vaj. 
Sarii. xiii, 20 ; Ait. Br. 
viii, 5, 8 ; Sat. Br. iv. 5, 
10, 5 ; vii, 9, 2, 10, 12; 
etc ; grows on Damp 
ground, R. V, x, 16, 3 ; 
142, 8. 

India, Burma, 

Ceylon ascend- 
ing fe» 5000 ft. 
in the Himala- 
yas. 

Sacrificial. 
Medicinal . 

37. Eranda 

Ricinus Commu- 
nis 

(Euphorbiace:e) 

Sank]). Aras. xii. 8. 

Throughout India, 
cultivated, tro- 
pics, generally, 
indigenous in 

Africa. 

Medicinal , oil. 

38. Garmut 

(LcKiiminos€Sc) 
Wild bean 

Taitt. Sarii. ii, 4, 4, ,1. 2; 
KAtfi Sam. xiii ; Mait. 
Sarii. ii, 2. 4. 

Pulse. 

39. Gavedhuka 
Gavedhuka 
Gavidhuka 
Gavidhuka 

Coix Lachryma 
iOramineap) 

Taitt. Sarii. v, 4, 3, 2 ; sat. 
Br. v, 2, 9, 13 ; 3. 1, 10 ; 
xiv, 1, 2, 19 ; Taitt. S<uii. 

i, 8, 7, 1 ; 9, 2 ; Taitt. 
Br. i, 7, 3, 6 ; Mait. Sam. 

ii, 6, 5 ; iv, 3, 8 ; Vaj. 
Sam. xv, 5. 

Tropical Asia. Cul- 
tivated, hotter 
& damper ports 
of India, kernel 
used as food , 
medicine, lad- 
der grass (Dut- 
hie). 

40. Godhuma 
I 

Triticum vulgare 
(Gramineae) 

Mait. Sam. i, 2, 8 ; Vaj. 
Sam. xviii, ,12 ; xix, 22 ; 
89 ; xxi, 29 ; Sat. Br. xii, 
7, 1, 2 ; 2, 9 ; Brhaa. Up. 
vi, 3, 22 ; distinguished 
from Vrihi & Yava in 
Taitt. Br. i, 3, 7, 2 ; Sak 
tval.i made from it. Sat. 
Br. xii, 9, 1, 5 ; v, 2, 1, 
6. 

Northern India, 

up to 13000 ft. 
in the Himala- 
yas & Tibet. 
Cereal. 

t 

41. Guggulu 

Bulsamodcndron 

Mukul 

(Bur^eracea:) 

A. V. xix, 38 : amulet for 
various blessings. 

Sind, Rajputana, 
Baluchistan 
rocky hills. 
Frankincense . 

42. Haridra 

Curcuma longa 
(Zingiberacea) 

A. V. i, 24, 2 ; remedy 
against leprous spot. 

Cultivated in In- 
1 dia, throughout 

tropics. 

Medicinal . 

43. Haridru 

Q?drus libani 
i far deodara 
(Coni ferae) 

i 

Sat. Br. xiii, 8, 1. 16. 

N. W. Himalaya 
! from Kumaon 
westwards 3,500 
to 12,000 ft. 

i 


VEDIC PLANTS 


651 


Vedic name . 

Latin Synonym 
and Family. 

Ref . in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

*- 44. Isika 

Poly t oca barbnla 

(Gra mines?) 

A. V. vii, 54, 4 ; xii, 2, 54 ; 
Sat. Br. iv, 3, 4, 16 ; etc. 
Jaimin. Br. Up. i, 9 ; ii, 
134 : Chand. v f 24, 3 : 
Hath Up. ii, 6, 17, etc. ; 
Nimkta ix, 8 ; a basket 
of Isika in Sat.. Br. i, 1, 
4/ 19; argalesika (bolt 
and pin of a door) in 
Sankh. Aran, ii, 16. 

Throughout India 
hot and damp 
area from the 
Punjab to As- 
sam. 

Utensils etc., 
furniture . 

: 

45. Javnbila 
Jambila 

* 

i 

1. Citrus auranti- 
urn 

var Hcrgamia 

2. C. Medica vat 
acida 

( RutaccaO 

Mait. Sam. iii, 15, 3 ; Kath 
Sam. V, 12, 1 ; Vaj. Saip. 
xxv, 3. 

Said to be indige- 
nous in the 
Mothronwalla 
swamp, Dehrd- 
dun, Gharwal, 
Kumaon. 

Citron. 

46. Jarigida 

i 

: 

Tcrminalia arjtina 
i CombrctaccaO 

: 

A. V. ii, 9 ; xix, 34, 35 ; 
against all sorts of dis- 
eases. A. V. xix, 39, 10 ; 
ii, 4, 1 ; xix, 34, 1, 5 ; 
9, 7. amulet. 

Sub-IIimalayan 
tract, N. W. 
Provinces. 
Amulet. 

47. Kakambira 

Useful tree of 
some kind 

R. V. vi. 48, 17. 


48. Kapitthaka 

Feronia clephan- 
turn 

(Rutaceac) 

A. V. iv. 4, 8, for virility. 

In dry situation 
from the Punjab 
eastward and 

southward. 

49. Karira 

• 

Cappris aphylla— 
c. den dua 
(Capparidaccae) 

Taitt. Sam. ii, 4, 9, 2 ; 
Kath. Sain, xi, 11 ; xxxvi, 
7 ; Sat. Br. ii, 5, 2, 11. 

The Punjab, Gu- 
jarat, Rajputana, 
drier places. 

50. Karkandhu 

1. Zizyphus num- 
mularia, 

2. Z. quenoplia 
(blarkdrupe) 

3. Z. jujuba (yel- 
low, oi^nge-red- 
dish brown 
drupe) 
# (Rhamnea?) 

R. V. i, 112, 6, mentions it; 
may be Z. omopolia, but 
the one mentioned in 
Kath. Sam. xii, 10. Mait. 
Saip. iii, 11, 2 ; Vaj. Saip. 
xix, 23, 91 ; xxi, 32 ; xxiv, 
2 ; Sat. Br. v, 5, 4, 10 ; 
xii, 7, 2, 9 ; 9, 1, 5, etc. 
Jaim. Br. ii, 152, 5,— had 
red berry ( rohita ). It 
cannot be z. jujuba, it is 
z. nummularia as its 
drupe becomes red when 
ripe. 

Outer Himalayas 
up to 4,500 ft., 
dry arid region 
of the Punjab, 
Waziristan etc. 
up to 3000 ft. 

Fruit . 


652 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name . 

Latin Synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

■i 

Distribution 
and uses 

51. Kargmarya 

Gmelina arborea 
(Vcrbenace®) 

Taitt. SaiTi. v, 2, 7, 3. 4 ; 
vi, 2, 1. 5 ; - Mail. Sam. 
iii, 2, 6 ; 7, 9 ; Sat. Br. 
iii, 4, 1, 6 ; 8, 2, 17 ; iv, 
3, 3. 6; vii, 4, 1, 37. 

Throughout India 
extending to the 
foot of N. W. 
Himalayas, then 
eastward. 

52. Kasa 

Saccharum spon- 
taneum 
(Graminere) 

R. V. x f ,100, 10 ; used for 
mats. etc. according to 
Roth, but clean in Taitt. 
Aran, vi, 9, 1. 

Throughout India, 
South Europe 
and warm region 
of the old world. 
L'nimlurc. 

53. Khadira 

Acacia catechu 
(LeguminoscaO 

R. V. iii, 53, 19 ; A. V. iii, 

6, 1 ; v, 5. 5 ; viii, 8, 3 ; 
x, i), (5 ; Mait. Saqi. iii, 
9, 3 ; Taitt. Sam. iii, 5, 

7, 1 ; Ait. Br. ii, 1 ; Sat. 
Br. i, 3, 3, 20; iii, 6, 2, 
12 ; etc.; — as a tree with 
hard wood, A. V. x, 6, 6; 
Arundhati climbs on it 
( A. V. v, 5, 5) ; sacrificial 
ladle (Taitt. Sam. iii, 5. 
7, 1) ; of great strength 
(bahusara), in Sat. Br. 
xiii, 4, 9, 2 ; amulet, 
sarikh. Aran, xii, 8. 

The Punjab, N. 
W. Himalayas 
C. India, Bihar. 
Medicinal, 
limber. 

54. Khalakula 

Dolichos bifiorus 
(Leguminosejjc) 

Bphad. Up. vi, 3. 22. 

The Himalayas to 
Ceylon, and 

Burma, ascend- 
ing to 300Q ft. 
in Sikkim. 

Pulse & fodder. 

55. Khalva 

Canaka 

Ni§pava 

Phaseolus radi- 

atus 

Cicer arietinum 
Vigra catjang 

A. V. ii, 1 ; v, 23, 8 ; Vaj. 
Sain, xviii, 12 ; Mahi- 

dhara glosses it Wth ca- 
naka (chicken pea) : 
Brhad Up. vi; 3, 32— 
Sayana glosses it with 
Nt$i>dva. 

Cultivated in 
temperate and 
tropical coun- 
tries. 

Pulse . 

56. KharjOra 

Phoenix Sylvestus 
(Palmse) 

Taitt. Sam. ii, 4, 9, 2 ; 
Kafh Saip. xi, 10 ; xxxvi, 
7. 

Wild in the Indus 
basin. 

Fruit. 



VEDIC PLANTS 


653 


Vedic Name. Latin Synonym Ref. in Vedic literature . Distribution 

and Family . and uses 


57. Kixh£uka Butea frondosa — R. V. x f 85, 20 (wedding); The Himalayas to 

Patfis B. monosperma bridal car adorned with Ceylon & Bur- 

Panna (Leguminosea?) its blossoms ; Parna in ma ascending 

R. V. 97, 5; A. V, v, 5, to 4000 ft. in 

5 ; amulets and cover of the N. W. Kh- 

sacrificial dishes in A. V. andesli. 

iii, 5, 4, 8 ; xvi, 11, 4, Timber for cars 
53 ; sacrificial implements and utensils , 

in Taitt. Sam. iii. 5, 7, 2; flowers . 

Mait. Sam. iv, 1, 1 ; 

Pafica. Br, xxi, 4, 13 ; 

Ka|h. Sam. xv, 2 ; viii, 

2 ; Taitt. Br. i, J, 3, 11 ; 

7, 1. 9 ; 8, 7 ; parria-valka 
(bark) in Taitt. Sam. ii, 

5, 3. 5 ; Tait. Br. iii, 7, 4, 

2, 18, etc. 

Palasa in Kaus. Br. x, 2 ; 

Sat. Br. i, 5, 4, 5; v, 2, 

1, 17 : etc. ; Ait. Br. ii, 

1 ; Sat. Br. i, 3, 3, 19 ; 
ii, 6, 2, 8. 

58. Kiyambu .... R. V. x, 16, 13= A. V. xviii, 

Kyambu 3, 6, planted in the place 

where dead bodies are 
burnt. Taitt. Aran, vi, 4, 

1, 2 where Kydmbu is 
the term. 

59. Krsoala Abrus precatoritta Kath. Sam. xi, 4 ; Taitt. The Himalayas to 

(Leguminose®) Br. i, 3, 6, 7 ; seeds used Ceylon ascend' 

as standard weights for ing to 3,500 ft. 
currency. 

60. Kulm£$a Phaseolus mumgo Chand. Up. i, 10, 2, 7 Extensively culti- 

var radiatus (Kutsita masa) ; Niruk- vated all over 

(Lcguminosere) ta, i, 4. India. 

Food & medicine . 


61. Kumuda I Nymphrca lotus Mentioned with other Warmer parts of 

(Water lily) (Nymphaeace®) plants in A, V. iv, 34, 5. India. 

Flower. 

62. Kusa Eragrosis cyno Sat. Br. ii, 5, 2, 15 ; iii, 1, Sacrificial . 

(See usder suroides 2, 16 ; v, 3, 2, 7, etc,; 

Daibha) ( Gramme® ) Kusa & Kusl occur in 

Mait. Sam. iv, 5, 7 ; Sat. 

• Br. iii, 6, 2. 9 ; Taitt Br. 

i, 5, 10 ; 1, 2, 7. 

63. Kusara Saocharum offiri- Only once mentioned in R. Cultivated in the 

narum V. i, 191, 3; according to 0 hotter parts of 

(Gramme®) B. Majumdar it refers to India. 

sugar cane, this term, he Sugar. 
says, is still being used in 
* Bengal for sugar cane. 


654 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name. 

Latin Synonym 
and Family. 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses 

64. Ku$tha 

1. Costus specio 
sus 

2. C. arabicus 

(Zingiberaceae) 

3. Saustfarea auri- 
culata (Hille- 
brandi. I, 65) -- 
S. lappa 

( Composite®) 

i 

A. V. v, 4 ; vi, 102 ; xix, 39, 
1 ; grows on mountains 
along with soma (A. V. 
4, 1, 2, 8; xix, 39, 1) ; 
as a remedy highest place 
among herbs (A. V. v, 4, 
1 ; xix, 39, 4) ; cures 

headache, diseases of the 
eye, bodily affection (A. 
V. v, 4, 10), fever and 
consumption ( Yakima ) , 
all healing ( visva-bhe - 
$tija) —in A. V. xix, 39, 
9 ; aromatic, classed with 
salve ( anjana ), and Na- 
\ Lida (nard) — A. V. vi, 
102. 3. 

Alpine, 4000 ft. 
Central & East- 
ern Himalayas, 
Kashmir, 8000- 
12,000 ft. 
Medicine , drug. 

65. Laksmana 

A plant having 
upon its leaves 
red spots 

A. V. ii, 25, 3 ; against ab- 
oflion. 


66. Madavati 
(Grape vino?) 

Intoxicating plant 
creeper 

A. V. vi, 16, 2 ; cf. iv, 7, 4; 
could it be grajx: vine: 


67. Madhuga 
Madhugha 

Honey plant, 
sweet herb, a 
fruit (?) 

A. V. i, 34. 4 ; vi, 122, 3 ; 
madhu-dugha occurs in 
R. V. vi ; 70, 1. 5. 


68. Madhuka 

Bassia latifolia 

A. V. i, 34, 5.— a love spell 
with this plant intoxicat- 
ing drink is made from its 
flowers. 

— 

69. Manjistha 

Rubia cordifolia 
(Rubiacea?) 

Ait. Br. lii, 2, 4 ; sankh. Br. 
vii, 7. 

Throughout Vndia 
in hilly districts. 
Dyestuff'. 

70. Ma§aparpi 

Teramnus labialis 
(I^eguminose®) 

A. V. ii. 25, 3. 

From the foot of 
the W. Himala- 
yas to Ceylon. 
Burma etc. 

7.1. Masura 

Lens esculenta 
(Leguminosesc) 

Vaj. Sam. xviii, 12 ; Brhad. 
Up. vi, 3, 22. 

i 

Cold weather crop 
throughout 
India. 

Pulse, cereal. 

72. MasCtfva 

A grain of the 
north country 

Taitt. Br. iii, 8, 14, 6. 

.... 


VEDIC PLANTS 


655 


Vedic name . 


Latin Synonym 
and Family. 


Ref. in Vedic literature. 


Distribution 
and uses. 


Phragmitis 

maxima 

(Graminere) 


74. Nalada, Na- Nardostachys 
ladi, (Nard) Jatamana 

(Valeriact®) 


R. V. i, 32, 8 ; 179, 9 ; ii, 
34, 3 ; viii, 69, 2 ; x, 11, 

2 ; 105, 9 ; Nirukta v, 2; 
it is identified by Pischcl 
with Na<la as at one pas- 
sage (R. V. i, 3?, 8) reed 
boat is mentioned, which 
is made of Nada split, 
and over which the 
waters go ; at another 
passage (ii, 31, 3), reed 
whip is' mentioned. Max- 
Miiller sees reed also it) 
R. V. x, 11, 2 ; in R. V. 
x, 105, 4, and x, 11, 2, 
the idea of a river is 
clearly indicated. 

In India, and partial 
larly in Bengal, reed is 
never employed in boat 
building, but Palmyra 
palm is extensively used 
for such purposes. G>uld 
it mean this plant? lht 
idea of splitting lends 
support to it. 

A. V. vi, 102, 3 : Ait. Araq. 
iii, 2, 4 ; sankh. Aran, xi, 
4 ; used for garland 


From the Punjab 
to Burma, 
throughout 
India, Himala- 
yas up to 3000 
ft. 

Boat, furniture. 


Alpine Himalayas 
1000 to 15.000 
ft., Kumaon. 
Sikkim 17,000 
Bhutan. 


75. Narad 


A poisonous plant \, V. v, 31, 4. 


76. Nilakalasala Grain creeper 
Nilagalasala 


A. V. vi, ,16, 4 (Whitney, 
292-293). 


77, Nispava 


78. Nivara 


I (See under 

Khalva) 

A variety of paddy Rath. Sai|i. xii, 4 ; Mail. Cereal. 
wild race Sam. ii, 4, 10 ; \ aj. Sarp. 

(Graminese) xviii, 12; Sat. or. v, i, 

* 4, 14 ; 3. 3. 5 ; Taitt. Br. 

i,' 3, 6, 7. etc. 


ra . N ,«»dta rs®***-* 

. chtS roots, in R. V. i, 24. forest'. 

7 (Pischel, I, 113 114): Sant fatal. 

A. V. iv, 37, 4 ; v, 5 5 ; 

Ait. Br. vii, 30, 31 ; Sat. 

Br. v, 3, 5, 13 ; viii, 2, 7, 

3 ; Chand. Up. vi, 12, 1, 
etc ; camasa made of its 
wood, Taitt Sam. vii, 4, 

12, 1 : VSj. Sain, xxm, 13. 


656 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


« 


Vedic Name. 

i 

Latin synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature . 

Distribution 
and uses , 
* 

80. Nyastika 
(See under 
Canda) 

Andropogan acicu- 
latus 

(Gramme®) 

A. V. vi, 139, 1. 


81. Pakadurva 

1. Edible millet 
(Gramineae) 

R. V. x, 16, 3, mentions 
along with Kiyambu and 
Vyal Kasa , among plants 
used for growing on spots 
where dead bodies are 
burnt. Tailt. Aran, vi, 
4, 1, 2 ; A. V. xviii, 3, 6, 
reads. Sdndadurva (hav- 
ing egg shaped roots). 
Could it be Cyperus 
rotandus ? 

India, 0—6000 ft. 

Cereal. 

82. Palasa 

See under Kim- 
suka 

.... 


83. Parpa 

See under Kim- 
suka 

.... 

.... 

84. Patii, Patha 

1. Stephania 
elegans 

2. S. glabra 

(■= S. rotanda) 

3. S. hemandifolia 
(Menispermaceae) 

A. V. ii, 27, 4 ; KauS. 
Sutra, xxxvii, 1 ; xxxviii, 
18. 

S. elegans and S. 
glabra, subtro- 
pical Kumaon 
and Simla to 
Sikkim. S. her- 
nandifolia in 

Nepal-Sikkim. 

Medicinal. 

85. psia 

A fragrant plant 

A. V. iv, 37, 3 ; fragrant 
plant mentioned along 
with Gugguiii & Naiad i 


86. Pilu 

1. Carcya arborea 

(Myrtace®) 

2. Salvadora 

persica 

3. S. olleoides 

(Saivadorace®) 

A. V. xx, 135, 12 ; on the 
fruit of which doves feed. 

From the Hima- 
layas to Travan- 
rore. up to 4000 
ft. S. persica in 
drier parts $f 
India from the 
Punjab to Sind, 
Gujarat, Raj- 

putana. 

87. Pippali 

1. Piper 
peepuloides 

2. P. longum 

(Piper ace®) 

A. V. vi, 107, 4. 

f 

Tropical Hima- 
layas ; hotter 

parts of India. 
Spices, medicinal. 

88. FUudSru 

Pinus longifolia 
(Conifei®) 

Kath. Sarp, xxv, 6 ; sat. Br. 
iii, 5, 2, 15 ; 4, 4, 5, 17 ; 
Pahca. Br. xxiv, 5 ; Mahi- 
dhara on Vaj. Sain, v, 
14 ; Sayapa on Ait. Br. 
i. 28. 

Outer Himalayas, 
' The Indus to 
Bhutan, 1500 to 
6000 ft. Afghani- 
stan 



VEDIC PLANTS 


657 


Vedic Name , 

| Latin synonym 
and Family. 

Rej. in Vedic literature. | 

Distribution 
and uses 

89. Plak$a 

90. Prak$a 

Ficus lacor 

Fiais lacor 
(Urticacese) 

Plak$a, waved leaved fig 
tree, small white fruit. 

A. V. v, 5 ; Taitt. Sam. vii, 
4, X2\ cf. iii, 4. 8. 4; 
Mail. Sarii. iii, 10, 2 ; vi, 
3, 10, 2 ; Ait. Br. vii, 32 ; 
viii, 16 ; Taitt. Br. iii, 8, 
19, 2 ; Sat. Br. iii, 8, 3, 
10, 12. etc. 

Prak$a is mentioned in Taitt. 
Sam. vi, 3, 10, 1 ; Sama- 
veda. i, 144 ; ii, 465 ; Ait. 
Aran, v, 2, 2. 

Plains and lower 
hills of India. 

91- Pramanda 

Hill debrandt (I, 
14-16 ; II, 241- 
45) thinks it to 
be a plant 

having shoots 

turned down- 
wards* ( naica - 

sakha), refers to 
Soma 

R. V. iii, 53, 14. 


92. Pramandani 

93. Praprotha 

Certain sweet 

rented plant. 

A substitute of 
Soma 

Kau:s. Sutra, viii, 17 ; xxv, 
11 ; xxxil 22. 

Pane. Br. viii, 4. 1. 


94. Priyangu 

Setaria italics 

Tail. Sam. ii, 2, 11. 4; 

In moftit warm and 

(Panic seed) 

(Gramineae) 

Hath. Sam. x, 11 ; Mait. 
Sam. ii, 1, 8 ; Vaj. Sam. 
xviii, 12. 

tropical coun- 

tries, 6000 ft. 
in the Hima- 
laya. 

Medicinal. 

95. Priyangu 
.* 

Aglaia odorata 
('Meliacese) 

In sajviihsa Br. v, 2, it is 
described as phalavali 
(Weber, 315) this plant 
appears to be a tree. See 
CaTaka-Dahaciktlsd. Am - 
ara also describes 1 the 
plant in his Lexicon. 

Eastern Peninsula. 
Toilet. 

96. Pfrsniparni 

1. Uraria lagopioi- 

A. V. ii, 25, 1, etc ; as pro- 
tection against evil beings; 

1. Herbs, in the 

(having speckl- 

des 

plains from foot 

ed leaf) 

(Leguminosea:) 

2. Lenina Sp. (in 
the lexicon) 

(Lemnaceac) 

3. Hemionitis cor- 
difolia 
(JFilidna?) 

Sat. Br. xiii, 8, 1, 16. 
Roth (cited by Whitney), 
later identifies it with a 
plant Laksmana curing 
barrenness. The scholiast 
ofKatysin. Sr. Sutra (xxv. 
7. 17) identifies it with 
Teramnus labialis ( 
Glycine debilis ). In the 
lexicons the plant is iden- 
tified as a Lenina Sp. 
(water plant). 

"" T ' 

of W. Hima- 
layas to Ceylon, 
etc. 

3. Common in the 
plains, on the 
mountains up to 
3000 ft. 


43 


658 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic Name. 

Latin synonym 
and Family. 

Ref . in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses* 

97. Pundarika 

Nelumbo nucifera 

R. V. x r 142, 8 ; A. V. iv, 
35, 5; (Whitney 207; Aim- 
mer, 70, Weber, 18, 138), 
Taitt. Sam. i, 8, 2, 1 ; Sat. , 
Br. v, 5, 5. 6 ; Brhad Up. 
ii, 3, 10 ; vi, 3, J4 ; 
Chand. up. i, 6, 7 ; Ait. 
Amp. iii, 3, 4 ; A. V. (x, 
8, 3) compares lotus bud 
to human heart (shape). 
In the Taitt. Sath. i, 8, 
18 ; 1 ; Taitt. Br. i, 8, 2, 

1 ; wreath of lotus petal. 1 
( pundarbsraja is men- 
tioned. 

Throughout the 

(lotus) 

( == N. Specie- 
sum) 

(Nymphajacea) 

; 

i 

warmer parts of 
India. 

Voilet, Flowers. 

98. Pu§kara 

Nymphaca stellala 

R. V. vi, 16, 13 ; vii, 33, 

Wanner parts of 

(Blue lotus) 

: 

(Nymplucacett) 

I 

11 ; A. V. xi, 3, 8 ; xii, 

1, 24 ; Taitt. Saiii. v, 4. 

1 ; 2, 6, 5 ; 6, 9, 2 ; Vaj. 
Sara, xi, 29 ; Taitt. Br. i, 

2, 1.4; Sat. Br. iv, 5, 1, 
16 y Mait. Sam. iii, 1. 5 ; 
A. V. (xii, ,1, 24) men- 
tions sweet perfume of 
flowers, Grew in lakes 
puskarmt)- ~R. V. w 78, 
7 ; x. 107, 10 ; A. V. iv, 
39, 5; v, 16, 17; Brhad 
l/p. iv, 3. 11, etc : lotus 
crowned — R. V. x, 189, 

2 ; A. V. iii, 22. 4 ; Sat. 
Br. iv, 1, 5, 16, etc. 

India. 

99. PQtika 

1. Gaesalpinia 
Bonducdla 
(Leguminoseaa;) 

2. Basel J a rubra 

( Chtnopodiacerc) 

i Kath Sath. xxxiv, 3 ; Sat. 
Br. xiv, 1. 2, 12 ; Panca 
Br. viii, 4, 1 ; ix. 5, 3, 
etc ; Hillebrandt ( I. 24. 
n. 3) identifies it with 
Basella rubra. 

Himalayan Kuma- 
on up to 2.500 
ft. 

r 

100. Putirajju 

• • • • 

i 

A. V. viii, 8, 2 (See Roth.) 
(S. V.) 

(••• 

101. Putada 

U. C. Dutta iden- 

A. V. ii, 25, 3, prescribed 
against abortion and other 

Plains from foot 

Putrajani 

tifies the plants 

of the Hima- 

Putrakanda 

with Uraria La- 
gopodiodes 
(Leguminoseasc) 

maladies. 

layas to Ceylon. 

102. Putudru 

Finns Sp. 

( Conifera? ) 

A. V. viii, 2, 28 ; Taitt. Sam. 
vi, 2, 8, 4 ; Mait. Sam. 
iii, 8, 5 ; Kaus. Sutra, viii, 
15 ; Iviii, 15. 

Outer Himalayas. 

103. Rohitaka 

Aphanamixis poly- 
stachia 
(Metraceai) 

Mait. Sam. iii, 9. 3. 

Sub-Himalayan 
tract from Rap- 
ti, Sikkim up to 
6000 ft. 



VEDIC PLANTS 


G3» 


Vedic name. 

Latin Synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

1 

Distribution 
and uses. 

104. Rajjudala 

Cordia obliqua 
(Boraginaceai) 

Sat. Br. xiii, 4. 4. 16. 

Western India 

from the Pun- 
jab to the whole 
of wanner parts 
of India. 

105. Sada 

Glass 

R. V. ix, 15, 6 ; Vaj. Sam. 

XXV. 1. 

.... 

106. Sadampu$pa 

Ever flowering 
plant 

A. V. iv, 20, 9 ; against 
Pisaca (supernatural 

agency.) 

— 

107. Saha 

According to Roth 
(S. v. 26), the 
name oi a plant. 

A. V. xi, 6, 15 ; Samavidh. 
Br. ii, 6, 10. 

.... 

108. Sahadeva 

A plant 

R. V. i, 100, 17; Samavi- 
dhana Br. ii, 6, 10. 

.... 

109. Sahadevi 

See under Arun- 
dhati 

(Malvaceae) 

A. V. vi. 59, 2. 


110. Sahamana 

A plant 

A. V. ii, 25, 2; iv. 7, 2; 
viii, 2. 6; 7-5. 

.... 

111. Sairya 

Species of grass 
infested with 

insects 

R. V. i, 151, 3. 

.... 

112. Salmali 

• 

Bombax Ceiba 
(Bombacacese) 

Fruit poisonous in R. V. vii, 
50, 3 ; bridal car made ol 
its wood (R. V. x, 85, 
20), as the tallest of trees 
Taitt. Sam. vii, 4. 12, 1 ; 
Vaj. Sam. xxiii, 13 ; Sat. 
Br. xiii, 2, 7, 4 ; Pane. Br. 
ix, 4, 11, etc. 

Tropical Eastern 
Himalayas ; th- 
roughout hotter 
forest regions of 
India. 

Timber . 

113. Salanj&Ul 

Grain Creeper 

A. V. vi, 16, 4 ; Kaus. Sutra 
ii, 16. 

.... 

114. sail 

Oryza sativa— a 

variety * 
(Graminesc) 

• 

A later word for paddy con- 
jectured by Roth to be 
equivalent to Sari, in the 
word Sarisaka in the A. 

V. 

Indigenous in the 
marshes of Raj- 
putana. 

Cereal. 

115. Sal&ka 

Nymph, xa lotus 

(Nymphaeaceae) 

A. V. iv, 34, 5. 

Wanner parts* of 
India in pools 
& lakes. 


€60 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name . 


Latin Synonym 
and Family . 


Ref. in Vedic literature. 


Distribution 
and uses. 


117. Sana 
(hemp) 


1. Prosopis spici- A. V. vi, Jl, 1 ; 30, 2, 3 ; 

gera Taitt bam. v, 1, 9, 6 ; 

2. Mimosa Suma 4. 7. 4 (for the lower 

(Leguminoseae) ara^i for kindling fire) ; 

Kath. Sam. xxxvi, 6 ; 
Taitl. Br. i, 1, 3, 11. f i 
seq . ; 6, 4, 5 ; Sat. Br. ii, 
5, 2, 12 ; ix, 2, 3, 37, etc. ; 
destructive of hair in A. 
V. vi, 30, 2, 3 ; as pro* 
during intoxication ; 

broad leaved ; these two 
characters are totally 
wanting in the two trees. 
Prosopis spicigera, and 
Mimosa Suma with which 
Sam w usually identified 
(Roth in Whitney, 302). i 
In fire kindling lower ] 
arani in A. V. vi, 11, 1 ; 
Sat.' Br. xi, 5, 1, 15 : cf. 
13 ; 4, 1. 22 ; Taitt. Sam. 
v, 1, 9, 6 ; 4, 7, 4 . fruit 
— Sdmidhdnva in Sat. Br. 

1. 1, 1. 10. 

Crotalaria juncea a. V. ii, 4, 5 ; as growing 
(Leguminosea) j n forests, remedy again- 
st Viskandha ; Sat. Br. 
iii, 2. 1. 11; i, 6, 1, 24;! 

2. 15. i 


The Punjab, Raj- 
putana, Bundel- 
khand, Sind, 

Gujarat, Af- 
ghanistan. 

Wood. 


From base of the 
Himalayas to 
Ceylon. 

Medicinal , fibre. 


118. Sagtfcdurva Cyperus rotandus a. V. xviii, 3, 6. 
(Cyperacea;) 


119. Sankha- Hemp? 
pu$pika 


A. V. vii, 38. 5. 


120. Saphaka Trapa bispinosa A. V. iv, 39, 5 ; Apas. Sr. Throughout India. 
(Onagraceae) Sutra, ix, 14, 14. Fruit. 


121. Sara 


Saccharum arun- R. V. i, 191, 3 ; A. V. iv, Throughout plains 
danaceum 7. 4 ; Taitt. Sam. v, 2, 6, and low hills of 

(Graminea) 2 ; vi, J, 3, 3 ; Kath. Sarh. India. 

ix, 5 ; xxviii, ; Sat. Br. Grass. 
ii, 2. 2 ; 4, 1 ; iii, 1, 3, 

13 ; Brhad. Up. vi, 4, 11, 
etc ; Nirukta v, 4, etc ; 
arrow shafts, in A. V. i, 

2, 1; 3, 1. 


122. Sar$apa Brassica Camp- Chand. Up. iii, 14. 3 ; Sac}. Cold weather crop. 

pestris var $ar- Br. v, 2 ; Safikli Sr. Oil, medicinal. 
son Sutra, iv, 15, 8, etc. 

(Cmcifera?) 


VEDIC PLANTS 


661 


Vedic Name . 

Latin synonym 
and Family . 

Ret. in Vedic literature . 

Distribution and 
uses. 

123. Satavara 

Asparagus racemo- 
sus 

(Liliaceae) 

A. V. xix, 36. 

Tropical and sub- 
tropical India 

ascending the 
Himalayas' to 
4000 ft. from 
Kashmir east- 
ward. 

Eatable , medicine . 

124. Silad 

Name of a healing 
plant, also call- 
ed IAk$d 

> 

< 

< 

M 

00 

.... 

125. Silanjala 

Crain creeper 

Same as Salanjala. 

.... 

126. Siihsapa 

Dalbergia Sisu 
(Leguminoseai) 

R. V. iii, 53, 19 (with 
Khadira) a stately and 
beautiful tree. 

A. V. xx. 129, 7 ; cf. Sariv 
sapa in vi, 129, 1. 

W. Himalayas up 
to 4000 it. 
Central Hima- 
layas ascending 
to 5000 ft. Te- 
rai of Nepal. 

Wood. 

1 26 A. Sipala 

(water plant) 

Blyxa Ceylanica 
(Hydrocharidea;) 

R. V. x. 68, 5 ; later form 
Saivala ; Sialyo , over- 

grown with Sipala plants: 
Sad- Br. iii, 1 ; only once 
in A. V. vi, 12, 3. 

B. Oryzoterum is 
the only species 
growing in 
Kashmir. 

127. Soma 
(with figs) 

• 

Cannot now be 
identified with 
certainty ; vari- 
ously identified : 

1. Sarcostwnma 

brevistigma 
A&lepias 
acida ; 

2. S. intermedium 

— S. viminale 

3. Periploca 

apbylla 

( Asclepiadacex) 

4. Ephedra Vul- 

garis 

(Gnetaceas) 

5. Cannabis saliva 

( UrtuAceai) 

In the Rgveda the whole of 
the 9th Mandala and six 
hymns of other Mapcjalas 
are devoted to this plant. 
Soma is described as the 
best among plants all 
trees arc prostrate to 
Soma who is their king. 

(1) + (2) are in 
the Deccan Pen- 
insula ; (3) in 
the Western 

Punjab in the 
plains & Sind, 
Afghanistan, 
Persia, etc. (4) 
in temperate and 
Alpine Himala- 
yas, 7 to 12000 
ft. Western Ti- 
bet in drier re- 
gion^, and (5) 
wild in the N. 
W. Himalayas, 
Central Asia, 

etc. 

Drink. 

128. Somavati 

On« of the four 
prindpal medi- 
dnal .plants in 
Rgveda 

R. V. x, 97, 7. 

.... 

129. Spandana 

A certain tree 

R. V. iii, 53. 19. 

— 


662 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 





VEDIC PLANTS 


663 


Vedic name. Latin Synonym Rej. in Vedic literature . Distribution 

and Family. and uses. 


139. Talasa 


140. Taretafiha 


141. Tandi 

142. Tila 
Tirya 


Flaoourtia cata- A. V. vi, 15, 3 ; Whitney Kumaon. 
phracta suggests it same as Tatisa. 

(Flacourtiacese) 

Tree Kaus. Sutra, xxv, 23 ; its .. . 

adjective tarsla&hi is 
found in A. V. v, 29, 15 ; 

Weber (18, 280) thinks 
it mustard plant. 

.... A. V. x, 4, 25 (See Si. 

Petersburg Diet. S. V.). 

Sesamum indicum A. V. ii, 8, 3 ; vi, 140, 2 ; Cultivate! 


(Pedalineae) 


143. Tilvaka 


144. Trayamajia 


145. Udojasa 


146. Udumbara 


Symplocos 

racemosus 

(Symplocacerc) 


xviii, 3, 69 ; 4 , 32 : as an 
epithet of Kurambha (A. 
V. iv, 7, 3, Taitt. Sam. 
vi, 3, 2 ; Vaj. Sam, xviii, 
12 ; Sat. Br. ix, 1, 1. 3 ; 
etc.; often mentioned with 
md$a — in A. V, vi, 140, 
2 ; Brhad Up. vi, 3, 22 ; 
Chand. Up. v, 10, 6, etc.; 
Taitt. Sam. gives hemanta 
& sisira seasons for it. 
Til a- piii jh til- pin ja. for 

fuel in A. V. ii, 8, 3 ; 
xii. 2, 54 ; tilaudana (por- 
ridge) in Brhad. Up. vi, 
4 , 16; Sahkh. Aral?, xii, 
8 ; as oil ( taila ) in A. 
V. i, 7, 2 ; x, 136, 16 ; 
Sahkh. Aran. xi. 4 . 

Sat. Br. xiii. 8, 1, 16 ; 
Maitt. Sam. iii, 1,9; Sad 
Br. iii, 8 ; Yupa made of 
its wood. 


Cultivated all ovei 
Tndia. Baluchi- 


a native of Tro- 
pical Africa 
Food , medicinal 
ritual 


A. V. viii, 2, 6 ; also men- 
tioned by Amaru in his 
lexicon. 

One of the four R. V. x, 97, 7. 
principal medi- 

Fim’tfSSu Not to R. V. ; A. V xi,. 31, 

<««-*> l; tiVt * £• »*; 

vii, 4, 1, 38, etc.; wood 
for ritual purposes ; yupa 
• and ladle made of^ its 

wood in Taitt. Saiij. 
v, 47, 3 ; amulets in A.V. 
. xix, 31, l; Taitt. Sain. 

iii, 4, 8, 4 ; fruit sweet as 
madhu in Ait. Bf. vn, 13; 
ripen three times a year 
in Ait. Br. v, 24 : forests 
of Udumbara is mention- 
ed in Panca. Br. xvi, 6, 4 


Himalayan Terai, 
of Kumaon, 
2,5(X) ft. thro- 
oughout N. E. 
India. 

Wood. 


Outer Himalayas, 
plains & low 
hills of India 
from Rajputana 
and Salt Range 
to Khasia hills. 

Medicinal , eatable 
& ritual 




664 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Vedic name . 

Latin Synonym 
and Family . 

1 

Ref. in Vedic literature . 

Distribution 
and uses. 

147. Ulapa 

Imperata arundi- 
nacea 

(Gramineaj) 

R. V. x, 142 ; A. V. vii, 66, i 
1 ; Vaj. Sam. xvi, 45 ; 
upolapa in Mait. Saip. i, 
7, 2. 

From the Punjab 
southwards and 
eastwards, hot 
ter parts of 
India. 

Grass. 

148. Upavaka 
(Latu Indra- 
yava ) 

Wrightia tinctoria 
(allied to Hol- 
arrhena untidy- 
senterica) 

( Apocyanaccse) 

Vaj. Sarp. xix, 22, 90 ; xxi, 
30 (as healing); Sat. Br. 
xii, 7, 1, 3 ; 2, 9, etc. 

Rajputana, C. P. 

etc. Arabia. 
Medicinal . 

149. Upolapa 

See under Ulapa 

— 

.... 

150. Orjayanti 

One of the 4 prin- 
cipal medicinal 
plants in the 
Rgveda 

R. V. x, 97, 7. 

* 

151, IJrvaru 
Urvaruka 

1. Cucumis’ mdo 

2. C. Sativas 

(Cucurbitaceae) 

A. V. vi, 14, 2 ; R. V. vii, 
59, 12= A. V. xiv, 1, 17 
--Mait. Sarp. i, 10, 4 = 
Taitt. Sam. i, 8, 62 -= Vaj. 
Saqi. iii, 60 ; Panca. Br. 
ix, 2, 19 

Said to be wild in 
dry places of 
India. 

Fruit. 

152. U$ana 

1. Piper longum 

2. P. peepuloides 

Sat. Br. iii, 4, 3, 13 ; iv, 2, 
5, 15. According to 

Amara it is synonymous 
with Pippal. A plant 
from which sotna was pre- 
pared. 

Tropical Himala- 
yas. 

Medicinal , spice. 

153. V&napami 

Water plant 

A. V. iii, 18. 1. 

.... 

154. Varajja 

CraUcva nurvalla 
( = c. Roxbur- 
ghii) 

(Capparidaceac) 

A. V. vi, 85, 1 ; x, 3, 1 ; 
xix, 32, 9 ; Pafica. Br. v, 

3, 9, 10 ; Sat. Br. xii, 8, 

4, 1. 

« 

*■ 

All over India, 

often 1 found 

along streams, 
but also in dry 
deep boulder for- 
mations in the 
sub -Himalayan 
tract. 

Medicinal. 

155. Vibhitaka 

Terminalia bele- 
rica 

(Combretaceai) 

R. V. iii, 86, 6 ; x, 34, 1 ; 
A. V. (Paipp.) xx, 4, 6 
—its fruit used in mak. 
ing dice. 

Throughout India 
common in the 
plains & lower 
hills. 

Myrobalan. 

156. Vihalha 

A plant 

A. V. vi, 16, 2. 

— 


T 




VEDIC PLANTS 


665 


* 


Vedic name. 

lAtlin Synonym 
and Family . 

Ref. in Vedic literature. 

Distribution 
and uses. 

157. Vikankata 
Vikantika 

Flacourtia vamon- 
tchi 

(Flacourtiacea?) 

Taitt Sam. iii, 5, 7, 3 ; vi, 
4, 10, 5 ; Kath Sarii. 

xix, 10 ; Mait. Sam. iii, 
1, 9 ; cf. A. V. xi, 10. 3 ; 
Sat. Br. i, 2, 4, 10 ; v, 2, 
4, 18, etc. 

Sub-Himalayan 
tract, outer Hi- 
malayas ascend- 
ing to 4000 ft. 
from the Indus 
eastwards and in 
the adjacent 
plains. 

158. Virana 
Virina 

Aiidropogan muri- 
catus 

{Grammes) 

Sat. Br. xiii, 8, 1, 15. 

Plains of India & 
low hills. 

Grass. 

159. Vii^anaka 

Gymnema sylvcs- 
tre 

(Asdepiadaceae) 

A. V. vi, 44, 3 ; cf. Vi^dnikd 
in Wise. Hindu System ot 
Medicine, 146 ; rancdy 
against disease in A. V. 
ix, 8, 20 ; also in R. V. 
vi, 16, 20; xi, 96, 8. 

Tropical Africa, 

W. Ghats. 
Medicinat . 

160. Vrihi 

• 

Oryza sativa 
(Gramincsc) 

A. V. vi, 140, 2 ; viii, 7. 20; 
ix, 6, 14, etc.; Taitt. Sain. 

vii. 2, JO, 3 ; where it is 
said to ripen in autumn. 
Kath. Sarp. x, 6 ; xi. 5 ; 
Mait. Saip. iii- 10, 2 ; iv, 
3, 2 ; Vaj. Sam. xviii, 12; 
Ait. Br. ii. 8, 7 ; 11, 12 ; 

viii. 16, 3, 4 ; Sat. Br. v, 

5. 59 ; Bihad. Up. vi, 3, 
22 ; Chand. Up. iii, 14, 
3 ; black and white rice 
is contrasted in Taitt. 
Sam. i. 8, 10, 1 ; also 
distinction of a dark swift- 
growing (dxd), and 

mahdvrihi, are found in 
A. V. xi, 4, 13 ; Jaimin. 
Br. i, 43 ; Ctand. Up. v, 
1, 5 etc. ; Macdonell & 
Keith think the swift- 
growing variety is later 
known as saslika. 

Indigenous in 
marshes of Raj- 
putana, Sikkim 
etc. 

Cereal. 

161. Vyalka-sS 

Water plant 
• 

R, V. x, 16, 3 ; grown in 
cfpota where dead bodies 
are burnt. 

.4 • » • 

1 

162. Ya&imadhu 
(MadhQka) 

Glycyrrhiza glabra 
UJeguminoseffi) 

$ 

A. V. i, 34, 5 ; for virility 
and erotic success. 

Imported through 
the Punjab from 
Afghanistan in 
the N. W. Pro- 
vinces. 

Medicinal dye t 

wood. 


666 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


t 


Vedic name. 


Latin Synonym 
and Family. 


Ref. in Vedic literature . 


Distribution 
and uses. 


163. Yava 


Hordeum vulgare R. V. i, 23, ,15 ; 66, 3 ; 117, 
(Gramineae) 21; 135, 8; 176; 2; ii, 

5, 6; 14, 11 ; v. 85, 3; 

vii, 3, 4 ; viii, 2, 3 ; 22, 
6; 63, 9; 78, 10, etc.; 
A. V. ii, 8, 3 ; vi, 30, 1 ; 
50, 1, 2 ; 91, 1 ; 141, 2 ; 

viii, 7, 20 ; ix, 1, 22 ; 6, 
14 ; xii, 1, 22 ; Taitt. 
Sam. vi, 2, 10, 3 ; 4, 10, 
5; vii, 2, 10, 2; Iiath. 
Sain, xv, 10 ; Mait. Sain, 
iv, 3. 2 ; Vaj. Sarp. v. 26; 


Cultivated chiefly 
in N. India, 
widely cultivat- 
ed in temperate 
regions in N. 

India up to 

13,000 ft.; native 
of temperate re- 
gions 
Cereal . 


xviii, 12 ; xxiii, 30 ; 
Taitt. Br. i, 8, 4, 1 ; felt. 
Br. i, 1, 4, 20; ii, 5,2,1 ; 


iii, 6, 1, 9, 10; iv, 2. 1, 
11 ; xii, 7, 2, 9 ; Chand. 
Up. iii, .14, 3, et. seq.; 
Kaus Br. iv, 12 ; the har- 
vest came after spring 
(Kaus. Br. iv, 12 ; in the 
summer) 'Taitt. Sam. 
vii. 2, 10, 2 ; sowing 

[vapa, R. V. i, 117, 21); 
ripening, i, 135, 8 ; plou- 
ghing, i, 176, 2 ; grain 
rejoicing in rain, ii, 5, 6; 
saktu (barley meal) in 
x, 71, 2, and in later 
Samhitits. 


3. Classification. 


Plants listed in the preceding section are now classified according to 
their Families : 



Plants. 

Families. 

I. 

Filicineae 

Prsnipanjf. 

11. 

Coni ferae 

Haridru, Pitudaru, Pfltudru. 

III. 

Gnetaceae 

Soma. 

IV. 

Ilydrocharideae 

Avaka, S^ala, Saivala. 

V. 

Zingiberaoeae 

Adara, Hanidra, Ku$tha. 

VI. 

Liliaceae 

Amula, Satavana. 

VII. 

Pameae 

Khar j Ora. Na<fa (?). 

VIII. 

Gramineae 



(i) Cereals . . 

Ajiu, Gavedhiika, Gavidhuka, Godhfl- 


ma, NivSra, Pakadftrva, Priyangu, 
Sali, Syam&ka, Vrihi, Yava. 





VEDIC PLANTS 


667 


Plants. 

(ii) Grasses, reeds, 
etc. 


IX. 

Cyperaceae 

X. 

Menispermaceae 

XI. 

Nymphncese 

XII. 

Cruci ferae 

XIII. 

Capparidace® 

' XIV. 

Flacourliaccae 

XV. 

Malvaceae 

XVI. 

Bombacacea? 

XVII. 

Rutaceae 

XVI 11. 

Burceracze 

XIX. 

Mcliacciai 

XX. 

Khamneze 

XXI. 

Anacardiaceac 

XXII. 

I-eguminoseae 


(i) Pulses 


(ii) Other spp. 


XXIII. Combretace® 
XXIV. Myrtaceae 
XXV. Onagrace® 
XXVI. Cucurbitace® 

XXVII. Rubiace® 
XXVIII. Valcriace® 
XXIX. Confpositae 
XXX. Ebenace® 
XXXI. Salvadorace® 
XXXI II. Symplocace® 
XXXII. Apocyanaces 


Families. 

Ala, Asvavala, A&vavara, Balbaja, 
Canda, Darbha, Kharadarbha, 
Mrdudarbha, DQrva. l§ika, Ka^a, 
Kusa, Kusara. Nada, Nyastika, 
«?tda, Sara, Sanya, Sugandhiteja- 
na, Ulapa, Upalopa, Viraya, 

Viriija. 

Pakadfirva, Saijdadfirva. 

Pa(ha, Pata. 

Andtki, Kumuda, Pundarika, Pu$- 
kara, Saluka. 

Abayu, Baja, Sarsapa, Tanjtagha. 

Karira, Varana. 

Tala4a, Vikarikata, Vikantika. 

Anindhati, Sahadevf. 

Salmali. 

Bilva, Jambila, Kapitthaka. 

Guggulu. 

Priyarigu, Rohitaka. 

Badra, Karkandhu. 

Ajasrugt. 

Canaka, Garmut, Khalakula, Khalva, 
Kulmasa, Masura, Nispava. 

Adhyan-da, Aparajita, Aratak!, Araiu, 
Khadira, Kimsuka, Kn»nala, Pala- 
sa, Pama, Prsnipanjt, Pfitika, 
Putrada, Putrajani, Putrakanda, 
Sami, Sana, SiriisapS. 

Dhava, Jangida, Vibhitaka. 

Pilu. 

Saphaka 

Alabu, Alapu, Bimba, Karkandhu, 
UrvarQ, Udvarfika. 

Mafiji§th&- 

Nalada, Naladi. 

Kustha. 

SphQrjaka. 

Rlu. 

Tilvaka. 

Srckaparna. Upavaka. 



oo 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Plants. 


Fatuities. 


XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

XLI. 

XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 

XLV. 


Asclepiadacese 

Boraginese 

Convolvul aceae 

Solanaceae 

Bignoniaccse 

Pedalineae 

Verbenaceae 

Amarantaceae 

Chenopodiaceae 

Piporaccae 

Euphorbiacese 

Urticaceae 


XLVI. Unidentified 


Aja&pigi, Arka, Soma, Vi$anak£. 

Rajjudala. 

Amfila. 

Asvagandh^. 

Aralu. 

Tila, Ttrya. 

Kar§marya, Sraktya. 

Apamarga. 

Putika. 

Pippali, Ussana. 

Adhyanda, Amala, Amalaka, Erapda, 
Tajadbhanga A&vattha, Bhanga 
Nyagrodha, Plaksa, Prak$a, Udum- 
bara, Soma. 

Alasala. Asvavati, Auk$agandha, 
Citraparni, Dasavrk§a, Kakani- 

bira, Kyambu, Kiyambu, Lak&- 
maija, Madavati (grape vine?). 
Madhugha, Masaparni, Masusya, 

Naraci, Nilagalasala, Nilakalasala, 
PTla, Pramanda, Pramandani, 
Praprotha, Putirajju, Shahadcva, 
Sahamana, SalanjalS, Sankha- 

puspika, 5ilSci, silanjala. Soma, 
SomavatT, Spandana, SvadhS, 

Svadhiti, Syandana, Tarstagha. 
Taudi, Ar^yamaria (Syn. Balabha- 
drika-Amarakosa) , Udojasa, Urja- 
yanti, Vanaparni, Vihalha, Vyat- 
kasa. 



IS THE CULT OF DHARMA A LIVING RELIC OF 
BUDDHISM IN BENGAL? 

By 

Dr. SIJKUMAR SEN, M.A., ph.d. 

The cult of Dharma or Dharma worship is the most primitive and native 
form of religious practice in Bengal. In recent times it is current only in 
West Bengal, in Burdwan Division to be exact. The Ilooghly once formed 
the northern and eastern boundary of the land where the cult was extensively 
current. Owing to the shifting of the course of the river, places which once 
were situate in this side of the river have now gone over to the other. Dhamia 
worship therefore is not unknown in these areas. So Dharma is not unknown 
in the western area of the 24 Parganas. 

But there is evidence to show that Dharma worship, in its cruder form 
probably, was once known throughout Bengal and also in the contiguous 
province of Behar. The worship of Del (< deul ‘temple’) and of Pal 
( <pat(.a ‘spiked board’) which have survived as special items in the Carfak 
or Gajan ceremony of Siva (in the closing days of the Bengali year) in some 
localities in North and East Bengal, are really rituals of the elaborate Gajan 
ceremony of Dharma. There is even a temple of Dharma in Baguqla (Bogra) 
district, at a village some distance from the chief town of the district The 
popular Chal-parab ( $as(hi parva) of Behar is a parallel ceremony. The 
parallelism is remarkable not only in the agreements but in the differences as 
well. For instance, in the ritual current in Behar eating of a bottle-gourd 
(la jw) by the worshipper (a mother desiring welfare of her son) forms an 
important item of the ritual, whereas in the Gajan ceremony in Bengal the 
worshipper (a lady desiring a son) must never eat that vegetable nor should 
she eyer plant it. 

The cosmogonic idea as outlined in the Ndsadlya hymn in the Ifgveda 1 
is faintly yet unmistakably echoed in the cosmogony of the cult of Dharma. 
The former shows remarkable similarity with the cosmogonic conceptions of 
the Polynesian (Austric) peoples. It is, therefore, not unreasonable to hold 
that the cult in its most.primitive form was brought in by the Austric immi- 
grants. The cult was later superimposed by Vedic and later Hindu religious 
ideas and practices. The extreme austerities as practised on the concluding 
day of the Gajan celebration may indicate Jaina or allied influence. The 
only trace of later Buddhism which I have found, beside the doubtful phrase 
“ Sunyamurti ”, is a verse used in the final ritual in Gajan , which echoes the 


1. RV. X. 129. 



670 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


imagery or allegory underlying the first couplet of a mystic caryd song of the 
Buddhistic Sahajiya Kanhapada. The latter says : 

nagara-bahnc jdinbi tohuri kudid, 
choi choi jaisi bambhatta nddid. 

‘ Beyond the outskirts of the township, O Pom woman, stands your hut ; 
and you dare touch the shaven-headed Brahmin on your comings (and 
goings) !’ 

The Gdjon verse echoes 

Pakhur-parete Sadd-domer kujia, 
ghanaghana dise jay brdkmana barud. 

* The hut of Sada, the Pom fellow, stands on the embankment of the 
tank ; but the Brahmin priest incessantly comes and goes (by it)! ’ 

Saiva Natha cult was not entirely unconnected with Pharma worship. 
The four early Natha siddhas are mentioned in the cosmogony of the Pharma 
cult as directly created from the ashes of the body of Pharma. Purlabtia 
Mallika’s version 2 is the earliest available form of the Mayanamati-Govinda- 
candra legend. Therein we find the cosmogony peculiar to the cult of 
Pharma fully implied. Another point of contact between the two cults is 
the wearing of the symbolic footprint or foot gear ( pddukd ) of Pharma by 
the Natha siddhas as well as by the Pharma priests {pandit a). 

Although the cult of Pharma has been always a living one, at least in 
West Bengal, the educated and English knowing people felt no curiosity for 
it obviously because its adherents were recruited from the lower strata of 
the society. It was Haraprasad Shastri who first brought Pharma and his 
semi-mystic cult before the educated public. His assistant (“travelling 
pandit ” ) had secured some fragmentary Mss. 3 describing the ritual of the 
cult and also the copy of a Ms. of the Dharmamahgala poem written by 
Manik-ram Ganguli in the second half of the eighteenth century. Buddhistic 
studies just then had captured the fancy of the Indian orientalists who weft 
too ready to read Buddhism between lines in all matters ojd, unknown and 
mysterious. Shastri too could not overcome this weakness. (The two epithets 
of Pharma— nirafijma and sunyamurti — occurring in the Sanskrit verse which 
given as the dhyatia mantra of Pharma in the ritualistic Mss. at once led 
him to believe that the Pharma cult was a survival of Mahayana Buddhism 
in Bengal . ) Accordingly he published three short papers, one in the Proceed- 
ings and two in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in December- 
January 1894-95. - Since then) it is universally accepted, without further en- 
quiry. that the cult of Pharma is but a living- relic of Buddhism.) The Dhar- 

2. Edited and published by Sivacandra SI (1901). 

3. Edited and published in (1) Sun v a pur ana by Nagendranath Vasu (1907), 
and (2) Dharmapuj&vidhdna by Nanigopal, Bandyopadhyaya (1916). 



IS THE COLT OK DHARMA A LIVING RELIC OK BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 671 

ma cult has been keenly described in an interesting article 1 by Prof. K. P. 
Chattopadhyaya, in which the ritual as witnessed by him has been narrated. 
But is it really so ? 

Our researches have led us to think otherwise. We- have collected a 
number of Mss. describing the elaborate rituals of the cult, which has enabled 
us to correct, some faulty readings in which Shastri and his followers had 
put their faith. Thus the reading “ sinihale dharma-devatd ” in the line 

sitrihale dharma-devatd bahuta sanaman “ 

does not occur in any of our Mss. and probably not also in the Mss. collect- 
ed by Shastri. The entire line appears to be reconstructed or interpolated. 

In the verse named Niranjancr Usrnd Anger of Niranjana or Dharma ’) 
the Brahmins arc said to have been not only antagonistic to the Dharma cult 
but hostile to g< xxl men as well. The published version reads 

saddharmvre karaye vinos 

The HTnayana Buddhists called their religion Saddharma or Good Reli- 
gion. Saddharmi naturally would mean a Buddhist. The followers of 
Dharma thus appear to identify themselves as Buddhists in contra-distinc- 
tion to the Brahmins. This seems to be a very strong ground for Shastri’s 
theory. Unfortunately the reading Saddharmi does not occur in the Mss. 
collected by us and by Shastri. The reading obviously emanated from the 
editor of Siinyapurdtja. Our Mss. read sddhujane. Shastri’s Mss. read 
sadharmire. sadharmt meaning ‘ virtuous, pious ’ as against adharnu ‘ vicious, 
impious ’. 

Let us now examine the. implication of the epithets, niranjana and sunya- 
murti , on which Shastri relied so much. The former is indeed a regular name 
or epithet of Dharma. Now Dharma is all white, in form and garments. 
“ White disease,’’ i.c., leucoderma resulted from his curse. So Dharma is 
described as spotless ( niskalanka and niranjana) . Sunya here means de- 
vfiid of spot ' (.nirlepa) and sunyamurti means 4 whose form is spotless.’ In- 
deed the epithets niranjana and sunyamurti have been used in the apabh- 
ramsa writing of Bengali Buddhists following the Tantrik cult (Sahaja-ydna) 
to indicate the highest Deity, 4 5 6 7 but these very well may indicate the influence 
of the Dharma cult on Tantric Buddhism. In Mahayana Buddhism, sunya 
does not mean merely ‘void.’ but indicates the Ultimate Reality which is 

4. K. P. Chattopadhyaya, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Ben- 
gal, Calcutta, 1942. 

5. Mr. Panchafcan Mandal, M.A., doing research work with me, has been very 
helpful in his collaboration. 

6. Sunyapuran, p. 57 ; cf. p. 132. 

7. Cf. sunya niranjana parama-prabhu no lot pufiya na pdu Sunya Niranjana 
is the Supreme Master ; Merit and sin He has not * I Hevajratantia, quoted by Shas- 
tri in Sahitya-pari$at Patrikd , XXXIV, p # . 46. 



672 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


neither positive nor negative but both. From the viewpoint of orthodox 
Mahayana Buddhism sfmyamurti is quite meaningless. 

Shastri’s last argument was his identification of the symbol or icon of 
Dharma with Buddhist stupa. But herein he was entirely mistaken. The 

emblem of Dharma rather his padapitht: or footstool on which was placed 

or engraved the pdduka (boots or sandals) of Dharma — is a tortoise. In 
most cases it is a natural bit of stone shaped like a tortoise, in other cases it 
is a chiselled stone image of the same. In very rare cases the image is made 
of brass. A miniature temple or chariot is also known to be worshipped as 
emblem of Dliarma. The shape of the tortoise roughly resembles the stupa 
and Shastri mistook the protruding feet and head of the tortoise to be the 
tiny images of the five Dhydnt Buddhas that usually decorate the Buddhist 
stupa. 

Thus we see that the cult of Dharma has little to do with Buddhism. 
Now the question arises what is this mysterious deity. Those who have 
studied this cult in letter and in practice will find out readily that Dharma 
is the sun-god. The tortoise ( kurma , kasyapa) as the symbol or emblem 
of the (rising?) sun is probably a non- Aryan concept. But the identifica- 
tion of the tortoise with the sun appears early in Indo-Aryan religion, at Iea3t, 
as early as the Satapatha Brahmana* As an Aryan god the sun moves in 
a chariot. So does Dharma. As a matter of fact the ceremony of Ratha- 
yatra was originally connected with Dharma. Like the sun-god Dharma cures 
incurable diseases like leucoderma. The sun-god has a bird as his vdhana 
and the god of death ( Yama) is his son. Dharma ’s direct creation Uluka 
(‘owl’) combines the two personalities. The monkey, cult was originally as- 
sociated with the sun worship. In tire cult of Dharma, Hanuman is his 
factotum. 

Dharma is also the Iranian sun-god. He wears ‘boots, dresses like a 
warrior and rides a horse. Being the white God his raiments and his horse 
are all white. In this form he sometimes appears before his devotee. Titus 
says Ramadas Adak in his Dharmamahgala : 

sveta asve capi dharma rautera veSe 
krpd kari dekha dila dim rdmaddse. 

‘ In the garb of a warrior riding a white liorse Dharma graciously ap- 
peared before the poor Ramadas.' 

Dharma, the warrior god, was easily identified with ruling power of the 
country. So says the ritualistic verse : * 

hasd ghora khasa jojd paye diya mojd, 
ava£e$e boldile gaujera raja. 


8 . 7.5 1 . 5 . 




IS THE CULT OF DHARMA A LIVING RELIC OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 673 

i Riding) a swan-white horse and putting on fine garments and boots 
you at last have called (i.e., manifested) yourself as the king of Gaur/ 

It is, therefore, no wonder that the attendants and officiating priests of 
Dharma bear the titles of the officials and dignitaries of the ancient Indian 
court, e.g. padihdra (< pmtihara), uthasini (< mttkitasanika) , dhanustkan - 
nl (< dhmmddhikaranika) , etc. 

With this conception of Dharma is connected the story of the Kalki ava- 
tar a in the Puranic tradition. 

Dharma is partly the Water God and is allied to the Vedic Varuna. 
Dharma when worshipped with austerities by barren women bestowed the gift 
of progeny. As a matter of fact the Ghara-bhard (literally * filling the void 
of home*) Gajan, the most, elaborate ceremony of the cult is even now held 
as piilresii yajna. Varuna alsq was a giver of sons. The close similarity bet- 
ween the Sunalisepha story in the Altar ey a Brdhmana and the Luicandra 
episode in Dharmamahgala and in the Dkar mapu jdvidhdna treatises is more 
than accidental. Curious readers arc referred to the originals. 

Dharma was predominantly the War God of fighting tribes like the pom 
and others. According to the tradition recorded in the ritualistic treatises Sada 
the Pom was the first to worship Dharma. Next man was Asoya the Gliral 
(< Canddla). The latter is said to have offered to Dharma “tanks of wine*’ 
and “ hillocks of rice cakes M : madyer puskarnt dUa pi $ ter jaiigdl. Sacrifice 
of animals such as goat, duck or pig is made even now in the annual Gajan 
ceremony of Dharma. Wine and rice cakes are also offered. At some places 
the image is bathed in wine just before the commencement of the ceremony. 
The genuine priests of Dharma generally belong to the Dom or the Carat 
caste and comparatively rarely from other castes such as Bdrni , Dhopd , Suri, 
etc. Brahmins officiate as priests only in the daily worship and in that Gajan 
ceremony where no pig, wine or rice cake offerings are made. 

^ This form of worship seems to have been widely known in the kite fif- 
teenth century Bengal. So testifies Vmdavanadasa in his Caitanyabhagavata : 

madya mdr/isa diyd keha yaksa pujd kare 

‘Some people worship the demon with wine and meat offerings. 1 

Dharma was the god that was pleased only with the most cruel auste- 
rities. One had to bum incense over head, to walk over live coals, to pierce 
most delicate parts of the body with iron spikes, even through the chest be- 
fore the deity relented and offered the desired gift of son. The hardest pen- 
ance was self-immolation ( hdkanda ) f when the devotee cuts off his own head. 
This was done only by Lausena, the hero of Dharmamangala. By this ex- 
treme form of penance Lausena compelled the sun to rise in the West. This 
phenomenon indicated the fulfilment of Dharma worship in the earth. 

As an ascetic god Dharma sometimes appeared before his devotees or 

44 



674 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


before the persons to be favoured by him in the guise of a Brahmacdrin or 
of a fakir. The day of such manifestation was a Saturday and the time 
noon. So says Ruparama in the autobiographical episode in his Dharma - 
matigala : 

eke sanibdr lay thik diipur held, 
sammukhe dawfaila dharma gale candramala. 
galay capdr mala dsd bdri hdthe, 
brahmaner bese dharma ddtidaila palhe. 

‘ It was a Saturday, then again just noontime ; Dharma appeared be- 
fore me, wearing a “moon” garland (candra-mala) . A champak wreath 
dangling round his neck and a fakir’s staff in his hand Dharma stood on the 
way in a guise of a Brahmin.’ 

This deity, known as “ Sannyiasi Thakur ”, believed to be residing in a 
particular tree is even now- worshipped in North-west and South-West Ben- 
gal. The day is always Saturday and time noon. In those localities where 
there is both Dharma Thakur and SannyasI Thakur, the ceremonial worship 
of the former is initiated by the worship of the latter. 

The conception of this Mendicant ( Sannyasi Fakir ) deity later deve- 
loped into Satyanarayana or Satyaplr. 

The cult of Dharma is the quintessence of the native culture, both spi- 
ritual (religious) and material. All minor native deities such as BasaS, Jan- 
guli (i.e., Manasa), Various K§etrapalas, Dakinis and Sakinls gathered round 
Dharma as his courtiers (dmrana-devata) and thus obtained general recog- 
nition and worship. The legend about the origin of the cultivation of rice 
has insinuated itsdf into the grand ceremony (i.e., Gdjan). Other native 
industries also, such as production of molasses, smelting of copper and iron 
etc., have not been overlooked. Thus in the elaborate Gdjan ceremony we 
witness the slow emergence of early Bengali culture in its main aspects. 



THE EVOLUTION OF VAISNAVISM 

By 

Rai Bahadur KHAGENDRA NATII MITRA, M.A., 

Calcutta University. 

Vai$navism in the sense of Vi$nu worship is as old as the Rg . Veda. 
There are many mantras which glorify Visnu and enjoin his worship as a 
means to the attainment of vision beatific. The two most important features 
of the religion are mentioned in some of these passage's, viz., the constant 
utterance of His name and divine vision of God ITimself. That God becomes 
manifest to His devotees is a cardinal belief of the Vaisoava sect. 

From the time of the Upani$ads , the Unity of Godhead has been un- 
equivocally maintained. The Vedanta conception of God perhaps goes fur- 
ther in this direction than any other philosophical religion. It is well known 
that the Vedanta is not satisfied by positing the Unity of Brahman but is 
anxious to prove the unreality of anything other than Brahman. According 
to the Vedantin, God is strictly speaking unspeakable and inaccessible to 
human mind. This is practically the same as the mystifying position of the 
Agnostics in the West minus the theory of Maya which is wrongly translated 
as illusion. 

Any way, the theory of Nirvisc$a (qualityless) Brahman does not carry 
us very far. It is Truth “ too far removed from the sphere of our sorrow M 
and is thus useless for any human purposes. The cry is for truth which 
can give relief to the troubled mind and bring consolation in the midst of 
ttiousand and one sorrows to which mankind is subject. The philosopher 
has bowed to the man in the street and proclaimed that to one who has a 
vision of the Supreme Reality all doubts have been dispelled, all the knots 
of his heart loosened and all his Karma has been dissipated. Man’s lot in 
this earth is never very enviable and his unending heartaches seek relief in 
some divine miracle. And any truth which is unrelated to this context is 
not likely to command respect for any length of time. The Vaisnavas, there- 
fore, speak of Brahman "as an aspect of God and not God Himself. 

Since the Absolute cannot evoke any human feeling, the turn-over is to 
a personal God who possesses all the qualities we regard as the highest aqd 
best such as power, knowledge, virtue, justice, benevolence, mercy, etc. But 
although we frequently speak of a Personal God, we are not quite clear as 
to what that expression exactly means. The expression is capable of a variety 
of interpretation and probably every# man has his own pattern of a Personal 



676 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


God. Has personal God any form? Individuality perhaps He has, but 
certainly no form according to one view. For to assign to God any form 
human or otherwise would amount to taking a leap into cmde paganism. 
The most progressive religions of mankind have set their face against idolatry 
of any kind and so we are once again marooned on the lonely cliff of philo- 
sophical isolationism. God— yes a personal God — cannot be represented by 
any means, because after all man is human ! That is to say, man is by nature 
incapable of comprehending God. In other words, in order to glorify God, 
man must be crucified. He has a name all right, but no form. For name and 
form are what belong to mundate things which are finite and perishable. From 
this dilemma Vai$tjavism supplies a refreshing exit by its mysticism. Why 
Vaisnavism ? All religions must contain some element of mysticism. I have 
been to the world famous Church of St. Peter in Rome, which is a strong- 
hold of the Roman Catholics and also to St. Paul's in London where the 
Protestants flock, and the formalities in worship which are. observed there 
are full of mysticism. It is hardly necessary to dilate on this point as 
every man who has had any religious experience must feel that without a 
mystic fringe religion is robbed of much of its inner charm mid value. 

The Vaisnavas say that God in his limitless capacity can take any form 
He chooses and does take the human form out of compassion for His de- 
votees. He docs indulge in all kinds of sports which are likely to prove a 
stimulus for them to be. attracted towards Him.’ Man ordinarily is forget- 
ful of God ; his vanity prevents him from thinking of God as the source of 
his life and origin, and supporter of his life. But the Ekantins insist on the 
ceaseless contemplation of God — like an uninterrupted flow of oil. 

This is also the fundamental injunction of the song of the Lord ( Dhaga- 
r ad- Gild). The Lord is satisfied with the humblest of offerings viz., petals 
of flowers, a handful of water, etc., provided your mind is with it. In other 
words, God expects the highest offering from man viz., his heart and soul. 
Whatever is done by man should be offered to Him — Sacrifices, Tapas, Charity 
— and even your smallest things— such as eating, etc. 

It is a very exacting demand, no doubt, but there is no compromise 
between Self and God ; you cannot serve God and Mammon of self-interest 
at the same time. No gift is acceptable to God if you have one eye to self- 
interest and the other to Him. But it does not mean that you have to re- 
nounce everything for the sake of God. The Bhagvad-Gtta does not preach 
an ideal impossible to the ordinary householder, but rather lays stress on the 
performance of duty belonging to one’s station in life. Its moral code is 
undoubtedly one of the most enlightened in the world. No more ennobling 
conception of righteous action is found in any ethical system : Do your 
work without caring for its fruits. Desires have been regarded as the root 

1. Kriyate tad f si kridah yak srutvd t'ntparo bhavet — Bhagavata. 



THE EVOLUTfoN OF VAIS^AVISM 677 

of all evil. But the Gita realises that no one can avoid doing work and work 
is not possible without tire necessary springs of action. The Gita therefore 
inculcates a rule of action which does not consist in the killing of desires 
which an ultra-ascetic view of life demands but in a sublimation of desires. 
Since desires create attachment or asakti a rule of life is laid down which, 
if followed, will make attachment impossible but will at the same time enable 
one to perform all the duties of one’s daily life. This is the real Sannydsa 
or renunciation. If one flees from tire world, throws off all obligations and 
retires to a fastness or cave, it is only apparent Sannydsa, for no one can flee 
from his passions and impulses. The only escape from these is provided by 
an intense, devotion to the lx>rd. You anchor the ship of your life in God 
and the storm and stress of satfisdra will cease to trouble you. The essence 
of the teaching of Bhagavad Gild is that if one wants to attain salvation, one 
must practise Yoga which enables a man to be detached from the fruits 
of his actions ; and in order to be so detached one must be wholeheartedly 
attached to God. This is Bhakti or devotion, 

Bhakli has been variously defined ; but even without entering into a philo- 
sophical disquisition about its nature, it may be said to be an emotion of the 
mind resulting from the contemplation of God. The exhortation to love 
God may be traced to the earliest texts,- but the Gita by placing emphasis 
on the emotional aspect of worship introduced a change in the ideology of 
God -consciousness which may almost be regarded as revolutionary. For so 
long that consciousness consisted in the knowledge ( jndna ) of God. Now 
almost for the first time Emotion ( Bhakti ) is joined to Knowledge ( jndna ), 
,4Gthetics yoked to the service of Philosophy. Knowledge (vidyd) was so 
long regarded as the only means to salvation. 2 3 4 Salvation (mok$a) is the 
summum bonum of human existence and whether it is conceived as the total 
absence of pains, or union with the Lord, it is attainable only by true know- 
ledge (Tatlvajndna) . But here we hear for the first time that knowledge or 
np knowledge, any one who throws himself on Divine mercy without any 
reservation is saved. 

Here therefore two conflicts arise. It has been asserted emphatically in 
the Upani$ads that there is no other way but the way of knowledge ( vidya). 
But the Gita introduces a personal element inasmuch as God can save one 
who exclusively depends on Him. The other case of conflict arises when 
the inexorable law of Karma is viewed vis-a-vis this new theory. Ordinarily 
there is no escape from one's Karma,* but the Gita tells us that the Lord 
can save irrespective of that law. This is the message of hope which the 

2. Tadetat preyah putrat preyovittat preyohnyasmdt antaratararfi 

yadayamatmd— Cbandogya. 

3. Tameva viditvahtimjtyumeti nanya panthn vidyaiehyandya — Sruti. 

4. Avasyameva bhoklavyatit kjtatu karma subhasubhatti 



678 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


sacred Song of the Lord holds for man. No matter what the magnitude of 
your sins is, you will be turned into a saint the moment you worship the 
Lord singlemindedly.'* 

I have spoken of this theory as revolutionary in character, but if the 
extent of the change is not ordinarily perceived, it is because the ancient 
philosophy of the Upani$ads has been adopted in its entirety. The funda- 
mental tenet of Upanisadic pantheism is somehow artistically woven into 
the mystical personality of God in the Bhagavad Gita. It is nowhere so forci- 
bly illustrated as in the 10th chapter of the Gita which sees God’s excellence 
and exuberance manifested in every form of cosmic existence.® God is both 
immanent and transcendent. He is transcendent not only in the sense of 
exceeding Nature which is jx'rmeated through and through by Him, but also 
in the sense of setting Himself above all laws of nature. It is possible to 
know this transcendence neither by the help of the Vedas (knowledge), nor 
by jxuiances. nor by benevolence, nor by sacrifices ; but it can be known in 
its true nature (transcendence) only by singleminded devotion. 5 6 7 8 This shows 
unmistakably how the centre of gravity in Vaknav philosophy is shifted for 
the first time explicitly at least from knowledge (jndna) to emotion ( bhakti ). 
Herein lies the mysticism of the creed. So far as God’s transcendental na- 
ture is concerned, it is not only revealed to the emotive self, but it can be 
seen ( dra$lutn ) by that self. Not only can it be perceived in clear vision, 
but its raison d’etre also can be grasped by the emotional side of our nature. 
Thus Emotion and Sentiment come to play a prominent part in solving 
problems which have so long been thought to be the proper subject-matter of 
the intellect. This truth was conceded at least partly by Immanuel Kant in 
his Critique of Judgment when he realised that truths which baffle Pure 
Reason, both Speculative and Practical, reveal themselves to the other Facul- 
ty of Man, viz.. Taste which is curiously enough the same word as Rasa in 
Hindu philosophy and rhetoric.* So far as I am aware this very essential 
aspect of Kant’s philosophy has not received the treatment which it deserves 
in western philosophy. 

The philosophy of Rasa has however been very elaborately dealt with in 
the east and the rightful place which belongs to it is assigned to it in the 
Bhagavad Gita. Knowledge as a function of the intellect is not neglected 
but one is inclined to think that intellect is more or less an auxiliary of the 
emotion. Doubts may reasonably be entertained as to whether the com- 

5. Ajn cel sudurdedro bhajale mamamnyabhdk \ 
sadhureva sa mantavyah samyagvyavasitohi sab II —Gita. 

6. The only other example is to be found in the Alaikandeya Candi, 4th 
Mahatmyaxp. 

7. Bhaktyd tvqnanyaya sakya ahamevatfi vidhohrjuna | 

jndlutft draffunca tall vena pravetfuitca parantapa || -Gita, xi, 54. 

8. Rasy ate asvddyate asau iti rasah. 



THE EVOLUTION OF VAIStfAVISM 


679 


partmental theory of mind which is implied by this sharp distinction between 
emotion and intellect can be maintained. But that is no reason to ignore 
this new approach to the problem of the conception of God. When, for in- 
stance, Kant proved beyond doubt the incompetence of intellect or Pure 
Speculative Reason as he called it to reach the ultimate truth or Bergson was 
obliged to fall back upon Intuition as the particular function of the mind to 
which Truth is revealed in its purity, there is no reason to quarrel with this 
new philosophic development, so far as the conception of Reality is con- 
cerned. 

Tliat emotion or sentiment plays a large part in spiritual life is a fact 
admitted by Psychology. Difficulty arises when it steps out of its own sphere 
and invades the domain of Reality. But since the Faculty of knowing or 
intellect gropes in the dark to find a clue to Ultimate Truth, recourse is had 
to tire faculty of Feeling which, at any rate, has the advantage or directness; 
Because whereas intellect woTks through judgment and inference, feel- 
ing places us into immediate contact with anything that inspires feeling. 
That feeling is the most essential fact in our experience is also 
proved by the fact that intellect itself is baffled without a colouring from 
feeling in the form of interest. Again our activities are also paralysed with- 
out a strong dose of feeling. We act most, when we fad most. Our inteJ 
lect also is most active when it is sharpened by feeling. Without interest, 
i.e., feeling, intellect is dull, and without motive, will is inert. In these cir- 
cumstances, we may legitimately turn our gaze towards feeling, when philo- 
sophy in the sense of intellectual search after truth proves a veritable zigsaw 
puzzle. Our ordinary experience also supports this appeal to feeling. For 
we believe where we cannot know, and love conquers when knowledge falters. 

This of course does not mean that feeling should be divorced from in- 
tellect. In the higher processes of consciousness, it is only natural that all the 
higher functions of the mind should be called into play. On the physio- 
logical side, the most intense forms of mental exercise involve the highest 
biain centres. Just like this process of conscious cerebration, all the func- 
tional activities are called forth in grappling with the important problems 
of Truth and Duty. This is admitted in the Bhagavad Gild when an attempt 
is made to unify Jnana and Bhakti into one indivisible process. 11 But this 
has led to not a little misunderstanding. Some have taken it to mean that 
Bhakti or Sentiment of devotion is the handmaid of knowledge or Taltva 
Jnana. Others have gdhe so far as to identify Bhakti with Tatlva- Jnana.™ 
I know of some philosophers of the Sarpkhya School who have not hesitated 
to speak of Paid Bhakti or highest manifestation of Bhakti as highest know- 
ledge. In fact the Gita, which is the greatest repository of the Bhakti cult, 

9. Tefal} t jharii nityayukta ekabhaktirvisifyate — Gita, ch. vii. 

10. TattvajMnameva bhaktiriti yuktain — Sridharasvaml (Gita, ch. xvm). 



680 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


itself lends countenance to such confusion. The Lord now speaks of Jnana 
and now of Bhakti as the sole means of attaining Him. Texts may be quoted 
to show that if there is any misconception on this very important point it 
may be traced to the Gita. 

But in the evolution of Vaisnavism there came a stage when all such 
misconceptions were destined to end. Enquiry was directed to the nature of 
Bliakti and it was found to be nothing else but the highest sentiment of 
which human nature was capable, viz., Love. For instance, when Sanfiilya 
defines Bhakti as the highest feeling of attachment for God or Niirada defines 
it as tlie most intense feeling of forlomness in His absence , 11 it became quite 
clear that the course of Bhakti was gradually being more and more widely 
diverted from pure intellect. The two streams may run parallel but the 
tendency to identify the two as one and the same became more and more 
unjustifiable. 

There is no doubt that in the earlier texts the word “ Prema " but seldom 
occurs. In the Gita, one does not find the word or any of its synonyms. In 
the Bhdgavata itself, the sentiment is no doubt traceable to the story of the 
attachment of the Gopis towards Krsna, but the word 'Prema' does not 
appear to have been used too frequently. Perhaps the tlieory had not then 
taken definite shape. There is no doubt that in the later history of the 
evolution of Bhakti the influence of the Bhdgavata is unmistakable ; still it 
required subsequent speculation in southern and northern India to unravel 
the mystery of that phenomenon which is supposed to hold the key not only 
to salvation, not only to the realisation of the Divine but also to tlie highest 
problems of thought and reality. Henceforth Love lights the path of Truth. 1 * 

Now when the conception of Bhakti became stabilised by its identifica- 
tion with the highest sentiment of love, the progress was rather rapid towards 
a separation of the two spheres, viz., intellect and emotion. The mystic 
phenomenon of love tended to throw' off the yoke of knowledge. This new 
approach finds expression in the theory of Rdganugd Bhakti which may be* 
translated as “passionate love.” This was a natural development because 
love is no love if it is not passionate, even in the human sphere. So far as 
God is concerned, this love emerges as an all-consuming passion which is 
Beyond Good and Evil, Beyond Right and Wrong and Beyond True and 
False . 12 

This new developimcnt which may be regarded as almost consequential 
was inaugurated by Sri Rupa Gosvarrun in his Rasamrtasindhu and Ujjvala 
Nilmarii and a few other Vai^nava poets who have given to Bengali litera- 
ture some of its best lyrics. Tlie recognition of Bhakti as* passionate love 
for God gave a new impetus to the growth of sentimental literature, which 

11. Narada Bhakti Sutra. 

12. Caitanya Caritamjta — Madhya xiv. 



THE EVOLUTION OF VA1§I>IAVISM 681 

may be said to have started from Jayadeva. Jayadeva imported into his 
conception of love a good deal of erotic fervour which the subsequent poetry 
was only too eager to imitate. In the Srlmad Bhdgaval the love of the Gopls 
for Kfsna, although passionate in the extreme, was undoubtedly based upon 
a consciousness that their lover was none other than God Himself. 1 * 1 This 
consciousness sublimated the sentiment and easily converted love into worship. 
The poets of the Bengal school were sometimes apt to forget this and allowed 
themselves to be carried away by erotic sentiment in which the subtle element 
of worship was almost lost sight of. The life of sii Caitanya, however, 
steadied the balance and completely eradicated this erotic aspect. Influenced 
by the creed of the Alvars in the south, Caitanya removed from the theory 
of love all that was dross and sensual, lie was a SannyasI and his passionate 
love for Srikr$na could not be mistaken for the vicarious indulgence in the gross 
passion of conjugal love. In the first place, it went through the whole gamut 
of the tender affection, viz Dosya , Sakhya , Vdtsalya and Madhur. The pas- 
sionate devotion of the servant for the Master, and the self-forgetful affection 
between friends cannot even remotely be called erotic. In the second place, 
Caitanya’* life was the most effective commentary on the theory of Rdgd - 
nug/1 as it invariably led to Ecstasy which is a fitting sequel to the ardent love 
which the devotee feels for his object of worship. The Vaisnavas regard this 
Ecstasy as the highest stage in the evolution of the sentiment. 11 Whether merely 
by the utterance of the name of the Lord or by t he contemplation of his various 
qualities or Lila , the Bhakta falls into a state of Ecstasy when the world with 
all its manifold solicitations ceases to exist and the soul is immersed in a 
sea of Bliss. These states of Ecstasy are not merely recorded events, but 
are actually realisable by numerous Bhaktas even to this day. In the West 
also the devotees sought to induce this state of Ecstasy as in the case of the 
Neo-Platonists. The Carmelite Nuns, an order which curiously enough, was 
founded about the same time as the demise of Sri Caitanya are so devoted 
to Christ as lover, that they take a vow never to look at the face of any 
•male person. 

* Then again the exponents of Rdgdnuga form of worship lay stress on 
the necessity of following the tenets of the sacred Texts without which no 
worship of God is possible. Visvanath Chakravarti in his Rdga Vartrna 
Candrikd or the moonlight on the path of the religion of love insists on con* 
formity to the laws of worship enjoined by the Sastras. 15 Without such con- 
formity mere passionate feeling does not do any good. But on the other- 
hand mere conformity cannot produce that strong feeling of attachment which 


13. Narad a Bhakli Sutra . 

14. Srimad Bhdgavat, II.. 2. 40 & II. 14. 24. 

15. Vastutastu lobha pravartitarfi vidhi mdrgena sevanameva rdgamdrga ucyatc ; 

vidhi pravartilatn vidhi mdrgena sevananca vidhimdrgah — Rdgavartma 
Candrikd 12. 



682 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Raganuga worship (t Bhajana) requires. It must be prompted by, an ardent 
hankering ( lobha ) after the object of worship. This is no ordinary erotic 
longing for union with the object of love such as an ordinary man or woman 
feels. It can ony arise through the mercy of Krsoa or his Bhaktas. 

Kt?w tadbhakta kdrunyamatra lobhaikahetuka | 
pustimargataya kaiscidiyat/t rdgdnugocyate 1 1 

That is, the hankering or thirst ( Idlasd ) has for its cause only the mercy 
of God or of His devotees. This is called Pusti mdrga by some anti Raganuga 
by others. 



THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE KACHWAHAS OF 

AMBER 

By 

Mr. GOLAPCHANDRA RAYCHAUDIIURI, M.A., b.l. 

The Kachwahas, according to certain traditions, laid the foundation of 
their rule in the modern State of Jaipur in Rajputana in the latter half of the 
tenth century a.i>. They came to the lime light of history only in the six- 
teenth century. The intervening period is one of almost unredeemed 
darkness, and the reason is not far to seek. Tod makes the apposite remark 
that “ they have to date their greatness, as the other families (especially the., 
Ranas of Mewar) of Rajasthan their decline, from the ascent of the house 
of Timur to the throne of Delhi/* A little information relating to the early 
period can however he gleaned by making use of historical traditions of a 
late date. But even these are often found hopelessly discordant. An attempt 
has been made here to examine and discuss the substratum of truth underly- 
ing the traditional accounts. 

The .Kachwahas of Amber claim descent from Kusa, son of Rama- 
chandra, the hero of the Rdnidyana . Raja Nala, a scion of the race, is 
alleged to have migrated westward and founded the city and kingdom of 
Naravara or Narwar in Central India in S. 321, or a.d. 295. According to 
NenaST, Dhobi or Dholo, the son of Nala, founded Gwalior and constructed 
the tank Golorava in it. Tod's sources however record that the towns of 
Lahar, in the heart of a tract called Kachwahagar situated between the rivers 
Sindh and Pahuj, and Gwalior were “ intermediate places of domicile prior 
to the erection v ’*of Narwar by Nala. It was from Narwar, or according to 
another view Gwalior, that the Kachwahas are said to have migrated to 
Dhpndhara or the Dhuncia country as the present State of Jaipur was called 
in comparative early times. 1 

The story given above is usually regarded as legendary. Cunningham 

I. For the traditional accounts, cf. Muhanota Ne.naSt ki Khydta, translated 
into Hindi by Ramanarayajia Dugatja, vol. II, pp. 1-4 ; Tessitori. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of Bardic and Historical Manuscripts , Section I, Part I, p. 23 ; To d, 
Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, edited by W. Crooke, Vol. Ill, pp. 1327 ff., 
1328n3, 1329tq. 

For the name Dhundhara or Dhu&jda for Jaipur, cf. Tod, ibid., p. 1327, 
Annual Report of the* Rajputana Museum, Ajmer, 1933-34, p. 4, Cunningham, AS./., 
Vol. II, p. 251. 

Tod identifies Nala with the famous Nala Nai$adha. This is however ex- 
tremely doubtful. Nor can we accept the surmise that Narwar represents the 
classical Ni$adha country. The geographical cantos of the Puranas locate the Ni$a»- 
dhas in the Vinidhyan region far to the south of Narwar. 



684 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


thinks that the tradition regarding the descent of the Kachwahas from Kusa 
was a later invention of the bards suggested by a fancied similarity of his 
name with the tribal designation. He puts forward the theory that “ the 
modem form of Kechwdha would appear to be derived from the synonymous 
Kachchhapa-han, as the Hindu Kachhiva is undoubtedly the Sanskrit Kach- 
ckhapa, and the termination, ha, is most probably only the. Sanskrit han 
which has exactly the same meaning as g ltdia." He therefore connects the 
Kachwahas with the Kacchapaghata family mentioned in the Gwalior Sas- 
bahu inscription of v.s. 1050 or a,d. 1093. 3 Whatever might be the merit of 
tire above derivation of the iwpular term Kachwaha from Sanskrit Kacchapa- 
han, almost all the modern writers are in general agreement with Cunningham 
regarding the descent of the Kachwahas from the Kacchapaghatas of Gwalior. 

The following traditional evidence may be cited in support of the above 
theory. 

(1) Rajapiana, tlie bard of the Kachwaha prince Prthviraja, father 
of Bharamala or Bihari Mall of Amber who gave his daughter in marriage 
to the great Mughal Akbar. and a chronicler of Bikaner include the entire 
list of princes of the Gwalior branch of the Kincchapaghutas, mentioned in the 
Gwalior Sasbahu inscription of v.s. 1150, viz.. Lak§mai)a. Vajradaman, Man- 
galaraya (Mangalaraja), Kritaraya or Ksetraraya (Kirtiraja), Muladeva 
(also -known as Bhuvanapala-Trailokyamalla ) . Devapala, Padmapala, Sura- 
pala or Surajapdla (obviously Suryapala) and MahTpala, among the ancestors 
of the Kachwahas of Amber. But in the dynastic table of Rajapana no 
less than twenty princes are inserted between Mahlpala, the. last Kacchapa- 
ghata ruler mentioned above and Sodhadeva. father of Dulahadeva, both 
of whom are represented in tradition as the founder of the Kachwaha prin- 
cipality in Dhundhara or Jaipur.” This raises a serious chronological diffi- 
culty which can be obviated only if we surmise that like some Puranic 
texts the bardic chroniclers of Rajputana represent as lineal descendants 
princes who were really collaterals. , 

(2) The Gwalior annalists Kharag Rai, who wrote during the reign 
of Shah Jahan, and his contemporary Fazl Ali, who derived his informations 
from a previous writer named Ghanasyama,' 1 connect Tej Karan ( taken to be a 
proper name of Dulha which means a “bridegroom’’), alleged to have been 
the founder of the Kachwaha kingdom of Amber, with Gwalior.'* The fol- 


t i 

2. Cunningham, Archeological Survey of India, Vol. II, p. 319. 

3. ibid,, p. 374 ; Muhariota NenaSi ki Khydta, II, p. 3. 

4. Cunningham, op. cit.. p. 370 f. * 

5. ibid-, p. 376 f. Pandit G. II. Ojha thinks that Dularaja or Dulaharaya 
stands for Durlabharaja, (Tod's Rajasthan, translated into Hindi by Pandit Rama- 
gariba Chaube and edited by Pandit G. H. Ojha, Vol. I, p: 250). Tod writes 
Dhola for Dulaha. The Gwalior annalists seem to corrupt the name into Dulha . a 
4 * bridegroom ”, and takes it to be an epithet of Tej Karan. 



685 


early history of kachwahas of amber 

lowing tables however show that the lists of ancestors of Tej Karan as given 
by Kharag Rai and Fa 2 l Ali differ widely from those of the predecessors of 
Dulahadeva as known to the bards of Rajputana. 

Rajapana 

Nala 
Phola. 

Lak$amana 
V’ajraddama 
Mahgalaraya 
Kritaraya 
Muladcva 

Devapala 

Padmapala 

Sura pa la 
Mahipala 
20 other names 
Isa si mh a 
Sorjhasirhha 
Dulahadeva 

(3) It will be seen from NenaSrs list quoted above that he also 
indudes three Kacchapaghata princes of Gwalior, viz., Laksamana, Vajra- 
dipa (Vajradaman) and Mahgala ( raja ) among the ancestor of the Kaclv 
walia princes of Amber. Ojha thinks that Sumitra was a younger son of 
Mangalaraja. 1 ' 6 7 8 * 10 11 

The combined testimony of the bardic chroniclers undoubtedly implies 
some sort of lineal connection between the Kachwahas of Jaipur and the 
Kacchapaghatas of Gwalior. It is however interesting to note that in some 
family records of the Kachwaha princes they claim to belong not to the Kae- 
cjpapaghdta or Kacchapdri (literally, slayers of the Kacchapas , i.e., tortoises) 
vamsa (clan) but to the Kurma (i.e., Tortoise) family itself. Thus for 
instance in the Sanganer (Jaipur State) inscription of v.s. 1658 (a.d. 1601) 
Maharaja iSrl-Manasimghaji is referred to as belonging to the Kurma 
dynasty. 10 In the Adinatha Temple inscription at Rcvasa (Jaipur State), 
dated v.s. 1661 (a.d. 1604) Maharajadhiraja Rayasalji is described as a 
scion of the Kurma clan. 11 In the Lili (Alwar State) inscription of v.s. 1803 
• • 

6. Muhanota NenaSi kl Khydta , p. 3. 

7. ibid., p. 4 ;• Tod’s Rajasthan in Hindi, Vol. I, p. 250. 

8. Cunningham, op, cit„ p. 313. 9. ibid. 

9a. Tod's Rajasthan (Hindi), Vol. I, p. 250. 

10. Progress Refmt of the Archeological Survey of India , Western Circle , 
p. 49. 

11. Annual Report of the Rajputana Museum , Ajmer, 1934-35, p. 5. 


NenaSi 1 

. 

Kharag Rai* 

Fazl Ali ® 

Nala 



Phola 

Laksamapa 

Vajradipa 

Mahgala 

Sumitra 

Sudhibrahma or 
^ Mudhibrahma 
Kuhani or 
Kahuna 
Devani or 
Dcvanika 

i 

Ratnapaia 

Katnapfila 


Dharmapalu 

Dharrnapala 

Usai or Isa j 

Budhii/tla 

Budhipala 

Suiapakt 

(? Sodhapala) 

Sodha j 

Dularaja or 1 

Dulaharaya 

Gambhtrapala 
tej Karan 

Tej Karan 




686 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and 1814 (a.d. 1746 and 1757) Raja BhagavantasirhhajI of the Naruka 
family (a branch of the Kachwahas of Jaipur) is also stated to have des- 
cended from the Rur(a)ma clan. 1 * Reference to Kurma kings can be traced 
back to still earlier times. A Chafsu (Jaipur State) inscription of v.s. 1556 
( a.d. 1499) speaks of Raja Bhaihmara of the Kurma family. ta A Kurma 
prince finds mention in the Balvan (Kotah State) inscription of v.s. 1345 
( a.d. 1288). 14 The famous bard Chand Bardai, who is usually regarded as 
the court poet of Pfthviraja Chauhan, the last Hindu emperor of Ajmer and 
Delhi, describes the Kachwaha prince Pajjuna as a Kurma. ,s The following 
variants of the term Kacchavaha, viz., Kachava and Kuchaha, also seem to 
be derived from the word Kacchapa, a synonym of Kurina. 1 " 

The evidence cited above suggests two alternative theories. One is that 
the Kacchapaghatas or Kacchaparis are in reality not identical with the 
Kurmas or the Kachwahas, but they arc enemies and destroyers of the 
Kurmas. as the designations (Slayers of Kacchapas, Enemies of Kacchapas) 
clearly imply. If this view be accepted then we cannot equate the Kacchapa- 
ghatas with the Kurmas or Kachwahas just as we cannot do so in the case of 
Sakari and the Sakas. Can it then be that the Kacchapagliatas actually rose 
to power by ousting the ancestors of the Kachwahas from Central India 
with which they are associated in tradition ? But we have no positive evi- 
dence to prove this. 

The second view which is in consonance with the tradition recorded by 
Rajapana and NenaSi would regard Kacchapa (synonym Kurma) as a 
shortened form of the designation Kacchapaghata, just as the name Dinaj 
(Danuja, a demon) used by Muslim historians in reference to a king of 
Sonargaon in Bengal really stands for Danujamardana (Chastiser of a 
Demon). In this and similar cases the designation is perhaps not to be taken 
too literally. 

The bardic chroniclers have preserved several different versions of the 
story of Kachwaha migration to Dhundhara. Rajapana says that Dulahfi- 
deva made a gift of the kingdom of Gwalior to a Tomara prince. 17 Pandit 
Ojha refers to a tradition that Raja Isa Sithha gave away the famous fort 
to his daughter’s son, also a Tomara prince. Thereupon his son Sodhadeva, 
forcibly seized Daosa from the Badgujars in v.s. 1023 (A.D. 966-67) and 
laid the foundation of the Kachwaha state in Taipur. 18 Kharag Rai and 
Fazl Ali on the other hand tdl us that Tej Karan or Dulha Rai of Gwalior 


12. ibid., 1919-20, p. 5 ; Bhandarkar, A List of Inscriptions of Northern India, 
No. 1038. • 

J3. ibid., Na 870. 14. Epigraphia Indica, XIX, pp. 46 f, 49. 

15. Tod, op. cit., p. 1335. 

16. Bhandarkar, A List of Inscriptions of Northern India,' Nos. 938, 1081. 

17. Mukanota NenaSi At , Khyata, p. 3. 

18. Tod's Rajasthan (in Hindi), p. 250. 


early history of kachwahas of amber 687 

left his ancestral kingdom in charge of his sisters son Farmal Deo, a Pan- 
ha4a, and went away to marry the daughter of Ranmal, chief of Daosa. 
Tne Parihada prince revolted against his maternal uncle and himself usurped 
the throne. Tej Karan succeeded to his father-in-law’s principality and thus 
became the founder of the Kachwalu dynasty of Dhundhara. 1 ” Tod records 
that on the death of Sora Singh (Sodhasimha), prince of Narwar, his infant 
son Dhoia Rai (Dulahadeva) was supplanted by hia uncle in v.s. 1023 
(A.D. 967). The child and his mother found shelter with the Mina chief of 
Khoganw (within five miles of modern Jaipur). Dhoia finally usurped the 
authority of his benefactor. Soon after this he went to Daosa and married 
the daughter of the Badgujar chieftain of that place and the latter resigned 
his power to his son-in-law.'-'* 

A perusal of the foregoing accounts presents the following problems > 

Firstly, who established the Kachwaha principality in Kastern Rajpu- 
tana ? Ojha’s authority gives the credit to Sodhadcva, son of Isa Sirhha. 
NertaSI also states that Sodhadcva was the first Kachwaha prince to move 
from Nanvijr to Dhundhara.- 1 Rajapana, Kharag Rai, Fazl Ali and Tod 
however favour the claim of Dulahadeva. In the present state of our know- 
ledge it is difficult to reconcile this discordant testimony of late writers. 

Secondly, whence did the earliest Kachwaha prince of Dhundhara come? 
Riajapana, Kharag Rai, Fazl Ali and Ojha’s authority make him a 
scion of a ruling house of Gwalior. According to NenaSi (see the previous 
paragraph) and Tod he came from Narwar. Hie connection of the Kaccha 
paghatas with Gwalior is well known. 2 - A grant issued from Nalapura (Nar- 
war) reveals that a Kacchapaghata prince Vlrasirhha, son of iSaradasimha, 
successor of Gaganasirhha, was in possession of that city in v.s. 1177 (a.d. 
1120). 23 It is thus possible to connect the founder of the Kachwaha state 
in Dhundhara both with the Gwalior and Narwar ruling houses. It will 
however be seen that neither Virasiinha of Narwar nor any of his known 
ancestors are mentioned in the dynastic lists quoted above. On the other 


19. Cunningham, Archaeological Survey of India, Vol. II, p. 377. 

20. Crooked edition of Tod’s Annals, Vol. Ill, p. 1329 If. 

21. Mfflunpota NenaSI ki Khydta (Hindi), Vol. II, p, 4; Tessitori, A Des- 
criptive Catalogue of Bardic and Historical Manuscripts, Section I, Fart I, p. 26. 

22. Cunningham; op, cit., Vol. II, p. 374 ; bid . Ant,, XV, p. 201f. Ojha and 
Bhandarkar connect the # following Kacchapaghata princes, viz., Prthvlpaladeva 
alias Bhatrpatta, his son Tribhuvanapala, his son Vijayapala and his son Sura- 
pala, known from the Ihgooda (Dewas State) inscription of V. S. 1190 (ad. 1133) 
and the Thakafda fDungarpur State) inscription of V. S. 1212 (ad. 1155), with the 
Gwalior niling house (Tod’s Rajasthan in Hindi, p. 249 ; Bhandarkar’s List of 
Northern Inscriptions, pf, 391 and f.n. 7), They seem to identify PrthvTpala with 
Mahlpala of Gwalior because the two names are synonymous. We cannot however 
subscribe to this theory in the absence of further evidence to support it. 

23. Bhandarkar's List No. 206 ; Cunningham, op. cit., p. 313. 



688 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


hand, the inclusion of all the known Kacchapaghatas of Gwalior among the 
forbears of the present ruling family of Amber suggests that its founder 
came from Gwalior rather than Narwar. It may also be pointed out in this 
connection that the popular derivation of the name of the latter city from the 
Kachwaha prince Nala is a conjecture that lacks convincing proof. We have 
no early evidence to prove that the Kachwahas were actually in possession of 
that place before Gaganasimha, grandfather of Vlrasiriiha (aj>. 1120). 

Thirdly, what is the exact reason for the removal of his residence by 
Sodhadeva or his son Dulahadcva to Dhundhara ? Rajapana and Ojha’s 
authority agree that the event followed the gift of the kingdom of Gwalior 
made to a Tomara prince. Kharag Rai and Fazl Ali tell us that the Kachwaha 
prince was supplanted by his Pratihara nephew. According to Tod the usurper 
was the brother of Soradeva (Sodhadeva) and therefore was a Kachwaha. 
The tradition regarding Pratihara and Tomara occupation of Gwalior may be 
accepted as genuine. But the circumstances leading to their rise in that terri- 
tory are differently stated in contemporary documents. We learn from the 
Kuretfia Plate of Pratihara Malayavarman, dated a.l>. 1220, that his father 
Vigraha fought with a Mleccha king and seized Gopadri. 21 Vigraha seems to 
have flourished during the early years of the thirteenth century. According to 
Bhandarkar the defeated Mleccha king was Qufb-ud-dm Aibak who “ hum- 
bled the pride of Gwalior” in A. n. 1196.*® Cunningham has suggested that 
Gwalior was lost by the Muslims during the reign of Aram Shah. 2 *. The 
fort was recaptured by Iltutmish in A. I!. 632 ( a. d. 1232-33 ), and seems 
to have remained in possession of the Muhammadans till the close of the 
fourteenth century. Then, as we ISim from the T/irikh -i-Mubara k s h a hi , it 
was “treacherously wrested from the hands of the Musalmans during the 
invasion of the Mughals (led by Timur) by the accused Bar Singh, who 
was followed after his death, by his son Biram Deo.”* 7 It is not difficult 
to recognise the names of the Tomara princes Vfrasirhha and Virama in 
the preceding sentence. 28 The foundation of Tomara rule in Gwalior, 
therefore, must be dated later than the invasion of Timur, about two centtf- 
ries after the rise of the Pratiharas in that region. From what has. been 
stated above it will not be perhaps unreasonable to conclude that the expulsion 
of the Kachwaha prince from Gwalior had nothing to do with the rise of 
cither the Pratiharas or the Tomaras. Whether it was due to the usurpa- 

24. Bhandarkar, List of Inscriptions of North India, No. 475. For a tradi- 
tional list j>i the Pratihara princes of Gwalior, see Cunningham, Archeological 
Survey of India, Vol. II, p. 378. The genealogies of the Pratihara princes given in 
inscriptions cannot be brought even into approximate agreement with those of the 
bardic chroniclers. 

25. Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 68n. 26. Cunningham, op. at., p. 379. 

27. English translation by K. K. Basu (G. O. S., Vol. LXHI), p. 177. 

28. For a list of Tomara Princes of Gwalior, see Cunningham, Archeological 'S 
Survey of Indio, Vol. II, p. 382. 



EARLY HISTORY OF KACHWAHAS OF AMBER 689 

lion of the throne by a member of a collateral branch or any other factor 
cannot be satisfactorily determined at present. 

The date of Kachwaha migration to Dhundhara is another intriguing 
problem. According to the authorities of Tod and Ojha it took place in 
a.d. 967. 20 In a manuscript consulted by Cunningham the date is given as 
v.s. 1063 or a.d. 1006/'° The famous archaeologist rejects both the tradition- 
al dates. lie points out that according to the Gwalior analists the Kachwahas 
were succeeded by seven Pratihara princes who ruled in Gwalior for 103 years 
until its capture by Iltutmish in a.d. 1232. According to him the expulsion 
of Tcj Karan alias Dulha Rai, which led to the foundation of Kachwaha rule 
in Eastern Raj pu tana, therefore must have happened in ad. 1128 or 1129. :u 
The date proposed by Cunningham has found acceptance with several dis- 
tinguished historians. We have however seen above that the Pratiharas 
seized Gwalior not from the Kacchapaghatas but from the Muhamadafis 
about three quarter of a century later in the beginning of the thirteenth 
century. This invalidates Cunningham's ground of calculation for arriving 
at the date of Kachwaha migrating from Gwalior. But it may be pointed 
out in this connection that a fragmentary Gwalior inscription reveals that the 
immediate successor of the Kacchapaghata prince Mahipala of Gwalior was 
ruling in a.d. 1104 r;:2 and then the dynasty seems to have come to an abrupt 
end for reasons now unknown. Hence it is not altogether impossible to as- 
sign the first Kachwaha ruler of Amber, who is usually regarded as the 
last Kacchapaghata ruler of Gwalior, in the first quarter of the twelfth 
century a, d. or a little later. But: even this does not solve our difficulties. 
All the later chroniclers agree in making Pajjuna, fifth or sixth in descent 
from Dulahadeva ( see below ), a contemporary and a vassal of the Chau- 
han emperor Prithviraja III of Delhi and Ajmer (C. A. D. 1179-92). 
This implies that Dulahadeva flourished about 100 or 125 years before 
Prithviraja TIT, i.e., between a. d. 1054 and 1079, and Sodhadeva, father of 
Dulaha, naturally came a generation earlier. NenaSI, as wc have seen 
above, traces the descent of Dularaja or Dulahadeva from Sumitra, who 
is believed by Ojha to have been a younger son of the Kacchapaghata 
Mangala(raja), son of *Vajradaman of Gwalior, The last named prince 
was ruling in a. d. 977 (V, S. 1034 ). 33 Mangalaraja therefore may be 
assigned towards the close of the tenth or the earlier years of the eleventh 
century a. d. As six generations intervened between him and Dularaja- 
Dulahadeva, ( see NenaSi’s list quoted above ) we are to place the latter 
about 150 years after Mangalaraja, i.e., about the middle of the twelfth 

29. Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan (edited by Crodke), Vol. Ill, 
p. 1329; Tods Rajasthan (in Hindi), p. 250. 

30. Cunningham, op, cit. t p. 376. 31. ibid., pp. 375, 377. 

32. Bhandarkar, A List of Inscriptions of Northern India , No. 169. 

33. Ibid , No. 86. 


45 




690 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


century. In view of these discrepancies it is impossible to assign any definite 
date for the foundation of the Kachwaha principality in Amber. 

Most of our chroniclers agree that the earliest possession of the Kach- 
wahas in Dhundhara was Daosa which was either forcibly taken or inherited 
from a Badgujar chieftain. 34 We are info r med by Tod that the Badguj&rs 
held a considerable portion of Dhundhara and their capital was the hill fortress 
of Rajor. 35 This is also borne out by epigraphic evidence. An inscription of 
V. S. 1016 (a.d. 960) states that Rajorgarh was the royal seat of a prince 
named Mathanadeva of the Gmjam-Pmlihdranvaya (usually taken to mean 
“ of Gurjara-Pratihara lineage ”), and reference in the same record to Gurjara- 
vahitasamasl a-k$etra (‘fields cultivated by the Gurjaras’) 3 * undoubtedly im- 
plies the presence in Western Alwar region, not very far from Daosa, in the 
latter half of the tenth century a.d., of the Gurjara tribe of which the Badgu- 
jars were apparently an offshoot. Badgujar chiefs of Western Alwar arc also 
referred to in several inscriptions of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 31 
In view of this there is no possible difficulty in accepting as genuine the above 
tradition that Daosa which formed the nucleus of the Kachwaha principality 
in Raj pu tana was obtained from the Badgujars either by expelling them or 
by right of inheritance through marriage. 

Tod tells us that Dhola (Dulahadeva) after getting possession of Daosa 
marched against the Sira tribe of the Minas, and seized from them Machh. 
and renaming it as Ramgafh transferred his seat of government there. He 
subsequently married Miironi, a princess of Ajmer. The end of Dhola was 
tragic, and he fell fighting with a force of the Minas. 

The following tables will show that there is no agreement among later 
writers regarding the order of succession, as well as the number and names 
of the immediate successors of Dulaha. 


Rajapana-* 

NenaSi" 0 

Tod™ 

Dulahadeva 

Dularaja 

Dhola 

Haoumana 

Kakila 

Kankhal 

Kakaladeva 

i Haiju 

Maidal ,Rao 

Naradeva 

Jojada 

Ilundeo 

Jahrjadadeva 

Pajjuna 

i Kuntala 

'Pajjflna 


Pajun 


* $ 


34. Tod ys that Dhola first usurped the authority of the Mina chief of 

Khoganw, and then got Dao^a through marriage. * 

35. Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan (Crooke), vol. I, p. 141. 

36. Epigraphia Indica , vol. Ill, pi. 263 ff. 

37. Bhandarkar, List of Inscriptions of Northern India . Nos. 723, 821. 

38. MuhewLota NenaSi kl Khydta , II, p. 3*. 39 Ibid., p. 4. 

40. Tod, Annals and Antiquity of Rajasthan (Crooke), Vol. Ill, p. 1331 f. 



EARLY HISTORY OF KACHWAHAS OF AMBER 


691 


Hariumana, Haiju and Hundeo of the above lists obviously refer to one and 
the same individual, and this seems to be true about Kakaladeva, Kakila and 
Kankhal as well. Janhadadeva and Jojada also should in all probability be 
regarded as identical. 

Tod attributes to Kankhal the conquest of the country of Dhundhara, 
and to his son Maidal Rao the seizure of Amber, the future capital of the 
Kachwahas, from the Susawat Minas. But according to Rajajxuja Kakala 
was the founder of Amber.’ ! NenaSl also stales that Kakila and his son 
Hapunta (apparently Haijumana or Hainumanta) were the first to come to 
Amber. 1 - The Amber Inscription of V. S. 1011 (a.d. 954-55) perhaps imply 
the existence of the city of Amber before the coming of the Kachwahas in 
Rajaputana. 13 It has been identified with Amarapuri referred to as the 
seat of power of the Kachwahas in the HammTraniahakavya of Nayachandra 
Sfxri, and with Amradadri of the Kumbhagafh prasasti of the time of Rana 
Kumbha. 44 In the time of Swiii Jaisingh the city was known as Ambavatl. 43 
Tod derives the name of the city from Ambikesvara, a title of Siva. 4 " 

Tod's Hundeo followed the aggressive policy of his predecessors and 
continued the war against the aboriginal Minas, tlis son and successor 
Kuntal extended his sway over the hill tribes round the capital and inflicted 
a crushing defeat upon his Mina subjects which secured his rule throughout 
Dhundhara. 4 ®* 

It will be noticed that during the early period of their history the most 
formidable enemy of the Kachwahas were the Minos. Tod tells us that 
their original home was in the mountain range called Kalikoh, which extended 
from Ajmer nearly to the. river Jumna. 47 The name Mina suggests a tote- 
mistic origin of the tribe derived from Sanskrit Mina, a fish. It will be in- 
teresting to know if the tribe had anything to do with the name Matsyadesa 
(which may mean "the land of fishes”), referred to in early literature, 
which included “ parts of Ahvar, Jaipur and Bharatpur." 

• Pajjuna, as has been already pointed out was in all probability a con- 
temporary and vassal of Prithvinaja III, the antagonist of Mu‘izz-ud-dln 
Muhammad bin Sam of Ghur. Tod informs us that he had the honour of 
marrying the sister of his suzerain. The famous bard Chand assigns to him 
a conspicuous place in the council of the Chauhan emperor. If that poet 
is to be believed he put to flight a host of the Yadavas and was engaged in 

war with one Rao Chamand, a certain “ Babhan ” and with the Badgujars. 4 * 

* • 


Miianota t N&nast ki Khyata, II, p. 3. 42. Ibid, p. 4. 

Bhandarkar. A List of Inscriptions of Northern India. ] No. <0. 

Ind. Ant., Vol.. VIII, p. 63 ; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXI 
Bhandarkar, List of Inscription of Northern Mt* to* 1031. 

Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan (Crooke), PP- US2 and n, 1439. 

46a. Ibid-, p. 1332. 

47. Ibid., p. 1332. i 


41. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 


48. Ind. Ant., Vol. Ill, p. 18. 



692 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Twice did he distinguish himself in the service of his liege lord ; once by de- 
feating Mu‘izz-ud-d3n Muhammad of Ghur and a second time by helping 
Prithviraja to conquer Mahoba “ the country of the Chandels.” He was ap- 
pointed to the governorship of the conquered territory. 19 According to Chand 
Pajjuna lost his life fighting against the forces of Kanauj when Ptthvltaja 
is said to have carried off the daughter of the Gaharawar king Jayacchandra 
or Jaichand/' 0 If this last event is correctly recorded Pajjuna could not have 
measured his sword with the valiant son of Sam. for tradition affirms that 
the invasion of the Ghori king took place after the abduction of the princess 
of Kanauj. We learn from the Madanpur Inscription of Prithviraja III, 
dated a.d. 1182, that he devastated and plundered Jejakabhukti, then ruled 
over by the Chandella Paramardi. 91 Pajjuna may have distinguished him- 
self on this occasion, but it is impossible to say whether the Chauhan king 
actually captured Mahoba and appointed his own governor there. 

The history of the Kachwahas after the death of Pajjuna till the acces- 
sion of Bihari Mall, father-in-law of Akbar, is extremely obscure. Rijapana, 
NfenaSi and Tod simply pass over the intervening period of more than three 
centuries and give us a bare list of names. 9 - The immediate successor of 
Pajjuna was MalayaST (Toil’s Miilasi), who married MelhaiiadevI, a daughter 
of the Klchi prince Anal a. 91 He is credited with having won a victory over 
a prince of Mandu. Then came BJjala, Riajadeva and Kalyfma. After the 
last mentioned prince Rnjapana places Rajakula, but NenaSI and Tod both 
agree that the successor of Kalyaija was Kuntala. lie was followed by 
JuijaSl or JavanaSi and then came his son Udayakariia. Narasimha, son of 
Udayakariia, succeeded to the gadi of Amber. Bar Singh, the eldest son of 
Udayakariia, is said to have quarrelled with his father and surrendered his 
birth-right. His grandson Naru became the progenitor of the Naruka 
family now ruling in Alwar." Balaji, a third son of Udayakarna, obtained 
as his appendage the district of Amritsar which became the nucleus of the 
extensive confederation now known as Shekhawati, after the name of Shekhji, 
the son of Balaji." 

Narasimha was succeeded by Banabira and then came Uddharana and 
Chandrasena. The latter was succeeded by his son Prithviraja, father of 
Bihati Mall. 

49. Tod, op. tit., p. 1332. 50. Ibid*, p. 1333. < 

51. H. C Ray, Dynastic History of Northern India, Vol. II, pp. 1084 f. 

52. For a list of Kadiwaha princes after Pajjuna, see Muhanota Nenasi ki 
Khyata, II, p. 3 (Rajapajja’s list), pp. 4 ff (NenasS’s list); Tod, op. at., p. 1336. 

53. Muhctttola Nenasi ki Khyata II, p. 4-5. Tod, op. tit., p. 1336. 

54. Muhariota Nenasi ki Khyata, II, p. 27 ; Rajput'ana Gazetteer (Provincial 
Series), p. 425 f ;’Bhandarkar's List of Inscriptions of Northern India, Na 1038. 

55. Muhanota Nenasi ki Khyata, II, p. 32, Tod, op. tit, Mol. Ill, pp. 1336, 
13786. 



EARLY HISTORY OF KACHWAHAS OF AMBER 


693 


The death of the last Chauhan emperor on the battle-field of Tarain led 
to the complete collapse of his empire, and his descendants maintained a pre- 
carious existence in the strong fortress of Ranthambhor. But this momen- 
tous event did not perhaps immediately affect the cordial relationship that 
subsisted between the Chauhans and the Kachwahas. If Nayachandra, the 
author of the Hammiramahakuvya, is to be believed, a marriage was arranged 
between Viranarayana of Ranthambhor and a Kacchavaha princess of Amara- 
pura (Amber). The nuptial could not take place because the bridegroom, 
when he set out for Amarapura, was opposed by the Saka ruler Jalaludin. 
He was then entrapped by the Muhammadans and was poisoned to death. 58 
The captor has been tentatively identified with Shams-ud-dln Iltutmish who 
conquered the fortress of Ranthambhor in a.d. 1226. 51 In the latter half of 
the thirteenth century there seems to have occurred a breach between the 
Kpchwahas and the Chauhans. We learn from the Bala van inscription 
of a.d. 1288 that. Jaitrasimha, uncle’s son of Viranarayana, killed a Kurina 
king.'” This event must have happened before a.d. 1283, the year of acces- 
sion of I IammJra, who was the son and successor of Jaitrasimha according 
to Nayachandra. 51 ’ In the fifteenth century the Kachwahas came into hostile 
contact with the rising power of Mewar and the Kumbhalgarh prasasti 
credits Rana Kumbha with having devastated Amradadri, ( Amber ). Bi) The 
phenomenal rise of Rana Sanga. grandson of Rana Kumbha, to a position 
of pre eminence in the political horizon of western India is too well known. 
Babur bears eloquent testimony to this when he writes that “ the authority 
of the execrated pagan < Sanga) . . . was such that not one of all the exalted 
sovereigns of this wide realm, such as the Sultan of Delhi, the Sultan of 
Guziiit and the Sultan of Mandu, could cope with this evil-dispositioned one, 
without the help of other pagans ; one and all they cajoled him and tempo- 
rized with him. :,(n Tod recounts among his tributaries the name of Prithviraja 
of Amber. 82 “ Rajas and rais of high degree " obeyed Sanga at the battle of 
Khanua, and it is not altogether impossible that the Kachwaha chief also 
‘shared in the general defeat inflicted upon the Hindus by Babur. He fell 
by the hand of an assassin and the murderer was his own son, Bhlma.* 8 

During the centuries following the invasion of Mu’izz-ud-dln Muhammad 
bin Sam till the rise of Rana Safiga the history of eastern Rajputana was 
mainly dominated by the ambitious rulers of the Sultanate of Delhi and 
their successors who often held possession of the strong fortresses of Ajmer 


56. Ind. Ant., VIII, 63. 

57. H. C. Ray, Dynastic History of Northern India, II, p. 1095. 

58. Ep. Ind., XIX, pp. 46 ff, 49. 59. Ind. Ant., VIII, p. 59. 

60. Ep. Ind., XXI, pp. 279, 288. 

61. Babur-Ndma in English by A. S. Beveridge, Vol. II, (Section 3), p. 5611. 

62. Tod, Annals, Vol. I, p. 348 and n. 5. 

63. Tod, Annals, Vol. Ill, p. 1337. 




694 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and Ranthambhor, dominated over the Sapadalaksa country, once the home 
of the proud Chauhans, and exercised control over the neighbouring pro- 
vinces of Bayana and Alwar. It is not unlikely that the princes of Amber 
had now and then to bear the onslaught of the arms of Islamic forces. 

The foul assassination of Prithviraja was the signal for an internal 
turmoil in which his descendants entered into a contest for securing the 
throne. 

Prithviraja 

I 

7 i i r ■ t 

Bhlmasimha Puranmai Bharamala Saiiga other sons 

| or Bihari Mall 

i "T 

Hatnasimha Asakarna 
or Askaran 

i I 

Chitara Suja 

Bhlmasimha seems to have been the heir-apparent to the throne. But 
his claims were superseded by his father in favour of another son named Pur- 
anmai. Prithviraja paid the penalty by his death at the hand of his own son. 
Purapmal ruled for six years and was then killed by Bhlma who now regained 
his birth right. Suja, son of Puranmai, sought to avenge the death of his 
father with the help of Safr-ud-dTn, the Subednr of Ajmer and made an attack 
upon Amber. According to Tod. Bhlmasimha was murdered by his son 
Askaran at the instigation of his brothers. Ifc was succeeded by his eldest 
son Ratnasirhha who ruled for eleven years. But troubles now came from 
another quarter. Saiiga, son of Prithviraja and bom of a Bikaner princess, 
got the help of JaitSi, son of Lunkarart of Bikaner, and seized the capital. But 
he fdl by the hands of a bard named Kanha. Thereupon Askaran, the second 
son of Bhlma, ascended the throne. Even he was not destined to rule in 
peace. Being ousted by Bharamala or Bihari Mall in V. S. 1604 (a.d. 1547- 
48) he went to Delhi to seek the help of Haji Khan Piathan (most probably 
the famous lieutenant of Shcr Shah). The latter reconciled the rivals and 
conferred upon Askaran the government of Naravara (Narwar).* 4 The con- 
solidation of Bharamala’s rale in Amber and his alliance with the Mughal 
emperor opened up a new chapter in the history of the Kachwahas. The 
scene of activities of the Kachwaha kings was no longer confined within the 
narrow limits of Amber, but loomed large in the imperial pavilions at Delhi 
and Agra and beyond in the provinces of the far-flung Mughal empire. The 
new phase of their history requires separate and detailed treatment, and we 
may conclude our present article here. 

64. The abq ye account is based on a note which appears in the Miihavota 
Nbutsi hi Khyata, Vol. II, p. 9 n ; also compare Tessitoii, Descriptive Catalogue of 
Bardic and Historical Manuscripts, Section I, part II, p. 46 ; Tod, Annal9 and 
Antiquities of Rijasthan (Cooke), Vol, III, p. 1337. 



the criticism of historical reports among 

THE MUSLIMS 

By Dr. M. Z. SIDDlQi, m.a., pii.d. 

Calcutta University. 

Ibn Khaldun among the Muslims, has been accepted to be the most cri- 
tical and original historian. He laid down the dictum that the rule for 
distinguishing what is true from what is false in history is based on its possi- 
bility or imixissibility. He propounded sound principles for Historiography 
and showed the way to that scientific view and treatment of the subject which 
is advocated by the most modem writers on it. 

No one who has made even a superficial study of Ibn Khaldun’s Prole- 
gomena to his voluminous history can deny him the credit which he deserves 
so well. But it will tie certainly a mistake to think that he was the first 
Muslim author who tried to make use of the critical method in order to exa- 
mine the truth of historical reports. For, long before him, the Muslim de- 
vines who lived between the 7th and the 1 1th centuries of the Christian era, 
had made a keen and sincere study of the criticism of historical reports in 
connection with those of the words which fell from the lips of the Prophet of 
Islam from time to time, and those of his deeds. 

These reports are known as Ahddith, which is the plural form of the 
word Ijtadith. The term is generally translated into English as ‘tradition.’ 
They are of extreme religious and legal importance to the Muslims and they 
have taken great care to maintain their purity and genuineness. 

• Each of these reports howsoever short, is accompanied by the chain of 
the names of tire transmitters through whom it was re- 
giving the te names' ce * vecl by those who compiled them in books. This chain 
of the transmit- of the transmitters was considered by all the writers on 
tcrSl the subject as an indispensable part of the text of the 

reports themselves. The part containing the names of the transmitters is 
technically called Isnad ^support) or authority and the report itself is called 
Matn or the text. By and by this system became so popular among the Mus- 
lim authors that tjiey applied it to history, to geography, to belles-lettres etc., 
for many centuries during the middle ages. As a matter of fact it was carried 
to such an extreme that it was ridiculed by authors like al-Jahi?. There are 
books e.g. the Masariu'l-Ushshdq of al-Sarraj (containing the stories of per- 
sons who are said to have died of love) the subject matter of which is extre- 
mely frivolous, but in spite of it, the jiuthor took the trouble of recording the 



696 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


name of each transmitter of the narratives contained in them, and the date 
and place at which he heard the stories. 


The Origin of this System 

The origin of this system, which according to Professor Hitti is unique 
in the case of the Arabs and meets the most essential requirements of modern 
historiography , 1 is difficult to determine. But Caetani and Horovitz have 
attempted to solve this interesting problem, and A. H. Ifarley has sum- 
marised their conclusions in his introduction to the Musnad of ‘Umar b. 
’AbdiVAziz . 2 


Caetani is of opinion that the system could not liave originated with the 
Arabs. The wild desolation of the Arabian desert and 

Getani’s the restive nature and the character of the primitive igno- 

opamon. 

rant uncivilised and intolerant Arabs, did not suit its 
oiigin and growth/' But his contention, as one may see, is based 
more on presumption than on facts ; and if accepted will only prove that 
the system did not originate with the Arabs. With whom did it originate 
then? The great Italian Orientalist has failed to give any instance of its 
use by any other people. The Greeks and the Romans did not use it as a 
system. Professor Margoliouth has pointed out that the Greek and the 
Roman historians do not keep quite clear of the dates and that they very 
rarely, tell us the source of their information.' 

Professor Horovitz, however, carried his researches further, and giving se- 


veral instances from Jewish literature, proved that the 

Horovitz’s system of Isnad was used by the Jews before the Arabs, 

researches 

He also tried to show thit its use in their literature was 
found as early as the Mosaic period and by the Talmudic times, its chain 
assumed enormous length, the subject matter being of the most varied nature/' 
But the main facts discovered by the minute researches of the distin- 
guished modern German Orientalist had been already 
They were anti- dealt with, by a medieval scholar of Andalusia, 

Hazrr> d ^ Ib ” Al> u Muhammad ‘Alf b. Ahmad commonly known as 

Ibn IJazm, in his al-Fisal Ffl-Milal * about nine cen- 
turies before him. Of this Horovitz as well as Caetani appear to have been 
unaware. Ibn IJazm has classified the chains of transmitters according to 
their reliability, into six different groups, has described their merits as well 
as demerits, has pointed out such of them as had been used in the Jewish 
and Christian literature, has referred to the subject matter of the texts to 


1. The origin of the Islamic Stale, Int. p. 3. 

2. /. A. S.'B. 1924, pp. 404-405 . 3. Annali dell’ Islam. I, p. 32. 

4. Arabic Historians, pp. 18, 20. 5. Der Islam, Vol. VIII,. pp. 39-75. 

6. Vol. II, pp. 67-70. 



CRITICISM OF HISTORICAL REPORTS AMONG THE MUSLIMS • 697 

which they relate and has discussed, in his own way, the demerits of their 
lsttdds. 


The Indians also, like the Jews, however, made use of this system long 
before the Arabs. But as far as I am aware, no notice 
dians USC * n " ft has been so far, taken. It was ixrinted to me for 
the first time, by my friends and colleagues Dr. P. Bagchi 
and Prof. H. C. Raychaudhuri of the department of Ancient Indian History 
in the University of Calcutta. According to the former occasional use of 
the system of giving the names of the transmitters is found in the ancient 
Indian literature : Hindu Buddhistic as well as Jaina. The text of the re- 
ports contained in them are of as varied a character as in the case of Jewish 
literature and the length of the chain of the transmitters is pretty long, con- 
taining in certain cases, about twenty-seven names. 7 

The use of this system by the Jews and the Indians before the Arabs, 
cannot be denied. The Arabs may have either borrow- 
* Thc , Ara ! >s f ftavo ed it from them or may have used it independently, 

it a tcientitic orm. j j av j n ^ taken up its use, however, the Arabs developed 

it, a great deal and gave it a scientific basis. They created an extremely 
rich literature dealing with the careers and the characters of the transmitters 
of the reports during different periods. This literature is known among thc 
Muslims as Asmd'ur-Rijdl or the names of the Men (the transmitters). They 
laid down the necessary qualifications, of thc reliable transmitters, classified 
the reports according to the reliability of their reporters, introduced the 
chronological method in order to test their trustworthiness and produced im- 
mense varied literature which supply the necessary critical apparatus for 
testing the truth of the reports. 


• The material for 
the criticism of 
Isnad is wanting 
in Indian and Jew- 
ish literature. 


All this is entirely wanting in the Jewish as well as Indian litera- 
ture. The ancient literature of neither the Indians nor 
of the Jews show any signs of the scientific use of the 
chronological method, nor does it possess any collection 
of the biographical notices of the transmitters of the re- 
ports. " In the Talmudic literature," says Ilorovitz, “ there 
is no idea of chronological method and the oldest extant work attempting 
such an arrangement was composed after 885 a.d., more than a century later 
than the earliest earliest .work on lanad-critique.” “ From this and from the 
fact that the important Jewish works (of this period) had been composed in the 
Islamic dominion " continues Prof. Horovitz, 41 it may be inferred that this 


7. Mahabhdrata ti^nslated by P. C. Ray, Book I, Canto I ; Winternitz His- 
tory of Indian literature \ Vol. I, pp. 323-24, Vol. II, p. 34, N. 3 ; Keith's translation 
of Sdnkhayana Arct# yaka, pp. 71-72 ; S. B. E. Vol. XV, pp. 224-227 ; P. Cordier's 
Catalogue Du Fond , Tibetan , Part III, pp. 163 ; 168-69, 201 — etc. 

For all these references I am indebted to Dr. P. Bagchi of Calcutta University. 

4G 



698 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


historical interest of the Jews was due to the Islamic influence." The want 
of these and other important materials for the criticism of the reliability of 
the transmitters makes the use; of the system of giving the names of authori- 
ties, by the Indians and the Jews, altogether valueless. 

Two-fold Nature of Criticism 

TIm: criticism of the historical reports (especially the traditions) among 
the Muslims however, is of tWo-fold nature : ( 1 ) that relating to the 
chain of the transmitters, (2) that relating to tire text of the reports. The 
former is generally known as Usulur'-Ritvdyal and also as U sulu l-Hadith i.e. 
the principles relating to the narration of the reports. And the latter is com- 
monly called tire U suin’ d-Diray at i.e. scientific or juristic principles. 

(1) The works on the U$ulu'r-Riwayat lay down the necessary quali- 
fications of the reliable and proper reporters, classify the 
% necessary c j, a j ns 0 f the transmitters into various groups according to 
transmitter of re- the degree of their reliability, and deal with the methods 
P° rts - of learning, narrating and writing down the reports (es- 

pecially traditions) and various connected matters which must be mastered 
by every qualifier* porter. 

The qualintations of the transmitter of a tradition have been described 
by al -shaft* f (767-820 a.d.) in his al-Risala, one of the earliest works on the 
subject received by us, as follows : — 

** He must be of firm faith, well-known for his truthfulness in what he 
reported, understanding its contents, knowing well how the change in ex- 
pressions affects the contents, rejxirting verbatim what he learnt from his 
own authority and not narrating in his own words, only the sense of what he 
had learnt, possessing retentive memory if he reported from memory, and re- 
membering his book well, if he reported from it. He should be free from mak- 
ing a report on the authority of those whom he met, of what he did not learn 
fiom them. And his reports must be in agreement with what has been re- 
ported by those who are recognised to have good memory if they also have 
transmitted these reports." 8 

All the writers on the subject, however, are unanimously of opinion that 
the transmitter of a report in order to be. acceptable, must be of firm faith, 
mature age, and proved integrity and possessing good memory. He must be 
well-versed in tire methods of learning, transmitting and preserving the re- 
ports. He must be thoroughly conversant with the names, careers and the 
characters of thg earlier reporters as well as with the various classes of the 
reports (traditions) and their defects and other special features. 

8. Ar-RisSla, Egypt, 1312 A.H.. p. 99. ( 



CRITICISM OF HISTORICAL REPORTS AMONG THE MUSLIMS 699 

The classification of the traditions. 

The traditions liave been classified, according to the degree of their 
reliability, into three categories, (*) Saljil? i.e. the Genuine, (it) the Hasan 
i.e. the Fair and the Da’if i.e. the weak. 

(i) The $ahih. or the Genuine. The genuine is the report which has 
been handed down by a continuous chain of the transmitters possessing the 
qualifications mentioned above. Some important writers are of opinion that 
it must also be proved that each transmitter actually met his own reporter. 

(») The Hasan or Fair is the report the isndd of which does not in- 
clude narrators who are suspected of falsehood, and the text of which is 
not rare, and is identically or equivalently reported by more than one set of 
the transmitters. Ibn Salah, a distinguished writer on the subject, has further 
explained it. He says that ‘Fair’ is the report among the transmitters of 
which, there are men of unknown character, whose veracity and reliability 
have not been proved, but are not known to have beat careless and committing 
mistakes or forgery in their reports. 

(Hi) The Da'if or weak is the report which does not satisfy the condi- 
tions of either of the two classes of the reports mentioned above. They are. 
again classified into various categories ■ •v*. 

(a) The Mursal or the loose is the report about the Prophet of Islam 
by one who did not enjoy his company but met any one of his companions, 
without his authority. 

lb) The Munqata ‘ or the severed are the reports in the chain of the 
transmitters of which any link at any stage is wanting. 

(c) The Mu'dal or the straitened is the report from the Isndd of which 
two or more links are missing. 

(d) The Mudallas or the disguised is the report in the Isndd of which 
*any narrator reports on the authority of one whom he met, what he never 

leamt from him, or on the authority of any of his contemporaries whom 
he never met, so equivocally as may create the impression that he had actually 
met and received the report from him, or mentions a name or title of his 
authority, which is generally not known so that he may not be identified. 
This class of the reports is always rejected and the reporter is severely con- 
demned. ■ • 

(«) The Shddh or the rare, is the report made by one single reliable 
transmitter at any stage, at variance with that of other transmitters pos- 
sessing better memocy. 

These and’ various other classes of reports (traditions) have been des- 
cribed, and explained and their degree of reliability has been thoroughly 
discussed in all the works on the principles of narration. 



700 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


2. ’U d-Dirdyot or the scientific or juristic principles relate to the 
Matn or the tact of the reports irrespective of their trans- 
The scientific mitters. These principles are generally discussed in a 
principles particular part of the works on jurisprudence. For it 

is mainly the duty of those who utilise the reports to go carefully into the 
text and accept or reject it on account of its probability or improbability. 
But the works dealing with the ’Usulu'l-Hadith also contain a good deal of 
materials relating to it. A well-known book Fatliu'l-MughUh, for example 
contains the following principles : — 

(o) Every report against reason, or accepted principles (of faith) or 
against what is generally experienced, or against well-founded and recognised 
historical facts should be rejected. 

(b) All reports that do not suit the position or office of the persons 
about whom they are reported should be taken as unreliable. 

(c) Tlie events which should have been noticed by a large crowd of 
persons and reported by them, if transmitted by a single individual, should 
not be accepted. 

The works on Jurisprudence lay down the following principles : — 

(a) The degree of the reliability of a report must be in keeping with 
the importance of its subject-matters. 

(b) If a report deals with a technical matter and its transmitter does 
not possess technical knowledge or judicious mind the report may be accepted 
with certain reserve. 

A sufficiently large number of cases of the rejection of historical reports 
by the Muslim devines on account of one or the other principles mentioned 
above, may be cited, to prove the application of the above principle long 
before Ibn Khaldun. As a matter of fact he himself follows these very prin- 
ciples when he rejects the common explanation of the sudden fall of the Bar-** 
meeides, and the various reports of the extremely large number of the soldiers 
fighting in the wars waged by the Assyrians and others. 

Even in the modem times the criticism accepted by all the Orientalists 
against the story forged by ‘Abdu’l-Latlf, Ibnu’l-Qiftt and Barhebraeus about 
the burning of the library of Alexandria at the Command of the 2nd Caliph 
‘Umar, is based ore the principles laid down by thf Muslim .divines centu- 
ries before Ibn Khaldtin. 


9. Lucknow Edition, p. 114, 




INDEX 


Abdul Ali, A.F.M.. 377. 

Abdulla Khan, 228. 

Abhaya, 138. 

AbhidhaxmakoSavyakhya, 581. 
Abhijnanasakuntala, 20. 

Abhinavagupta, 182, 193. 

Aboriginal tribes of Malabar, Some, 326. 
Acyuta, 306. 

Agalokaka and the kingdom of Agni, 170. 
Agrawala, V. S., 368. 

Ahalya Bai Holkar, 15. 

Ajanta, 263. 

AjataSatru, 2, 433. 

Ajativada of Gaudapdda, 308. 

Akbar, 105. 

Altekar, A. S., 128. 

Amaravatl, 264. 

Amoghavajra, 70. 

Anasuya, 21, 33. 

Angelo, 263. 

Angkor, 263. 

ArthaSastra, The Age of the, 477. 

Agoka, 211, 212, 213, 438. 

Aspects of Pre-Faninean Sanskrit Gram- 
, mar, 334. 

Asvamedha, 442. 

Atlantic Charter, 6. 

Avantivarman, 51, 179, 192. 

AvidyS, 589. 

Amrapall, 137. 

"Anandavardhana, 192, 193. 

Badtranafak, 537. 

Bagchi, P. C., 419. 

Bakla, Raja of, 98, 102. 

Banerjce, Adris, 504. 

Banerjee. Indu Bhusan, 537. 

Barua, B. M., 574. 

Basu, K. K., 232. 

Baudhayana, 213. 

Badamyana, 160.* 

Baoabhafta, 487. 

Belvalkar, S. K., 19. ‘ 

Bemhardi, 5. 

BhadreSvara, 606. 

Bhagavadgita, 81. 

BhaktiSataka Slokas, 82, I 


Bhandarkar, D. R., 159. 
Blia$aparicchedamuktava]T ( 192. 

Bhaskara, 176. 

Bliattacharyya, Benoytosh, 354. 

Bhramara Sandcsa, 295. 

Bimbisara, 2, 137, 433. 

Bismarck, 5. 

Bodhicaryavatara, 83. 

Borneo, 118. 

Borobodur, 263, 265. 

Brahmanism and Jainism, 527. 
Bfhatkatha, 52. 

Buddha, 4, 271. 
liuddhabhadra, 69. 

Buddhacarita, Sutra, 66. 

Buddhadatta, A. P., 111. 

Buddhanandi, 44. 

Buddhism in Andhradesa, 346. 

Buddhist Iconography, Some Sources of, 
469. 

Buddhist Sects, 282. 

Buddhist Survivals in Bengal, 75. 
Budhagupta, 619. 

Burmese Records corroborate the Pura- 
nic date of Buddha’s birth, 392. 
Burnell, 145. 

Calicut, 305. 

Calukya Copper plate Grants, On some 
spurious, 570. 

Cambodia, 266. 

Campbell, 379. 

Can Women perform Srauta Sacrifices of 
their own accord? 159. 

Candanaka, 404. 

Candragupta, 51, 53, 165, 489. 

Carvalho, 100, 101. 

Cajjakya, 53, 590 ff. 

Carudatta, 402. 

Chandragupta, Early life of, 590 ff. 
Chatterjee, C. D., 590 ff . 

Chatterjee, Suniti Kumar, 75. 
Chaudhuri, Roma, 173. 

Ch&riakya, See Canakya. 

Chhabra, B. Ch., 170. 

Churfli, 303. 

Christ, 4. 



702 


INDEX 


Chronology of the early Kings erf Nepal, 
The, 626, 

Clau^ewitch, 5. 

Cocks, Richard, 127. 

Coumaraswamy, A. K., 469. 

Dak§in Roy, 76. 

Daphne paper of Nepal, The, 377. 
Dandekar, R. N., 194. 

Danapala, 70. 

Das Gupta, Nalini Nath, 617. 

De, S. K., 50. 

Deccan Karnatak, 150. 

Despatches and Reports in Indian 
History, 9. 

Devadatta, 139. 

Devasthali, G. V., 496. 

Development of Tripitaka Translation in 
China, 66. 

Dhanika, the story of, 419ff. 

Dharma, 79. 

Dharmaguptakavinaya, 425, 433. 
Dharmananda, 66. 

Dharma^amudra Ko§a Sutra, 66. 
Dhvanyaloka, A dissertation on the 
identity of the author of the, 179. 
Dikshit, Moreshwar, 570. 

Dikshitar, V. R. R., 346. 

Divyavadana, 215. 

Dupleix, 229. 

Durga, 273. 

Dutt, Nalinaksha, 282. 

Dvaraka, 218 ff. 

Early Buddhism and the taking of life, 
436. 

Education in Ancient India - historic 
survey of its achievements in different 
ages, 128. 

Ekavyavaharika, 283. 

Episode in the History of Buddhism in 
South India, An, 35. 

Fachow, 66. 

Frederick, Caesar, 106. 

Frederick the Great, 5, 

Gaudapada, 308. 

Gautama, 213. 

Gryatri, 86. 

Ghosh, Bata Krishna, 334. 

Ghosh, N. N., 210. 

Ghosal, U, N.. 362. 


Code, P. K., 142. 

Golconda, 232. 

Gonzales, 102, 103. 

Graham, 145. 

Guleria Paintings, 642. 

Guntert, 203. 

Gupta Scriptures of Benares— A Study, 
504. 

Gurner, C. W., 58. 

Har$a, 487. 

Har?a, the author of the Anka-yantra- 
cintamaui and his relatives, 496. 
Hemachandra, 601. 606. 

Ileras, II., 545. 

Millebrandt, 487. 

Hippon, Anthony, 122. 

Historical materials in Gilgit mantis- 
scripts, 134. 

Historical portraits in Baiia’s Ilarsa* 
carita, 362. 

Hitler, Adolf, 5. 

Hodgson, 378. 

Homo Sapiens, 1. 

Homer, I. B., 436. 

Ho-shang, 68, 

Hyder Ali, 251. 

Hyderabad, Nizam of, 12. 

I-tsing, 70. 

lacohi, Hermann, 602. 

Taisingh I, 11. 

Jamshed, 234. 

Java, 119, 2 66. 

Jayantabhatta, 192. * 

JIvaka, 138. 

Junagadh, 222. 

Kalluu?a, 392. 

Kane, P. V., 184. 

Kangm, 642, 643. 

Karatoya, 90. 

Karmarkar, A! P., 456. v 
Kautilya, 478. 

Kalacakrayana, 88. ‘ 

Kali, 273. 

Kalidasa, 22, 25, 51, 60, 62, 293. 
Kalidasa’s use of the incarnation theme, 
58. 

Kamarupa, 90. 

^amasutra, 487. 



INDEX 


703 


tlQraoarintamaDi. 499. 

Ka&yapa Matanga, 66. 

Keith, A. B., 477. 

Kiipvadi Sammasambuddho ? 111. 
Kokamukhasvamin , 88. 

Kokasandesa, 295. 

Kokilasandesa, 294. 

Kraznrisch, Stella, 61. 

Krwa, 63. 

Kumarajlva, 67. 

Kumaragupta I, On the successors of, 
617. 

Kunhan Raja, C., 293. 

Kusasthali, 219. 

Lankavatara Sutra, 571, 576. 

Lawrence, 231. 

Levi, Sylvain, 400. 

Licchavi, 2, 139. 

Linga cult in ancient India, The, 456. 
Lingodbhava, 465. 

Lokacarya of the Sr? Sampradaya, 173. 
Lokottaravada, 283. 

Madanapala, 143. 

Madhoram, 11. 

Madhyaroika, 82, 

Madura, 223, 227, 243. 

Magadha, 2, 14L 
Magan, the Kingdom of, 545. 
Mahadevan, T. M. P-, 308. 
Mahalinga Sastri, T. V., 225. 
Mahasarpchika Vinaya, 430. 
MrJ/dsainghikas, 285, 433 
Mahavira, 4. 

Mahisasaka Vinaya, 123. 

Ivlahisasakas, 286, 433. 

Mahmud Shah, 97. 

Maitra, Sushil Kumar, 559. 

Majumdar, R. C. 134. 

Majumdar, G. P. t 645. 

Malacca, 119. 

Mann, 207, 208. 

Manusmrti, 159. 

Masulipatam, 122. * 

Mathura, 407. 

Mayurasandesa, 295. 

Malava era, 622. 

Malavikagnimitram , 215. 

Mara, 471, 476. * 

Megasthenes, 479. 

Menon, C. Acyuta, 326. 


Mitra, Khagendranath, 675. 
Mohcnjodaro, 456. 

Mohini, 270. 

Moltke, 5. 

Mookerjce, Radha Kamal, 260. 
Mookerjce, Radha Kumud, 164. 
Mookerjce, Satkari, 179. 

Moore, Edward, 145. 

Moral role of Indian Art, The, 260. 
Mrcchakatika, 51, 400. 

Miidrarak^asa, 51, 52, 489. 

Muliammad Ali, 251. 

Mukerjec, S., 400. 

Mulasarvaslivada Vinaya, 427, 433. 
MuzafTar Jung, 229. 

Nanda, 592, 593. 602. 

Nainar, M. S. # 321. 

Nayak, 243. 

Niigarjunikoincja, 349. 

Namarupa, 582. 

Negapatam, 122. 

Nepal, 378. 

Oldenberg, 419. 

Oudh, Nawab of, 12. 

Padmasambhava, 167. 

Parvati, 270. 

Pataliputra, 594. 

Peri yapu ran arp, 36. 

Vi 11a i, Ananda Ranga. 215. 

Plaster, 611. 

Poligars, Southern, 237, 240, 241. 
Pondicherry, 245. 

Portuguese in Bengal, The, 92. 

Pradyota, 137. 

Prajnaparamitra Sutra, 69. 

Prajilaplivada, 283. 

PVatity asamutpada , 574. 

Priyamvada, 21, 34. 

Property ■ how it is acquired and 
managed, 321. 

Prospects of Economic Planning for 
India and the World, The, 530. 
Pudgala, 292. 

Purisamedha, 442, 

Punigupta, 617. 

Pusalker, A. D., 218. # 

Qasim Khan, .107. 

Quli Qutb Shah, 232. 



INDEX 


704 

Raivataka Ml, 222, 223. 

Raja Rao, M., 392. 

Rajballabh, Raja, 107. 

Ranjit Singh of Lahore, 12. 

Rao, Appaji, 251. 

RaSagarigadhara, 181. 

Ray, Kedar, 100. 

Raya, Acyuta Deva, 115. 

Raychaudhuri, G. C., 683. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C, 88. 

Rajagrha, 2. 

Rama, 63. 

Havana, 59, 466. 

Rebello, Diogo, 97. 

Rhys Davids, 141, 218. 

Routes between Aryavarta and Dakshi- 
jiiapatha, 519. 

Roy, Fhani Bhushan, 527. 

Saddliarmapuudarika Sutra, 69. 
Sahajayana, 86. 

Sakara, 409. 

Sakuntala, tlie child of Nature, 19 If. 
Saletore, B.A., U2. 

Saqikaravarman, 192. 

Sammittiyas, 287. 

Sampayo, Vasco Peres de, 98. 
Samudragupta, 16*1. 

SandcSa Kavyas and Malabar geogra- 
phy, Some, 293. 

Sandvip, 100, 103. 

Sarikhya, 584. 

Sarkar, Benoy, 530. 

Sarkar, Jadu Natli, 9. 

Sarvastivada Vinaya, 420, 433. 
Sarvastivadins, 287. 

Sastri, K. A. Nilakanta, 35. 

Some considerations on Gupta Coinage, 
164. 

Satgaon, 104. 

Savara, 16b. 

Sadhanaxnala, 355. 

Sariputta, 45, 46. 

Satakantf, Gautamlputra 159, 162. 

Sen, S. N., 92. 

Sen, Sukumar, 669. 

Shamasastri, R„ 277. 

Shende, S. R., 519. 

Siam, 266. 

Siddhantamukt&vali, 181. 

Siddiqi, M. Z., 696. 

Suphacandra, 169. 


Siva, 271. 

Sivajl, 11. 

Skandagupta, 363. 

Some aspects of the overseas trade of 
Vijayanagara from the accounts of Euro- 
pean travellers, 114. 

Sastri, Iliranand, 642. 

Sricandradevi, 619. 

Srinivasachari, C. S., 237. 

Silpur, 100. 

Studies in ihe history of Indian Plants — 
Antiquity of Jwar or Jondhla (Hol- 
aivS Sorghum) freon B.c. 2200 to a.d. 
1850, 142. 

Suddhadvaita, The philosophy of, 559. 
Sukasandesa, 291. 

Sumatra, 121. 

Sundarainurti, 38. 

Suhga, Pu$yamitra. 210. 

Tantrayana, 86. 

Tantric Buddhism, The Home of, 354. 
Taikavagisa, Ramacarapa; 192. 
Tattvasekhara, 173. 

Taxila, 213. 

Tara, 273. 

Tcnnesserim, 115. 

Theravada, 284, 433. 

Tipu Sultan, 18. 

Tiracchanakatha, 444. 

Tirumalanayak, 250. 

Udayana, 137. 

Udayibhadra, 141. 

Uddiyana, 359. 
lljjain, 213. 

Ujjayini in Mrcchakatika, 400. 
Crddha-linga, 460. 

Vaisali, 2, 134, 135, 136. 

Vai^avism, the evolution of, 675. 
Vajray£n&, 86, 361. 

Vallabhacaryya, 559. 

Vapparaangala, 447. 

Varihamihira, 393. 

Vatsayana, 487. 

Vedic Conception of the motherland : A 
study in the Prthvisukta of Atharva- 
veda, 368. 

Vedic gods, 277. 

Vedic Plants, 645. 

Vessantara, 264, 402. 








