


B. C. LAW VOLUME 

PART II 


Edited by 

De. D. R. BHANDARKAR, M.A., PhD. 
Prof. K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, M.A. 
Dr. B. M. BARUA, M.A., D.Litt. 

Dr. B. K. GHOSH, D.Phil., D.Litt. 
Prof. P. K. GODE, M.A. 


Published by 

The Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
POONA 
1946 



Printed by G. E. Bingham, Baptist Mission Press, 41a Lower Circular Road, Calautta,*and 
Published by Dr. R. N. Dandekar, M.A., Ph.D., the Secretary, Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, Deccan Gymkhana, Poona 4. 



THIS VOLUME OF ARTICLES 

contributed by 

HIS FRIENDS AND ADMIRERS 
is presented 
to 

Dr. B. C. LAW, 


•M.A., B.l.., Ph.D., D.Lrrr., F.R.A.S.B., F.B.B.R.A.S., F.R.G.S., BuddhagamaSibomaiji. 



PREFACE 

We are glad to complete the second and the last part of the B. C. Law 
Volume. We are grateful to scholars of the east and west for their ready 
response to our appeal, without which it would have been impossible for us 
to perform our arduous task. It is most regrettable that two well-known 
scholars, among the contributors, have left the world before the volume is 
out. We shall consider our labour amply rewarded, if the volume is proved 
to be of some use to scholars. We are thankful to the authorities of the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, for accepting it as their 
publication. 

D. R. Bhandarkar, 

B. M. Barua, 

K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, 

B. K. Ghosh, 

P. K. Godk. 


April 2, 1946 



CONTENTS 


Pag*. 

THE MALAY VERSION OF THE RAMA YANA 

By Sra Riohabd Winstedt, K.B.E., CM.G., D.Litt. . . . . 1 

THE OFFICIALS OF THE COURT OF THE KING OF SATARA, A.D. 1822 
By Me. R. E. Enthoven, C.I.E., C.L., I.C.S. (Retd.) .. .. 2 

REFORMATION OF THE SANGHA AND REVIVAL OF BUDDHISM 
IN CEYLON IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
By Sib D. B. Jayatilaka, K.B.E., MA., LL.D., Bar-at-Law . . 7 


KANCANASARA 

By Dr.*H. W. Bailey, MA., D.Phil. . . 11 

THE KAUTILlYA AND THE MATSYAPURANA 

By MM. P. V. Kane, M.A., LL.M. .. .. .. ..13 

BODHISATTVA AVALOKITE&VARA IN CEYLON 

By Db. S. Paranavitana, M.A., Ph.D. . . . . 16 

THERAVADIN AND SARVASTIVlDIN DATES OF THE NIRVANA 

By Dr. E. J. Thomas, M.A., D.Litt. . . . . . . 18 


ON £HE HISTORY OF l IN PALI 

By Db. S. M. Katre, M.A., Ph D. . . . . 22 

MADHAVA, SON OF SRI VENKATARYA, AND SAYANACARYA 

By Dr. Lakshman Sarup, M.A., D.Phil. (Oxon) . . 34 

THE NY A YA- VAI&ESIKA CONCEPTION OF MIND 

By Dr. Sadananda Bhaduhi, M.A., Ph.D. . . . . 38 

A PEEP INTO THE IDEAL OF EDUCATION IN INDO- ARYAN SOCIETY 
By MM. V idhusekhara Bhattacharya . . . . 48 

A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HISTORY OF JAINISM 

By Dr. H. L. Jain, M.A., LL.B., D.Litt. .. .. ..51 

DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN MAN (BHCNA) * 

By Prof. N. K. Bhagwat, M.A. . . . . 61 

MAN’S REASON AND HIS QUEST OF TRUTH, GOOD AND BEAUTY 
By Mb. Charh Chandra Dutt, I.C.S. (R«td.) . . . . 75 

CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 

By Db. M. N. Saha, D.Sc., F.R.S., F.N.I., F.R.A.S.B. .. ..84 

AKBAR’S TOMB AT SIKANDARA AND ITS HISTORICAL REMI- 
NISCENCES 

By Db. S. K. Bankbji, MA., PhD., D.Litt. . . . . . . 103 

KALA-AZAR AND ITS CONQUEST 

By Sib Ufendranath Bbahmaohabi, M.A., M.D., Ph.D., F.N.I., 
F.RA.S.B, .. .. .. .. ..HI 



vi 


contents 


Page 

BUDDHISM IN GUJARATI LITERATURE 

By Diwan Bahadur Krishnalal M. Jhaveri, M.A., LL.B., J.P. . . 116 

A BASIC TENDENCY OF PRAKRIT LANGUAGES 

By Dr. A. M. Ghatage, M.A., Ph.D. .. .. ..118 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPT OF &ESA 

By Dr. K. C. Varadachari, M.A., Ph.D. . . . . . . 123 

AMBASTHA, AMBASTHA, AND AMBASTHA 

By Dr. SArya KInta, M.A., D.Litt., D.Phil. (Oxon) . . . . 127 

ELEMENTS OF HINDU ICONOGRAPHY AND ITS SOURCES 

By Mr. G. H. Khare . . . . . . . . . . 140 

SOME UNKNOWN OR LESS KNOWN SANSKRIT POETS DISCOVERED 
FROM THE SUBHA SITA-SARA-SAMUCOAYA 
By Dr. Jattndra Bimal Chaudhuri, M.A., Ph.D. 14H 

KAMMA, OR THE BUDDHIST LA W OF CAUSATION 

By Reverend Thera Narad a . . . . 158 

MUSLIM PATRONAGE TO SANSKRIT LEARNING 

By Prof. Chintaharan Chakra varti, M.A. . . • . . 176 

‘BUDDHAKHETTA’ IN THE APADANA 

By Mr. Dwijendralal Barua, M.A. . . Xl83 

KALIDASA’S KUNTALeSvARA DAUTYA 

By Dr. V. Raqhavan, M.A., PhD. . . . . . . . . 1^1 

ORIYA LITERATURE IN THE EARLY STAGES 

By Prof. Priyaranjan Sen, M.A., P.R.S. . . . . 197 

VISHVESHVARA SMRITI 

By MM. Pandit Bisheshwar Nath Reu . . . . . . 207 

RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG THE MAINAMATI 
AND LALMAI RANGES, TIPPERA DISTRICT, EAS T BENGAL 
(with plates) 

By Mr. T. N. Ramachandran, M.A. . . . . . . . . 213 

SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION IN INDIA 

By Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, M.A., B.L., D.Litt., Bar-at-Law . . 231 

TAK9A-SCTRA 

By MM. Dr. Umesha Mishra, M.A., D.Litt., KAvyaurtha 237 

KAMPILYA 

By Dr. Kamta Peosad Jain, D.L., M.R.A.S. .. ..239 

WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 

By Mr. Tapo Nath Chakrabarty, MA. .. .. , 243 

NEKKHAMMA 

By Dr. P. V. Bapat, M.A., Ph.D. 


.. 260. 



CONTENTS Vii 

Page 

HYDRO-ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDIA 
■ By Messes. G. Kuriyan and V. P. Kannan Nair . . . . 266 

VILLAGES AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

By Dr. P. K. Aoharya, I.E.S., M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt. . . . . 275 

A FEW THOUGHTS ON HINDI LITERATURE 
. By Prof. Lalita Prasad Sukul . . . . . . . . 285 

SUFIS AND MUSIC 

By Dr. M. L. Roy Choudhury Sastei, M.A., Ph.D. . . 292 

DEVAPUTRA 

By Dr. F. W. Thomas, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt., C.I.E. .. .. 305 , 

SIR WILLIAM WATSON 

By Dr.*Amaranatha Jha, M.A., Hon.D.Litt., F.R.S.L. . . . . 320 

THE HISTORY OF THE SRI VIJAYANARAYANA TEMPLE OF BELUR 
(MYSORE STATE) 

By Dr. M. H. Krishna, M.A., D.Litt. (Lond.) . . . . . . 330 

A NOTE ON PERSIAN, TURKISH AND ARABIC MSS. 

By Mr. Fazal Ahmad Kiian, M.A. .. .. .. 334 

LlLATILAKA— A STUDY 

By Prof. K. Rama Pisharoti, M.A. . . . . . . . 337 

LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 
(urith plates) 

By Dr. S. P. Chatterjee, M.Sc., Ph.D., D.Litt. . . . . 342 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NEGATION IN HINDU PHILOSOPHICAL 
THOUGHT 

By Dr. Betty Heimann, Ph.D. . . . . . . • . 408 

SARVASVlRA 

By Dewan Bahadur Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, M.A., Ph.D., 
F.R.A.S.B. .. ..413 

THE BRHANNANDIKESvaRA AND THE NANDIKE&VARA PURANA 

By Dr. R. C. Hazra.M.A., Ph.D. .. .. ..416 

FURTHER LIGHT ON COLA-SAILENDRA RELATIONS FROM TAMIL 
INSCRIPTIONS 

By Mr. K. R. Venkata Rama Ayyar . . 420 

BUDDHA 

By Madame A. C. Albers . . . . 424 

THE ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 

By Dr. H. Goetz, Ph.D. . . . . *33 

RUDAKl, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 

By Dr. M. Ibhaque, MA., Ph.D. .. •• 444 

INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 

By Dr. B. M. Barua, MA.., D.Lrrr. . . . . . . 461 




THE MALAY VERSION OF THE RAMAYANA 

By 

Sib Riohabd Winstedt, K.B.E., C.M.G., D.Lm. 

Two of the classical Malay texts of the Ramayana have been printed, 
one by Roorda van Eysinga at Amsterdam in 1843, the other by Dr. Shellabear 
in the Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 71, 
December 1915, with an analysis in No. 70, April 1917. A third Malay 
text in a manuscript collected by Sir Stamford Raffles, the founder of 
Singapore, and now in the library of the Royal Asiatic Society, London, 
has been described by me in the Journal of that Society, Part I, 1944. All 
three texts appear to be derived from the same archetype. The Shellabear 
text is from a MS. which once belonged to Archbishop Land and since 1633 
has been on the shelves of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, but notwithstanding 
its age it is in matter the latest, although textually the oldest and best 
preserved. I have commented on the two printed texts in my History of Malay 
Literature* (Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
1940). A feature of Archbishop Land’s text is certain Muslim additions, 
although of course all three textB are a translation done (probably in fifteenth 
century Malacca) after the Malays had embraced Islam and borrowed the 
Arabic alphabet and many Arabic words. 

_ It is interesting to notice how the scribe who wrote Archbishop Land’s 
text has adapted the text of an earlier original to the taste and exigencies 
of a Muslim court. The contents of the first thirty-one pages of the Raffles 
MS. are outlined in my article cited above. The story then continues as in 
the Land MS., but just before the Land MS. begins, the Raffles MS. has a 
passage in which Chitra-Baha asks his father’s pardon for the ferocity of the 
young Ravana and accepts the decision that the child be banished. His 
speech runs as follows: — 

* “Lord of the world, not to speak of this lump of flesh and blood Ravana, 
if I had a thousand such children, I would surrender them at your highness* 
wish. Provided the name and fame of the Maharaja of all the world do not 
suffer, I am content. Even my life is in your hands and at your command 
and I lay it at your highness’ feet. For life with fair repute is good but life 
without fair repute is naught, because no man shall live for ever and verily 
all shall perish, So long as the country, the throne and the fame of your 
highness are safe, my heart rejoices.” When his highness heard these words 
of his son, he was exceedingly glad, and straightway Ravana was carried by 
Chitra-Baha aboard ship.’ 

This i%the passage which the scribe of the Land MS. has chosen for the 
commencement of his MS., partly it would seem because he saw a way to 
twist Chitra-Baha’s speech into an apology for a non-Muslim epic and partly 
* because it was immediately followed in his original by the visit of Adam, a 



2 


B, 0, LAW VOLUME 


Muslim Prophet, to Ravana as he is doing penance. This is a translation 
of his exordium:-— 

‘This is a wonderful tale famous among all in the monsoon lands, as set 
forth in Hindu books. It is the tale of Maharaja Ravana of the ten heads 
and twenty hands, a ruler exceedingly great on whom Allah Most High 
bestowed four kingdoms, one on earth, one in heaven, one under the earth and 
one in the depth of the sea. All episodes that are not seemly I discard, so 
long as what I recite to your highness be of good report. For I am at the 
command of your highness and the slave of your highness. For life with 
fair repute is good. Let me not die in bad repute, for this world is not im- 
perishable. If your highness’ country be safe, it shall be with good repute. 
And straightway Ravana was carried aboard a ship.* 

It is, of course, possible that the scribe of the Land MS. was copied from 
an original of which some early pages were missing but it seems more than an 
accident that he has chosen for his opening page a passage he can twist into 
an oblique apology and started with an episode immediately followed by the 
appearance of Nabi Adam. 


THE OFFICIALS OF THE COURT OF THE KING OF SATARA, 

AD. 1822 


By 


Mb. R. E. Enthoven, C.I.E., C.L., I.C.S. (Retd.) 


In the year A.D. 1822, a few years after the defeat of the Peshwa at the 
battle of Kirkee, a Maratha dynasty was restored to power intthe city of Satara, 
when the British Resident invested Pertab Singh with full powers on his 
attaining majority. 

♦ In pursuance of his instructions, a State document was thereupon drawn 
up containing the names of the leading court officials, their respective func- 
tions, and rules for their guidance in the discharge of these duties. The 
document, obtained from the archives of the Satara Kings, was translated 
and supplied to me by the late Rao Bahadur D. B. Parasnis some years ago. 
It is a very lengthy paper and, as might be expected, contains much 
repetition, particularly when describing the conduct of the various officials 
while at oourt. 

In the following notes I have extracted the really important part of the 
manuscript, which may be of interest to students of the Maratha regime. 

The following are named as the most important of the oourt officials 


1. Pandit. 

2. Upadhya, 

3. Karbhari. 

4. Fadnia. 

5. Potnia. 


6. Chitnis. 

7. Vanknis. 

8. Bakshi. 

9. Havaldar. 

10. Abdar. 



THE OFFICIALS OF THE OOUBT OF THE KING OF 8ATABA 


3 


11. 

Hajimis. 

18. 

Tirandaj. 

12. 

Bhonsle Khanajad. 

19. 

Rakhtavan. 

13. 

Bhoi. 

20. 

Chalebargir. 

14. 

Devapujar. 

21. 

Cook. 

16. 

Khasbhardar. 

22. 

Gondhali. 

16. 

Lagi, Bothati and Ita bearers. 

23. 

Davaregosavi. 

17. 

Gunijana. 

24. 

Kalavant. 


25. Kalamdan bearer. 


Of these twenty-five officials, the Bakshi is stated to have had two assistants 
known respectively by the titles of Jasuda and Bhaldar. The names of many 
of the above officials can be traced back to the Rules issued by Sivaji at the 
time of his coronation at Raigadh in 1674. This document contains over 90 
offices, maty of very minor importance. Students of the Peshwa’s Daftar 
will be able to compare the two State documents, which throw an interesting 
light on the Maratha administration. 

The orders of the Satara King for the conduct to be observed by these 
officials are couched in curiously vague terms. Thus, in the case of fifteen 
of them, we are told that ‘rewards will be given for the efficient discharge of 
duties, and punishments for the neglect thereof’; and, again, that ‘servants 
of the State, whether old or new, will be rewarded in consideration of the 
length and quality of their respective services’. This conveys little idea 
of the nature of the rewards or punishments referred to, and leaves the court 
a very wide discretion. Similarly, it* is to be observed that, in the case of 
Sixteen of these officials, a rule prescribed that ‘a bath should be taken early 
in the morning’, and that ‘they should come to the palace in clean and decent 
dress Presumably the remaining nine officials were expected to follow the 
same line of conduct, though this is nowhere specifically laid down in their 
case. 

At the Satara Court, as at all Hindu centres, the most important official 
was the Pandit or chief religious adviser. Few matters, indeed, were outside 
his sphere, either in an advisory or executive capacity. It is accordingly laid 
down that he should attend the palace daily. Here he must 

(1) propitiate the family gods ; 

(2) select Brahmans who are to receive daily gifts ; 

(3) appoint others to assist in the propitiation ceipmonies ; 

(4) deal with all questions involving an interpretation of the sacred 

laws ; 

(5) prescribe penalties for those who are reported to have violated the 

laws of the Shastras ; 

(6) supervise the preparation of the sacrifioial pit (kunda), and the 
# erection of the pavilion (mandap) for any special performance 

of propitiatory rites or worship ; 

(7) arrange for the feeding of a selected number of Brahmans at the 

oourt expense ; 



4 ' 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


(8) on holidays and festivals, pay respect (darahana) to the King, who 

will in turn salute him in the same way ; 

(9) advise the King, in advance, of all religious festivals ; 

(10) arrange for the reception of distinguished visitors, Brahmans or 
others. 

As a general instruction, the Pandit is enjoined to follow the stars in their 
courses, and to warn the King of their auspicious or inauspicious position in 
connection with public events. If these cannot be postponed when the omens 
are not favourable, the Pandit, by worship and by making gifts to Brahmans, 
should endeavour to modify any possible evil influence. 

The functions of the Upadhya or family priest are very similar to those 
of the Pandit, under whose instructions he acts, attending «the shrine of the 
gods in the palace, and helping to procure the various articles, i.e. rice, sandal 
paste, flowers, sacred basil and bel (Mgle rmrmelos) leaves, with the necessary 
utensils. He is responsible for making similar preparations in the queens’ 
apartments, where the shrine must be supported and worship carried out. 

He is specially charged with the duty of pouring water over the god’s 
image (abhisheka), and must keep both the King and his chief minister 
informed of the good and bad influence of the stars. 

The Karbhari is in charge of the King’s civil affairs, including care of the 
official records, and the general supervision of the royal establishment. 
Accounts must be kept under his orders and all security bonds completed. The 
treasury balance sheet and the list of the royal jewelry and other valuables 
must be examined and certified by him. Any default or misconduct on the 
part of the menial establishment is to be entered by him in their service records, 
and brought to the notice of the King. 

Under the Karbhari, the Fadnis and Potnis carry out the duties of 
accountant and treasurer respectively. The latter keeps the pay rolls of the 
establishment, and makes disbursements to the staff accordingly. It is for 
the Fadnis to keep a record of all orders regarding the dismissal, restoration 
or grant of leave relating to menial servants, known as the Shagiri Pesha, of 
which account must be taken when the monthly payments of salary are 
made. 

A careful record is to be maintained of all correspondence with the village 
officials regarding accounts and inams. While the Potnis is responsible for 
the oharge of all offerings (nazars) made to the King, the Vanknis makes 
arrangement for the distribution of charitable gifts, i.e. cash, clothing and 
food. These are drawn from the royal treasury or Jamdar Khana , and it is 
laid down that every single article of clothing so issued should be separately 
recorded, as well as the receipt of such articles by purchase or gift. 

Such, in brief, were the arrangements for the religious and # office work 
of the oourt at Satara. In addition to those of the jpandit and Upadhya, 
certain functions connected with religion were entrusted to the Devapujar, 
Who, in a subordinate capacity, assisted these officials. To this official, in 



THE OFFICIALS OF THE COURT OF THE KINO OF SATARA 


5 


addition to worship and sao^ce in the palace shrine, is allotted the 
important task of finding water for the King's meals, and, when necessary, 
medicine for his indisposition. Elaborate instructions are recorded for the 
collection and care of the various articles required for conducting the rites 
at the time of the numerous religious festivals. Among these, which it would 
be tedious and unnecessary to specify in detail, it is noticeable that the 
Devapujar conducted the Devak ceremony. I have dealt elsewhere with the 
significance of Marat ha devaks, to which Sir James Campbell drew attention 
in the pages of the Bombay Gazetteer. Here it will suffice to mention that, 
at the installation and worship of the fruit, flower or other emblems consti- 
tuting the totemistic marriage guardian, the Devapujar ’s family provided the 
Suvasmi or happily married woman and the Mehuna or happy couple who had 
to be present on these occasions, and to whom presentations of new garments 
were made, as well as offerings of food. 

We pass now to officials of another description. 

Chief of these is the Bakshi, with his two assistants, the Jasud (messenger) 
and Bhaldar (usher). This officer combined the command of troops, both 
mounted and on foot, with duties resembling those of a military secretary to 
a modern* Viceroy or Governor. Thus, it was for him to summon distinguished 
visitors to court, and to arrange for their being properly seated according to 
precedence before the arrival of the King. He had similarly to marshal the 
King’s guests invited to meals, and to arrange for interviews when necessary. 
In order to discharge these duties satisfactorily the Bakshi was expected to 
ljeep full records of the various chiefs, inamdars and other landlords and to 
handle their emoluments. On the accession of a King it was prescribed that 
the Bakshi should receive a new costume, a silver tray with inkstand and 
pens, a shield, a sword and a horse. He also received two betel rolls daily, 
and four on feast days. These betel rolls were prepared by the Havaldar 
attached to the department, known as the Abdarkhana, in charge of the 
Abdar. Water and the usual utensils for the royal bath, as well as flowers, 
scents and unguents, are to be provided by the Abdar, who, with the Havaldar 
and others assisting, is to be rewarded with a gift of clothes and occasionally 
a goat for their consumption. It is specially laid down that when distin- 
guished visitors offer them gratuities in any form, these may be retained. 

Special interest centres on the Bhonsle Khanajad, among the remaining 
members of the royal establishment, for the King, as a.descendant of Sivaji, 
was of course a Bhonsle. The term Khanajad, i.e. bom in the house, is stated 
by Molesworth to cover the child of a slave. This explains the menial duties 
allotted to him. He is, it appears, to be present at court with the royal 
shoes and spittoon, presenting the shoes to the King as he rises from the 
throne. He is to take his turn with others watching over the King when 
asleep or in private consultation. He is to act as a spy on palace intrigues, 
keeping the King informed of any sinister movements. He is also in charge 
of the King’s sword. It is laid down that one of the Bhonsle family should 
always be included in the list of those invited to court banquets. On 



6 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


occasions the royal standards should be borne by the Bhonsle. As body : 
servants of the King the Bhonsles are enjoined to show the greatest respect to 
their lord, even more than is paid by the King to the family gods. New 
clothes are given them at the Dasara. 

Of the remaining officials the functions can readily be gathered from their 
names. Thus the Bhoi, known in the south as a Bedar, is the palanquin 
bearer who forms part of a team under a Naik. The Bhois were supplied 
with a pal or small sleeping tent, a sack for it, and a conveyance for these 
when on tour with the King. At Dasara time the palanquin was worshipped, 
i.e. propitiated, and the offerings made to it, including portions of a goat, 
divided among the Naik and the Bhois. At Divali they received sweetmeats. 

The Khasbhardar was the King's armourer, and had charge of the guns. 
He accompanied the King to the chase, and was given the usual offerings at 
the time of the Hindu festivals. With the royal weapons in his charge he 
was assisted by the standard bearers, who bore the flags and spears. These 
were described as Lagi, Bothati and Ita bearers. Special orders enjoin that 
the famous bhagwa Jhenda' should be kept unfaded by constant renewal, 
and the spears brightly burnished. The Ita bearer is entitled to a goat at the 
Dasara. The Tirandaj kept the royal bow and arrows. The Rakhtavan and 
Kalamdan were charged respectively with provision of the ink supplies and 
the royal pen and inkpot. 

Special interest attaches to the Chalebargirs, and their origin, Bargir, 
of course, was the name given to the Maratha mounted troops, who were 
provided with State mounts and equipment in contrast to the Silledars, whp 
brought their own. But the Marathas were also very widely known by the 
term Bargir , of which the origin is by no means clear. The Chalebargirs 
are, by tradition found in these records, reputed to be the descendants of 
certain orphans of Maratha village officers discovered by Shahu I and by him 
taken into the service of the court. By conferring lands on these orphans 
Shahu was able to arrange for their marriages with certain deshmukhs and 
patik At the Dasara the Chalebargirs were granted clothes and goats by 
Shahu; but the Satara Court reduced these gifts to merely a goat. 

Their duties were those of watchmen, particularly for the royal treasury 
or Jamdar Khana. 

It is interesting to note how the authority of Shahu sufficed in this case to 
set at rest any question of caste in regard to the orphan children. Their 
recognition as Marathas seems to have been rendered easier by the substantial 
dowries conferred on them at marriage. 

We come now to the court dancers and musicians, the Gunijana, Gondhali, 
Davaregosavi and Kalavant, who, with the cook, whose functions are obvious! 
complete our list of court retainers. The orders mention by name two Guravas 
or village priests, i.e. Avaji and Sakhu Gurava, whose duty is described as 
to be present in the devagriha or palace shrine at the time of worship and to 
hold charge of the musicians' instruments, i.e. drum, cymbals, vim, etc., as 
mil as to superintend the Kalavants or dancing girls. The Gondhalis, or * 



REFORMATION OF THE 8ANGHA AND REVIVAL OF BUDDHISM IN CEYLON 7 


itinerant musicians and singers, who are called after the OondhcU dance which 
they perform, are enjoined to attend every full moon day in order to dance 
before the throne. At the Dasara they are to receive two turbans for the 
player of the chaundake and a goat for the others. Oil and sweetmeats are 
to be given them at the Divali. The functions of the Davaregosavis, or 
itinerant musicians, are in all respects similar to those of the Gondhalis. 

More detailed rules are given for the conduct of the dancing girls. They 
are to attend the palace shrine daily, to dance before the gods, dressed in 
silk garments and wearing ornaments of gold. They take precedence, in their 
performance, of the other musicians. They are to attend when the King 
entertains guests to dine, and are then allowed to claim special remuneration. 
At all functions the presence of these Kalavants is regarded as auspicious. 
The Gurava, as we have seen, is responsible for keeping order among them and 
settling disputes. For the dances musical accompaniment is provided by the 
Gondhalis. At the Dasara richly embroidered saris are to be given to the 
women as well as a goat and portions of the food that has been offered to the 
gods. A special cake known as Kadakani , or a paper image of the same, is 
also conferred on one or more Kalavants on this occasion. For Divali, the 
usual rewards are prescribed. 


REFORMATION OF THE SANGHA AND REVIVAL OF BUDDHISM 
IN CEYLON IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 

By 

Sir D. B. Jayatilaka, K.B.E., M.A., LL.D., Bar-at-law 

The eighteenth century dawned upon a politically weakened and morally 
depressed Ceylon. The advent of the Portuguese, two centuries earlier, had 
opened an era of disaster which paved the way to the ultimate extinction 
of the Sinhalese kingdom after it had lasted for over twenty-three centuries. 
By intrigue, and by force of arms, the Portuguese succeeded in occupying 
the coastal districts and the rich and fertile plains of the Low Country, pushing 
the Sinhalese kingdom into the mountainous and inaccessible parts of the 
country. These invaders from the West were not only tyrannical as rulers, 
but also extremely bigoted in matters of faith. They considered it their duty 
to destroy Buddhism and substitute for it the form of Christianity to which 
they adhered. For this purpose they adopted the powerful weapons of perse- 
cution and corruption. The Vih&ras and Dagobas within their reach were 
ruthlessly pillaged and destroyed, the practice of Buddhism was forbidden 
within their territory, and the Bhikkhus were driven to seek refuge in the 
part of the country still under the Sinhalese king. Roman Catholicism held 
undisputed sway in the Low Country, where thousands of Sinhalese deserted 
their ancestral faith through fear of persecution or tempted by temporal 
advantages, and received baptism. The practice of Buddhism fell into disuse 



B. C. LAW VOLUME 


together with the national names, customs and manners. After y 
of tyrannical rule the Portuguese power disappeared from Ceylon in 1056, 
leaving an evil memory behind it. They were succeeded by the Dutch, who 
continued to hold the maritime districts. As rulers, they proved to be much 
more humane than the Portuguese, but they were no less bigoted. They 
persecuted the Roman Catholics, and totally prohibited the observance of 
that form of the Christian breed under severe penalties. There was then the 


strange spectacle of one Christian sect, persecuted by another, seeking 
protection from the ‘heathen’ Sinhalese king, who not only gave them shelter, 
but permitted them to practise their religion without let or hindrance. The 
descendants of these Roman Catholic refugees are still found in the districts 
where they were permitted to settle by the king. The proselytizing weapon 
the Dutch used was wholesale bribery. By ofFer of office and honour to the 
leading men, whole districts were induced to give up the national faith and 
join the Protestant Church. But when in 1796 the Dutch power fell after 
160 years of domination, the Church which they had reared on Sinhalese soil 
with so much effort, also collapsed with it. Though the efforts of the 
Portuguese and the Dutch to Christianize Ceylon ultimately proved colossal 
failures, the methods of conversion they pursued left upon the character of 
the people a deep evil impression which took several generations to eradicate. 

If the condition of the Low Country under the Portuguese and the Dutch 
was thus unfortunate in this respect, the state of affairs in that part of the 
country which still maintained its independence was equally desperate. 
During the 160 years the Portuguese held the maritime districts, they sought 
every opportunity to destroy the Sinhalese kingdom and bring the whole 
country under their sway. There was thus almost incessant fighting between 
the Sinhalese king and the foreign aggressor. The utmost the king and his 
people could do was to defend the frontiers by constant watchfulness. This 
task absorbed the whole attention and energy of the Government. Other 
duties, such as education, were perforce entirely neglected. Religious 
practices fell into disuse ; temples were deserted, and in course of time fell into 
decay. and ruin; and the Bhikkhus, undisciplined and as uneducated and 
ignorant as the laity, forgot their high calling and lived ignoble lives like 
ordinary householders. It was truly a period of national disaster. But just 
when things looked most hopeless there arose the man, who by heroic efforts, 
sustained for nearly half a century, rescued the national faith from extinction, 
and the people from the depth of ignorance and moral depression in which 
they had sunk. 

Saranankara, who effected this transformation and brought about a 

great and permanent revival of both religion and learning in the Island, was a 

scion of an aristocratic family, members of which held high office under the 

long. He was bom in 1698. Even as a child he was noted fo» his piety, 

purity and devotion to his faith, and his mind was from the beginning set 

towards the goal of religious life. So in his sixteenth year, he persuaded 

his parents, much against their will, to allow him to join the Order. But 
# 



MFOBMATIOX OF THE 8ANOEA AKV BATTVAl OF BFDDHWK IB CETL05 9 


what he saw within the Church filled his youthful mind with shame . The 
worldly and sinful lives which the Bhikkhus led disgusted him , and young 
and inexperienced as he was, he made a solemn resolve to devote his life to 
the task of reforming the Sangha and spreading education among the people. 
In order to undertake this work, he found a knowledge of the Dhamma and 
even of secular subjects of instruction indispensable. But no competent 
teachers were available to him, and there was a lack of books, dealing with even 
such elementary subjects as grammar. Yet with the scanty help he could 
get, he set about educating himself with such earnest zeal that in a few years 
he acquired a proficient knowledge of Sinhalese, Pali and Sanskrit, and a 
thorough mastery of the Tripitaka. 

In a short time he gathered round him a band of young men as zealous 
and enthusiastic as himself. Living simple and abstemious lives, begging 
their daily food, they traversed the country, teaching and preaching to the 
village folk, reviving their slumbering faith and influencing them to live 
in accordance with its tenets. Their reforming efforts rapidly spread through 
the country and soon Saranankara was acknowledged both by the king and 
the people as the virtual head of the Church and the recognized authority on 
Buddhism. He was not, however, prepared to rest contented with the 
success that had been achieved. There was yet another task to be accom- 
plished before the reformation of the Sangha could be considered as com- 
pleted. The solemn ceremony of Upasampada (Ordination) had been given 
up for many years, and the whole country could not muster five ordained 
Bhikkhus — the least number necessary for the ceremony. But nobody knew 
wherefrom Ordination could be obtained. The occupation of the sea-board 
by the invaders from the West had entirely interrupted the intercourse which 
the Sinhalese kingdom had previously had with other Buddhist lands. In 
this predicament Saranankara approached the king Narendrasinha (1706- 
1730) with the request that an embassy might be sent to Buddhist countries 
in Further India in order to obtain a number of Bhikkhus to reinstitute the 
ceremony of Ordination in Ceylon. Narendrasinha was not, however, pre- 
pared to entertain this proposal. Saranankara, though greatly disappointed 
by this refusal, yet did not lose heart. He continued with unabated vigour 
his work of training young Bhikkhus, who flocked to him in ever-increasing 
numbers, and spreading education among the people. When Narendrasinha 
died in 1739, and was succeeded by his brother-in-law, Bri Vijaya Rajasinha 
(1739-1747), Saranankara renewed his appeal. The new king was much more 
sympathetic than his predecessor and agreed to send an embassy to Further 
India. Two high officials of the court and five pupils of Saranankara, who had 
disrobed themselves for the purpose, were sent on this voyage of discovery. 
But a great disaster overtook the mission. Near Pegu their ship foundered 
and all on board, exoept four, perished, together with the costly presents they 
carried with them. The survivors after many adventures managed to go 
back to Ceylon with the sad news of the misfortune that had befallen the 
embassy. 



10 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


This was naturally a bitter disappointment to Saranankara, but it did 
not in any way deflect him from his set purpose. With the loyal support of 
his pupils and under the patronage of the king preparations were made to 
despatch another embassy. This time the mission reached Siam where they 
were welcomed by the king who readily agreed to send out Bhikkhus to 
Ceylon. But while preparations were being made, news was received of the 
death of Sri Vijaya Rajasinha. The king of Siam naturally declined to send 
out Bhikkhus to Ceylon until and unless the new king renewed the request. 
So the Sinhalese mission started on their return journey but only one of the 
envoys survived the voyage. 

Sri Vijaya Rajasinha was succeeded by his brother-in-law, Kirti Sri 
Rajasinha (1747-1780), a name inseparably associated with the success of 
Saranankara ’s great reformation movement. Under his patronage and with 
his unstinted support a third embassy was despatched which reached Ayuthia, 
then the capital of Siam, and was received with due honour by king Dhammika 
who showed himself most sympathetic towards the objects of the mission. 
It was decided to despatch a number of Bhikkhus to Ceylon under venerable 
Upali Maha Thera. In a great procession attended by the king and the whole 
court, the Siamese Bhikkhus and envoys and the Sinhalese ambassadors 
were escorted on board the ships. But again the voyage proved disastrous. 
On the sixth day one of the ships sprang a leak and began to fill rapidly. With 
great difficulty they succeeded in making for the port of Muanlakong, a province 
of Siam. The passengers landed and in due course the mission was recalled 
to Ayuthia where owing to various untoward circumstances they were obliged 
to remain a long time before final arrangements could be made for their 
departure. 

When the news got abroad that the Sinhalese ambassadors who had 
been away from their home on this mission for more than two and a half years 
had reached Trincomalee with a number of Siamese Bhikkhus, it caused great 
excitement and enthusiasm in the oourt circles and among the people. A 
deputation, headed by the Chief Minister, was at once sent to welcome the 
mission. The king himself met the Siamese Bhikkhus and envoys at the city 
boundary from where they were escorted in a royal procession through the 
streets of Kandy to the quarters specially prepared for them. The venerable 
Upali and the other Siamese Theras at once began to prepare the candidates 
for Ordination. On? the lull moon day of July that year there was held after 
a long period the ceremony of Ordination, when Saranankara and five other 
leading Bhikkhus were duly admitted to the higher grade of the Order. In 
the course of a few weeks several hundred novices were similarly ordained. 
Thus was consummated Saranankara’s work for the reformation of the 
Sangha. 

He was fifty-four years old when he received Ordination. Nat long after 
; he was with universal approval elected to the exalted office of Saftgha-r&ja, 
T%eee honours however made no change in his mode of life. He lived the 
v f same ample life continuing his labours and inspiring his pupils, by the noble 



XXffCAtfASlRA 


1] 


example he set, to work unselfishly for the, regeneration of the people and the 
revival of the national faith throughout the country. The response to his 
inspiring call was most heartening. His pupils spread in all parts of the Island, 
carrying the torch of learning and reviving the spirit of religion among the 
people. The temples that had fallen into decay were soon repaired, religious 
worship and practices were restored, and Ceylon once more deserved to be 
called a Buddhist country. 

Saranankara lived long enough to see the full fruition of his labours. 
To the end he maintained his mental vigour and activity, and the end came 
serene and beautiful in his eightyfirst year, when surrounded by his devoted 
pupils, he passed away, as he lay listening to the words of the Buddha, con- 
scious to the last. Thus ended the career of the great Reformer, the last of 
the heroes of Lafika, to whose labours must be attributed the present position 
of Buddhism and oriental learning in the Island. 


kaScanasara 

By 

Dr. H. W. Bailey, M.A., D.Phil. 

The story of Kaficanasara is included in the famous collection of tales, 
the Damamuka, which was made known from the Tibetan version by I. J. 
Schmidt in his book ’Dzangs-blun oder Der Weise und der Thor (1843), pp. 3-6. 
This Tibetan version was made from a Chinese text as Professor Takakusu 
showed in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1901. The correct name 
of the king Kaficanasara was, however, discovered only in the Uigur Turkish 
version by Professor F. W. K. Muller (Uigurica III, 1922, pp. 27ff., and 
p. 91). He there pointed out the name Kancansari ilig bag King K&ficanasara, 
and KanSasari (pp. 33 and 28), and from these forms was able to correct 
the spellings in the Chinese and Tibetan (Ka-na-M-ni-pa-li). The Chinese 
(with the Tibetan) and the Turkish versions of the tale diverge widely, but 
are based on the same original story. Since the pioneer work of Professor 
Schmidt in 1843 the history of this collection of stories has been elucidated 
in several articles . 1 

To these sources for the tale we can now add the Khotanese Jataka- 
stava. This text, which I have had occasion to quote frequently in recent 
articles, was published in facsimile in Codices Khotanenses (1938, Copenhagen). 
A transliterated text has been in print since 1941 but lies still unpublished in 
the Press. The J&taka-stava is a poem of praise in honour of the Buddha 

— • — ■ — 

1 Peiliot, T'oung Poo, 13 (1912), 355; 26 (1929), 256ff.; Joum. Asiai ., 1914, 2. 139; B. Laufer, 
T'oung Poo, , 17 (1916), 415-422; S. L4vi, Joum. Atiat 1925, 2. 305-332; Vladimirteov, Mongolian 
GpUtcUon of Pole# from iho PaMatantra (in Russian), 1925, p, 440 (for the Mongolian version 
of the Damamuka). 



12 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


for his powers of endurance illustrated from Jataka tales. A similar Sanskrit 
poem by Jnanaya^as was published from the Tibetan Tanjur in the Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental Studies, 9. 851fF. It is likely to have been a popular 
type of Buddhist composition. 

The story, of the usual Buddhist kind, relates that the king KMcanasara 
wished to learn a Buddhist stanza and promised any boon in return for know- 
ledge of it. A Brahman Rudraksa knew this stanza but claimed in return 
for it the right to bore holes in the king’s body and to kindle lamps in the 
holes. The king consented and being at the point of death was delivered by 
Ssakra. 

In the Khotanese text the tale is briefly alluded to in eight lines of verse 
(folio 31, recto 1 — verso 1). These verses read as follows: — 
kajenesarresta da brriye uvare 
suhav&ysai ttraiks§ vine jiye bemda 
cvai ttaramdare narrvamde pharake dai£§ % 
pilirrv$ stardamde rrum niyade hast$ ^ 
pasvade dl-mala tteramdare be6e *\ 
pasve ham bade khu hauske brramje pasuste 
ysema^amdai kain$ yudai duska kire 
3stavana bg,yse si me pakam drga * 

The translation of these verses may be given as follows : — 

Thou, being Kancanasara, enduredst, for love of the noble Dharma, 
grievous pains against thy life, thou, whose body they pierced in many places. 
They set pipes about in it and smeared fat thereon. They lighted the garland 
of lamps in the whole body. It burnt at once as bums a dry birch-tree. Thou 
wroughtest for the world difficult works. 0 enduring Buddha, therefor 
homage at thy feet from me. 

To justify this translation the following lexical commentary will suffioe : 

(1) kajenemrre Kancanasara , with kamjana -, which occurs in the 

Khotanese Buddhist text E (edited by E. Leumann) in the 
phrase kdmjani ysirrd kfificana gold. For He replaced by mj and 
later j, of. also pajdb$m pafio&bhijfta (see BS08 10. 905). In 
the KharofthI Dharmapada we find similarly paja pafica five. 

(2) da, older data, law is regularly used to render the Buddhist 

Dharma. 

(3) For suhavaysai read ahavdysai, 2nd sing, preterite, from Sanskrit 

adhivdsaya -, see BSOS 10. 904. 

(4) fiya life, is given with other forms in BSOS 10. 591. 

(5) mrrvdmde, 3rd plural preterite, from nirdy to burst; the participle 

*nirufa would later regularly become warm-. 

(8) daii% plaoe, older diid-, from Sanskrit. , 

(7) pxtirruva- pipe, is found in one other plaoe in Khotanese, in the 
medical text, the Siddhasftra (of which the facsimile is in Codices 
191 r 3 nUirHvi hd the pipe must ie 



TOT KAUJILtYA APV TOT MAT8YAYUBI&A 


13 


inserted into it, which translates the Tibetan gee' us bau-iin 
injeoting (?) with the clyster-pipe (Sanskrit neirika). 

(8) stardamde they spread, 3rd plural preterite of star-. From the 

present stem star - occurs the future participle stafdrla - to be 
spread. The past participle is starda- spread (rd represents an 
Old Iranian rn-t). 

(9) nlyade they smeared, with niya - from *ni-axta~ } participle of ang- 

to smear. The Tibetan text has snwm-gyis bskus-pa smearing 
with fat. 1 

(10) dimala garland of lamps. The Tibetan text has mar-me'i sfiinpo 

heart of the lamps; the Turkish uses yula torch. Khotanese 
dl-, diya- (see BSOS 10. 906) is from a Middle Indian form 
corresponding to Sanskrit dlpa - lamp. 

(11) brramje birch- tree. In the Siddhasara 13 r 4 bramja renders 

Tibetan stag -pa birch -tree. The older form of the Khotanese 
word is brumjd which in the text E 21. 42 seems rather to mean 
bark. 


THE KAUTILlYA AND THE MATSYAPURANA 

By 

MahAmahopAdhyiya P. V. Kane, M.A., LL.M., 

Advocate, High Court, Bombay 

Intensive study of the Arthasastra of Kautilya has been going on for 
about thirty -five years. The controversies about its date and authorship 
cannot be said to have been set at rest. Much work remains to be done as 
regards the relation of the Kautillya to the Mahabharata, the Puraijas and 
other branches of Sanskrit Literature. Recently while reading the Matsya- 
pur&fla I noticed a very close correspondence between the Kautillya I. 20 and 
21 and Chap. 219 of the Matsyapur$ija. Some of the most striking passages 
of the Matsyapurajia that agree with the very words of the Kautillya are 
noted below and such words of the Pura^a are underlined. 


Artha&stra I. 20 

(1) * ftm- 

* vwf* i 

(2) Wl* 


Matsya 219 

5. 

vipbnw ^ nfw i 

fliigfoii viw w i 7.^ 



14 


B. 0. PAW VOLUME 


Arthat&stra I. 20 
(3) m' bt 

KITJt srtafa i firvwrt 

wrafa i sanrfs ^14^1 «w i (•nfl 
i wsftuiiifoji?) firc^ju i 


I. 21 

(4) 5 

TOW*: fiwfli WTftWTW ITO 

im ggo i ^TWfalfalJffl+H^Yi: (tu: v.l.) 


(5) 



’nfrogw© i 


situate* 


(6) ^U*rwn55»liW 1TWIBTOW*- 

q dS l ff ftgn w ft I 

(7) ^fT«it j?h[W »z^ri afifenw *e i 

(8) W )T « l fa * H r n f UT^5rh%T!TT 
( Myiuf WH^ y tT T ) 


Matsya 219 

focggfa f %! mp^q v w i 
fawfa * *Ptt UTfa qftfyreq UOT »SU | 
irfw: «5Mfa TPT5I »zreT*w ffwfg I 
>K*fvn^fa gsretf * » 
fdfttiifci UTW«T OTfallT 339 I 

. . 41*1 0 TTW *T 3^R4 I 

— verses 18-21. 
^rwrert garawrcr o^Tt 'o fav’t'era i 
f4K^ O W ^ ^ 31 VR?t^ I 
fWTT: 3sW$«lir<fiW«ll I 
ii3rt4 spit I 

1? jfat 3 tot wnra *su I 

— verses 11-13. 

M r4p!<l"ij 43?) 3f?B n».<iit4n* I 

T^STfsrcnrw g w grte^wfina^ i 

15. 

graarei g yw «unnt gyftgjjQ i 24. 

ggar ufairif gr refat u ftirfo i 

29. 

ifryni i znfNt ■n Haqf^ r iw rT i 

30. 


It is not necessary to multiply examples. It may be argued by some that 
both works might have borrowed from another work. But there are other 
considerations from which it follows that the Matsyapur&ga is based on the 
Artha&stra of Kautilya and on no other work. In the first place it has to 
be noticed that the Matsyapur&pa adds many details to the meagre statements 
of the Arthaftstra. In the story of Indra and Diti, where it is narrated that 
Indra out Diti’s embryo into 49 parts, the Matsyapur&pa (7. 63) makes TnHm . 
say ‘this evil deed was perpetrated by me by relying on (the Aethods pro- 
pounded in) the Artha&stra’. 1 In chap. 272. 22 the Matsyapurfipa sp ea ks 

' ISiZS.** 1 *™ fj* Wn l 1 W 7. S3. (AnaadUnma ed.) 



B0DHI8ATTVA AVALOKITB^VARA IN CEYLON 


15 


in a prophetic vein that Kautilya will uproot the sons of Mahapadma and then * 
the earth will come to the Mauryas. 1 Therefore it appears that the Matsya- 
purana knew of the Arthasastra of Kautilya and its last verse. 2 

The date of the Matsyapurana is far from being certain. It is clear that 
the Matsyapurana had attained to the position of a very authoritative work 
on Dharmasastra before the tenth century A.D. The Mit. on Yajnavalkya 
I. 297 quotes all the nine verses of chapter 94 of the Matsyapurana as regards 
the images of the nine grahas. The Rajadharmakanda of the Kalpataru 
(about 1120 A.D.) quotes hundreds of verses from the different chapters of 
the Matsyapurana such as chapters 215-219, 253-257, etc. Similarly Apararka 
quotes hundreds of verses from the chapters of the Matsyapurana on the 
Mahadanas. In my opinion for reasons which cannot be set out here the 
Matsyapurana cannot be later than the sixth century A.D. 


BODHISATTVA AVALOKITElSVARA IN CEYLON. 

. By 

Dr. S. Paranavitana, Archaeological Commissioner, Ceylon 

In my paper, Mahayanism in Ceylon (Ceylon Journal of Science , Section 
G., Vol. II, pp. 35-71), I have shown that the Mahayana Bodhisattva Ava- 
lokite^vara is still worshipped by Sinhalese Buddhists under the title of Natha 
Mid that he is referred to as LokeSvara Natha in Sinhalese inscriptions of the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Though there is ample evidence to prove 
that the cult of this Bodhisattva was once very popular in Ceylon, I was unable, 
it the time I wrote the above paper, to quote any Ceylonese inscription or 
literary work in which he is mentioned by the best known of his many appella- 
tions, AvalokiteSvara. Since then, I have discovered the Sanskrit rock 
inscription at Tiriy&y* of about the seventh century, in which the Bodhisattva 
AvalokiteSvara is eulogized, and I have also recently come across four Sanskrit 
itanzas praising this Bodhisattva in the Vrttaratnakam-pancika , written in 
Ceylon in the fifteenth oentury. 

Before I quote these stanzas, a few words may be said about this work 
md its author. The Vfttaratnahara is a well-known work on Sanskrit prosody 
vhich was much studied in Ceylon, as it was in India, and a very lucid com- 
nentary (paftcikd) to this text was written in Ceylon during the reign of 
Par&kramab&hu VI (1412-1468) by R&macandra, a Brahmin who came to 

1 ** fr*fa *** * fo *fr : I 

Hirr wff Www mft tfNfaarfawftr i mqr 272. 22 . 

* tn WTfi W WW W W**TWIWT * I 

IN wrofiuc I winW last verve. 

* JSpigraphia Zoylanioa, Vol. IV, pp. IM-160 and 312-819. 




16 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


this island from Bengal. In the colophon to the Vrttaratndkara-pancikd, R&ma- 
candra states that he was bom in a village named Viravatika. His father was 
Ga^apati of the Katyayana-gotra and his mother Dev! of the Bharadvaja- 
gotra. He had two brothers named Halayudha and Ahgirasa. We do not 
know the reason why this learned Brahmin migrated from Bengal to Ceylon, 
but on his arrival in this island he studied the Buddhist scriptures from Sri 
Rahula Sthavira, the head of the Sinhalese Buddhist Church at that time, 
who was equally great as a Sinhalese poet, as a master of the Pali Tripitaka 
and as a Sanskrit scholar. 

Ramacandra espoused Buddhism and, in order to glorify his new faith, 
composed the Bhakti-iataka , also known as Bauddha-iataka, , in which he 
extols the Buddha and his doctrine in a hundred elegant Sanskrit stanzas. 
The Sinhalese king Parakramabahu VI, who was himself distinguished for his 
learning, was so pleased with this work that he conferred the title of, 
‘Bauddhagama-cakravarttin’ and other favours on Ramacandra. Sri Rahula, 
Ramacandra ’s teacher in Buddhist lore, spent most of his life at Totagamuva, 
on the south-western sea-board of the island and it may be assumed that 
Ramacandra himself lived here for some time. In the Sinhalese literature 
of the period, Totagamuva figures as a seat of Natha (Avalokitegvara) and 
R&macandra must have himself become a devotee of that Bodhisattva when 
he espoused Buddhism. $ri Rahula, in almost all his works, expresses his 
devotion to Natha. 

In his comments on the Vrttaratnakara , Ramacandra gives a full stanza 
to illustrate each of the metres explained in that text. The great majority 
of these stanzas are his own compositions and have as their subject the praise 
of the Buddha and his doctrine, and panegyrics on King Parakramabahu 
and 6ri Rahula Sthavira. Four stanzas are addressed to Avalokite^vara. 

In illustrating the metre called Upasthita, Ramacandra gives this stanza : — 
Samsara-maharpava-madhya-magnan = 
Uddharttum=ahar=nisam==ihate yak— 

Mad-dufekham = apakurutad = dayabdhir = 

Nathdb sa satam= Avalokitesab 1 1| 

‘May Avalokite6vara, the Refuge of the virtuous and the Ocean of Com- 
passion, remove my suffering — he who endeavours, day and night, to deliver 
beings plunged in the midst of the great sea of sarhsdra.’ 

The stanza which illustrates the metre called Ekarupa is as follows:— 

P&y &t= tvam = A valokite^ var o ‘yaih 
Hina dina-jane ‘nukampako ‘yam | 

Yasy=&bhuc= oharad= indu-koti-bhfisa 
Trailokyam mahasft payab-payodhib 2 |j 

1 Vjitaratndkara -parteikd, edited by the Rev. C. A. Sllaakandha MahA-Stt^vira, Ninjaya- 
tfgar Pfeeos, Bombay, 1026, p. 39. This and the stanzas which follow are given as they appear 
in the printed text. Manuscripts of this work, which are found only in Ceylon, are in a very 
corrupt state, mid the texts may therefore admit of amendment. 

* VrUaraif%Skara-pafyoikd, op . oU. t p. 39. 




B0DHI8ATTVA AVALOKITE^VAEA IN CEYLON 


17 


- ‘May this Avalokitetfvara, who has compassion for the lowly and the poor 
folk, proteot thee — AvalokiteSvara by whose lustre, equal to the radiance 
of millions of autumnal moons, the three worlds appeared like the Ocean of 
Milk.* 

Another stanza eulogizing Avalokite^vara is given in illustrating the 
metre called Pramadanana: — 

6arad-indu-kunda-tu§ara-hara-pavrra-parada-sundaram 
J apamalika-mani-padma-pariim = a£esa -loka-hitaisinam | 
Jina-maulim==adigurum jatamukutMi-bhii^na-bhu^itam 
Prai^amami samprati sampadam = Avalokite^ varam = varam 1 [| 

‘I now worship Avalokite6vara, the Lord of Prosperity, who is as beauti- 
ful as the autumnal moon, or the jasmine flower, or snow, or the garland of 
pearls, or the lance, 2 * or quicksilver, who holds in his hands a rosary and a 
jewel-lotus, who wishes well to the whole world, who has, as his crown, a 
figure of the Conqueror (i.e., the Buddha), who is the foremost teacher, and 
who is adorned with ornaments like the jafa-makuta* etc/ 

The following stanza, which illustrates a variety of the Dandaka metre, 
also praises Avalokite^vara: — 

Pratidinam = A valokite^ varo Natha e§a kriya loka-raksakari sarva- 
vedi=ti 

V idadhad — Anupamab sambhramam tyajyase ‘tas tato hina-din= 
anukampl— ti vijfiaya | 

&aranam = aha m = upaimi prabhum tarn madlya-pramodalayam 
Bodliisatvagraganyam nu 

Vrajata sapadi yfiyam ca sarve janafc svarga-moksarthinas^tam 
gurum siddhaye s&dhu 4 1| 

‘The all-knowing and the incomparable Lord AvalokiteSvara, assuming 
that this action affords protection to the world, daily removes fear; hence, 
having known that he is compassionate towards the lowly and the poor, I go 
for refuge to that Lord, who is the abode of my rejoicing, and who is indeed 
the foremost among Bodhisattvas. May you and all people who desire heaven 
and final beatitude go at onoe for the accomplishment of your aims to that 
Teacher. May it be well ! ’ 

It is doubtful whether AvalokiteSvara was a popular deity in Bengal in 
the fifteenth century, so that Ramacandra could have known his name before 
he came to Ceylon. In Sinhalese literary works of that period, he is, as has 
been stated, referred to as Natha, and in inscriptions as LokeSvara Natha. 
He is described as a Bodhisattva whose characteristic was compassion towards 

1 Vrtktrotndkara-patoikd, op. © it., p. 67. 

2 This is the meaning of pavira, though I do not know whether the use of this word is appro- 
priate to the altuhk&ra. It might be a misreading. 

1 The reading jafd^mukufa in the printed text has perhaps to be changed to ja^d-makufa. 

4 VfUarcUndkara-paHoikd, op. cit. The construing of the first two lines of this stansa 
as, they are found in the printed text presents difficulties and the translation offered is only 
tentative. . 




18 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


beings. But these literary references, in themselves, are rather vague and 
do not show that the Sinhalese Buddhists of the fifteenth century had 
a clear notion of Natha and the commanding position he occupied in 
Mahay&na Buddhism, which as a separate school was then non-existent in 
Ceylon. The modem Buddhists of Ceylon think that Natha is the same as 
Maitreya, but in the fifteenth century it was dearly understood that he was 
a different Bodhisattva. If, as is likely, R&macandra had no knowledge of 
AvalokiteSvara before he came to Ceylon, the references to that BodhiBattva 
in the Vfttaratndkara-pancika show that the Bodhisattva was in the fifteenth 
century known in this island by his most familiar name and that much of the 
distinctive characteristics attached to him in the heyday of Mahayanism were 
till then ascribed to him by the Sinhalese Buddhists of that period. 

These references in the Vrttaratmkara-pancika lend further support to 
my identification of the god Natha with Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva. 


THERAVADIN AND SARVASTIVADIN DATES OF THE NIRVANA 

By 

Db. E. J. Thomas, M.A., D.Lxtt. 

The study of Buddhism, it has been said, is less than a oentury old, yet 
it is already paved with dogmas. One of these dogmas is the date of the death 
of the Founder, and this is supposed to be fairly certain. Charpentier in 
the Cambridge History of India says, 

‘There is now a general agreement among scholars that Buddha died 
within a few years of 480 B.C.’ 

Charpentier himself preferred the date 478 or 477 B.C., and the calculation 
of F. W. Thomas in the same work results in 488 B.C., but these and other 
slight variations merely indicate some unimportant difference in reckoning. 
The kernel of the evidence, as is well known, depends on the number of years 
between Buddha’s death and the coronation of Aioka, and this is given by the 
Ceylon Chronicles as 218 years. To the editor of the Cambridge History this 
was so little of a problem that he assumed 483 B.C. without a qualm. 

Yet in the same volume (p. 171) Rhys Davids was allowed to write: 

‘If the date for Asoka is placed too early in the Ceylon Chronicles, 
can we still trust the 218 years whioh they allege to have elapsed from 
the commencement of the Buddhist era down to the time of Asoka ? If so, 
we have only to add that number to the correct date of Asoka, and 
thus fix the Buddhist era [the date of Buddha’s death] at 483 B.C. or 
shortly after. Of the answer to this question, there can, Iethink, be no 
doubt. IFe con not.' 

So little did RhyB Davids trust this date that at the time when he first made 
the statement he held 412 B.C. to be the most reliable. He referred to other 

s 



THERAVlDIN AND SAEVlSTIVlDIN DATES OF THE NIRVjffA 19 

traditions, but merely declared that each of them was open to still more 
serious objection. If that is the case then we are left in the air with a date 
that can neither be tested nor verified, and it is a mere euphemism to call it 
a working hypothesis. Any of the other dates would be equally workable as 
long as there are no other contemporary dates to contradict them. 

Yet there is one source of evidence which Rhys Davids and others have 
ignored, or of which they were unaware — that is, the testimony of the Buddhists 
and others in India. The Indian Buddhists were still in flourishing existence 
when the Ceylon Chronicles were composed, and they had suffered no such 
break as the transference of the religion to Ceylon may have caused. Perhaps 
the most important of these schools was the Sarvastivadin, and their accounts 
put A6oka one century, not two, after Nirvana. Another striking fact not 
generally realized is that instances of this dating have also survived in Ceylon 
accounts. But it will be well if the treatment of the Ceylon evidence by 
modem scholars is first considered. 

Rhys Davids was the first to examine the Chronicles in detail, and he drew 
his conclusions chiefly from the Dipavamsa. He set aside the Ceylon calcu- 
lation of §44 or 543 B.C. for the Nirvana, for that date would put ASoka’s 
coronation in 326 B.C., the very time when Alexander was still in India, and 
when Chandragupta had not yet achieved his conquests. Rhys Davids’ 
calculation of the series of theras in the Dpv. led him to the conclusion that 
only 150 years had elapsed between Buddha’s death and Asoka’s ooronation. 
But the series of kings is 58 years longer. This series of kings begins with 
Bimbisara , Ajataiatru, Uddyin and Munda (with Anuruddha), so far agreeing 
with the Sarvastivadin list in Divydvadana , p. 369, and for the first three with 
the Jain list, which gives Aj&ta6atru’s name as Kfinika. Then in the 
Chronicles follow Nagaddsaka , Susundga , Kaldsoka and his ten sons. There 
may be said to be agreement also for the last four kings, Nanda (or the 
Nandas ), Chandragupta , Bindusdra , and Aioka , except that Divy . omits 
Bindus&ra. But none of the Indian lists include the Susun&gas, who, even in 
the Mahdvarpsa, were a new dynasty. Yet they are not a Ceylon invention, 
for the PuraijLas recognize them, but put the whole &iiun&ga dynasty before 
Bimbisftra. The names are &iiundga, Kdkavarna , K$emadharman, and 
Kfatraujas. This change of order Rhys Davids accepted. The 6i6un§ga 
dynasty he held was inserted in its present place in the Chronicles in order 
to fill up the 218 years. This seems likely enough. We know of contemporary 
dynasties in the Pur&$as that have been treated as successive. In any case 
the plaoe of the dynasty in the Chronicles cannot be accepted without query, 
when all the other authorities, even the Indian Buddhist list, omit it. 

Rhys Davids’ calculations were attacked by Bfihler, who in the Indian 
Antiquary, 1887 (reprinted as Thru new edicts of Aioka. Second notice , 
Bombay, 1878) aocuaed him of misunderstanding the method of calculating 
the succession of theras in the Dpv. Biihler claimed to have made the list 
Consistent, but he had to emend the text in several places and add twenty. 



20 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


years to the ages of the theras, so that the oldest was 106 and the youngest 
not less than 84. This hardly made the result more plausible. 

Buhler’s main purpose was to substantiate the figure 218, but his two 
main arguments have broken down entirely. One was the then recently dis- 
covered edicts of Sahasram and Rupnath. In both of them the figure 266 
occurs. Biihler held that this was an era dating from the death of Buddha. 
There is no mention of an era, and the word vivdsa, which Biihler took to mean 
the ‘departure’ of Buddha from life, and Rhys Davids the departure from 
home at his Renunciation, is now interpreted as the absence on tour of Aioka 
for 266 nights. Biihler’s other argument depended on Bumouf’s assertion 
that in a Northern Sanskrit text A6oka is said to have come to the throne 
200 years after the Nirvana. This was the Avadana fiataka (II, p. 200), but 
now that the text has been published it is possible to see that the word in 
question, dvitiyam , belongs to a previous verse, and then a new narrative * 
in prose starts: varsasataparinirvrte Buddhe bkagavati Pataliputre nagare 
rdjdioko rajyam karayati. These are almost the same words as occur several 
times in the Divyavaddna, and they show that the most important Buddhist 
sect in India, like other Indian authorities, knew nothing of the longer period. 

But there is evidence also in Ceylon works for the shorter period. The 
Dlpavamsa, especially in its earlier chapters, is known to be made up of separate 
accounts taken from the pordnd and other sources. Sometimes it gives an 
event two or three times over or quotes a passage in prose. One of these 
disjointed passages (I, 24, 26) is given as a prophecy by Buddha, where he is 
made to say that four months after the Nirvana the first Council will take 
place; 118 years thereafter the third Council for the purpose of advancing 
the teaching : 

parinibbute catumdse hessati pathamasamgaho , 
tato par cm vaeeasate vassan' aftharasdni ca 
tatiyo samgaho hoti pavaUatthaya sdsanam. 

That is the date given in four of the MSS. 

Three, however, insert dve before vassasate. Which is the original reading ? 
Oldenberg following the best MSS. accept 118 as correct, and this is made 
practioally certain by the fact that two of the MSS. that read dve have had this 
word inserted later, no doubt to make the statement conform with the calcu- 
lation finally adopted. Oldenberg supposed that a Sloka had been omitted 
referring to the second Council, but evidently none of the scribes knew of it 
whan they attempted to improve the passage. This would not be the only 
instanoe in which the Dipammsa has not harmonized its statements, and in 
any case neither 118 nor 218 agrees with the final calculation that the third 
Council was held 236 years after Nirvapa. 

There is another passage in the Dipavarma (V, 56-69) which harmonizes 
with this, though in itself it cannot be called conclusive evidence. Like the 
former it is in the form of a prophecy, and it begins with almost the same 
words as in I, 26 : 



THERAVlDIN AND SARVlSTIVlDIN DATES OF THE NIRVltfA 


21 


anagate vassasate va&sdn' atfhdrasdni ca 
upaji88ati so bhikkhu samano pafirupako. 

It goes on to state that this bhikkhu is Tissa, who will destroy the heretics, 
and A6oka will reign in Pataliputta. The passage is quite disconnected, and 
no indication is given to indicate who is the prophet. The natural inference 
would be that as Buddha prophesied the third Council, so he prophesied this, 
and it would put ASoka 100 years after the Nirvana, a conclusion quite im- 
possible to accept if the other dates in the Chronicles are correct. Accordingly 
Oldenberg in a note says that the prophecy was made by the theras of the second 
Council. But this appears to be entirely Oldenberg’s own supposition. It is 
omitted by the author of the Mahavamsa. 

Yet another instance has been pointed out by Kern (Man., p. 108) in 
which the shorter reckoning seems to have survived. It is in the Saddham- 
masamgaha, a work which appears to have been compiled from the pordnd 
much in the same way as the Dipavafrnsa, but the distinction between the 
quoted passages and the author’s own words is clearer, for the author adds 
his own matter in prose. In the prose of VI, 5 (P.T.S. ed., p. 47) he says that 
Dutthagapiini became sole king in Lafikadipa in the 376th year after Nirv&na, 
but in the accompanying verse, which he distinctly attributes to the pordnd, 
it is one century less : 

Sambuddhaparinibband dvlsu vassasatesu ca 
chasattaty atikkantesu rajdhu Dufthagamini. 

Here too the author has been using pordnd matter, such as existed before the 
scheraatization of the Chronicles came into play. 

We thus have two clear cases where Ceylon authors are quoting other 
authorities, and where they appear to have preserved the Indian tradition of 
100 years. In the SarvastivSdin tradition 100 years is preserved in the Divyd- 
vaddna and the Avaddna Pataka, and the Sarvastivadin list of kings agrees 
with the Purapas and Jains in omitting the Si^unagas. The * agreement among 
scholars*, of which Charpentier speaks, is one based on the Ceylon authorities 
alone, for the additional evidence that Buhler thought he had discovered is 
non-existent. But where are the scholars who are in agreement, except 
in the sense that others have accepted the statements of a few investigators ? 
And of what value is that ? We have seen what Rhys Davids* conclusion 
was, and his doubt about any positive decision is shown where he said: 

‘It is a long step from saying that the succession of Theras is not 
necessarily untrustworthy, or even that it is probably correct, to saying 
that it is entirely conclusive.* 

Biihler’s words were equally cautious and non-committal: 

‘I do not see that there is at present any possibility of saying whether 
the belief prevailing in Anoka’s time, that between the Nirv&i^a and the 
king’s coronation upwards of 218 years had elapsed, deserves implicit 
credence or not.* 



22 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


We can now say 
in Aloka’s time. 


that there is no evidence for saying that the belief prevailed 
We only know that it prevailed some five centunes later 


in Ceylon and in Ceylon alone. 

These are the real conclusions of scholars who have devoted most study 
to the subject. Neither of them was willing to risk a positive statement, and 
their conclusions were certainly not those for which Charpentier claimed that 
there was a general agreement. Further than this it can be pointed out that 
even so no general agreement exists. In 1932 Dr. Tokumyo Matsumoto 
published a work on the Prajnaparamita literature, i in which he quoted and 
rejected Jacobi’s view that the year of Buddha’s death was 486 B.C., and his 
following words (rendered into English) are : 

‘I think that I must attach myself to Professor Ui, who on the basis 
of extensive and not one-sided material has calculated the year 386 for 
Buddha’s death. It would take me too far to discuss his arguments here . 
in full, but I hope in a not too far distant time to be able to set them before 
specialists and also the material that he has used/ 

Dr. Matsumoto ’s actual words are ‘in abschbarer Zeit,’ and if this time 
at present is not easily discernible, we may at least hope for a discussion some 
day which will remove any tendency to dogmatic slumber. 


ON THE HISTORY OF ] IN PALI 

By 

Dr. S. M. Katre, M.A., Ph.D., Poona 

Among the Middle Indo -Aryan languages Pftli is unique in adhering to 
the tradition of the Rgveda according to which every -d(h)- 1 2 * is pronounced 
without occlusion and represented in writing by a separate symbol for -1(h)-. 
In non-Rgvedic and classical Sanskrit and in other MIA languages -d(h)- 
reappears, in a large measure due to the influence of the morphological system, 
and to a smaller extent also because the speakers of these languages had 
•4(h)’ as an occlusive. On the other hand certain of these phonemes, not 
influenced by either of these conditions, subsist in classical Sanskrit and MIA 
as -Z-. 8 The written tradition on which we have to depend solely for this ancient 
period is not quite definite on the values of these phonemes in the different 
vocables where they appear. Although even from the most ancient Br&hmi 
separate characters exist for \ and l North Indian orthography loses these 
distinct signs after the fifth century a.d. 4 * On the other hand the southern 

1 Die Prajfl&p&ramitd-Litcratur. Bonner Orientaliituche Studien . Stuttgart 1932. 

* This symbol will indicate both the aspirate and the simple stop in the subsequent 

discussion. 

* Jules Blocs, L'indo-arym, pp. 54-55. 

# * Xtfftpt’B, JBAS, 1911, pp. lOSlfif.; Antidoron, pp. 294ff. 




ON THE HISTORY OF | IN TlU 


28 


orthography, influenced by the existence of / in these legions, has preserved 
both symbols, and as we come down we notice the increasing use of fin the 
place of l; in fact most South Indian MSS. of Prakrit passages invariably show 
this f, and even with respect to Sanskrit vocabulary for which the oral tradition 
was never waning, this frequent supplanting is witnessed to a disconcerting 
degree. 

The gradual disappearance of the characters for l and \h may be best 
seen from the fact that while - dh - and -$y- are preserved in the palm-leaf MS- 
of A6vagho§a’s Kalpan&manditika, -d- is invariably represented by -J-. 1 In 
the Junagadh inscription of Rudradaman, the only forms where -d- is repre- 
sented by l- are ppramli(bhir) y - pafikatvat and vyafa- for which the classical 
forms already show l. 2 It is not possible to say with precision as to the time 
and locality, of the complete disappearance of the phoneme for even as late 
as 634-36 a.d. the Aihole inscription of PulikeSin II shows J in personal names 
like Kalidasa , A]upa~, etc. 8 In other records both forms occur side by side. 
Moreover it is also not possible to say whether the orthography reflects the 
real conditions of speech in the particular locality when such forms occur. 

In his very interesting paper ‘Zur Geschichte des 1 im Altindischen’ 
LUders has shown some of the obvious mistakes of orthography so far as Pfili 
is concerned such as dalidda -. 4 But it is fortunate that Pali texts, written 
principally in Simhalese, Burmese and Siamese scripts, have preserved for us 
a much better state of affairs. In fact the number of vocables which show 
both l and l are extremely limited ; and of these one of the two can be shown 
to be a false form with the help of comparative philology ; or if our material 
is sufficiently reliable we can see the influence of northern MIA forms with a 
l in the place of the normally expected On the nature of the signs for { 
and ]h nothing further can be added to what LttDERS has written in the above 
paper. 

Geiger has shown that P&li -J- goes back either to OIA 4~ or -d- which 
was oertainly cerebralized in the pre-Pali stage, and occasionally in a limited 
number <?f examples to -n- * Initially the d- of the bases Jdah- and Jdami - ' 
are cerebralized and become in P&li Jdaha- and Jdasa - respectively. Jdaha- 
when combined with prepositions gives us a base J-ldha- as we shall see 
below. Similarly -jf A- results from -d&-. 

In the sequel I am considering all the forms containing or -fh- as cited 
in the Pali-English Dictionary (PED) of Rhys Davids and Stede published 
by the Pali Text Society, as supplemented by the Critical Pali Dictionary 
(CPD) of Trenokner of which as yet only ten fascicules have been published. 
In view of the present nature of the paper, with limited space, I have omitted 
a consideration of the personal names, as recorded now in Malalasekbra’s 
Dictionary with the large corrigenda and agenda whioh Dr. B. C. Law has 
published ill his excellent review of this work.® The treatment is divided 


. i AnMoron, p. 296. 1 »&. * P- 297. * tf., p. 295. 

* Pati LitmUur und Sprache , J42 (pp. 58-9), (43 (p. 59). • lnd4an OWNff % 



24 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 

into two main sections : (1) definite instances of -d(h )- : -1(h)- correspondence, 
with a supplement of the correspondence -}- < -n- (and of -l- < (2) cases 

which do not fall within the above category according to our present state of 
knowledge. It has not been possible for the writer to verify all the citations 
from the principal sources utilized by him; the editing of PSh texts, with a 
few exceptions, is still in an unsatisfactory state of affairs and the remarks of 
those critical scholars Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith, deploring that 
the list of their corrections and additions exceeds 500 entries for the first 234 
pages of their Critical Pali Dictionary, resulting from a retesting of the com- 
mentaries and a closer analysis of classical passages,* indicates the necessity 
of the comparative study of Pali vocables linguistically as well as text-critically. 

I. OLA -d- > Pali -l- 

1. aggala ‘latch-pin, cross-bar’; ‘gusset’; and cmpds °-phalaka -, • 

°-suci, etc. [< OIA *argadah seen in Sat. Br. sdrgadah ; elsewhere Sk. Pk. 
aggala-.] 

2. ala-, ‘the claw of a crab ’. [< *ada- from *rda -,* cf. Gk. drdis ‘point 
and Sk. alarn ‘sting in the tail of a scorpion (or a bee) ’.] 

3. aldra-, ‘i.e. visdla, only with reference to eyelashes ’ ; a akkhiH — vimia- 
netta; ° -pataka = bakafo-8dmyata-pakhuma\ °-bhamuka = visala-akkhiganda- ', 
of. also aldra- ‘thick, massed’, etc. Keen explains the word aldra as ‘bent, 
crooked, arched’. [Connection with OIA uddra-: Pa. ufara- doubtful, but 
see udaraksa-. Possibly < arada- ‘having high horns’ : *ord[a- with meta- 
thesis of r and f. If the reading is v\dra- in the same significance, compare 
Vedic urand- ‘making broad or wide, extending, increasing’, in which case we 
have > -{-.] 

4. d]akd ‘thorn, sting, dart, spike’; ‘peg, stake, post’. [< *ddaka-, cf. 
*a<ja- above. 8 ] 

6. dfi ‘dike, embankment’. [Cf. Sk. ddih Npr. of an aquatic bird : Pa. 
ali 1 ‘a kind of fish ’.] 

6. afavaka-, dfavika-, afavi* ‘forest-dweller’. [<Sk. dfavika- : MIA 
atjaviya-.] 

7. tifara- ‘great, eminent, excellent, superb, lofty, noble’; °-«o, -i&\ 
— an-nlaratd ‘insignificance’, anu\ara -, °-i fco, °-tta; ano\arika- ‘subtle’; stfjara- 
‘magnificent’. [Geigeb §43, 2 < Sk. ud-ard-. Pischel §245 (p. 172) quotes 
Amg. urala-, oraliya- as from Sk. ud-ard- as an illustration of the change of 
■d- :4- ( an d in Mg. -1 -) ; but it is evident that Amg. urala- < *urafa- < OIA 
*ur&4a- which is probably this udard- with metathesis ami oerebralization of 
d after ra in *t irdda-.\ 

8. ufu ‘lunar mansion’. [Sk. udu fh. ‘a star’, n. ‘lunar mansion’ : Pk. 
u4u, De4I ulu-khanda-, ‘ meteor ’, ‘fire-brand’.] 

- - - ----- A— - 

i Page xxvii on Preface to OPD , vol. I, part 5.' 

* LfrDEBS, Ali und Ala in Festschrift Ernst Kuhn, pp. 313*4. • f6., pp. 317£f. 

* Sjrlvain Msri, Observations sur une langue pr4oanonique du Bouddhism, JA, dixttme 

tome 20, 495-512, gives dfavai<a(avt. 


ON THE HIBTOBT OF f IS FlU 20 

9. nfumpa ‘raft, boat’. [8k. utfupa nrn. 'raft or Boat’: Pk. udupa-. 
uduva-. For the nasal in Pali see Geigeb §43. J 

10. ela-(ka)- ‘ram, wild goat’; °-gal& ‘the plant Cassia Tora’ (cf. Sk. 
edagajah). [Sk. eda(ka)- m.; Pk. eda-, edakka-, edaya, ela-, elaga-, elaya-.] 

11. elaka- n. ‘threshold ’ (]). [Cf. Sk. lex. ed&ka- mn., edokam ‘a shrine ’.] 

12. olumpika ‘belonging to a skiff’. [Cf. vlumpa- above; BSk. odum- 
pilca-, olumpika-\ < Sk. audupa -, audupika -, Pacini 4.2.75.] 

13. kakkhaia- ‘rough, hard, harsh’. °-td> 0 -ttam, °4ya-. a-kakkha-Ja - . 
[Sk. kakkhafa- ‘hard, solid’: Pk. kakkhada -, kakkhala For the change > 
dr see Geiger 38 (p. 56) through an intermediary *-d-. The examples cited 
are: khela-, cakkavala-, phalika-, Alavi and Lofa-.J 

14. kanda$a- ‘Npr. of an esculent water-lily ’. Cf. also the J-form kandala- 
‘Npr. of a plant with white flowers’. [Sk. lex. kandatah ‘a kind of esculent 
water-lily’: Pk. kandala -.] 

16. kabalikd ‘a bandage, strip of cloth put over a sore or wound’. Cf. 

Sk. kavalikd ib. [On the form kabafa- generally seen in P&li MSS. see LUdebs, 
Antidoron 307-8 where the Central Asian MSS. of Pratimoksa-sutra show 
kabada-, kapada-, and the Mahavyutpatti has kavada- ‘a mouthful of water’ 
also known to Susruta.] 

16. karala- 'a wisp of grass’. The form quoted by PED is tina-karala 
in this sense, so that karala - should merely mean ‘handful*. The graphy is 
not certain as under karala both forms are shown, while under tina - only the 
Worm is indicated, with the identical reference. [Cf. Sk. *kara-fa-, *kara-la- 
for the -l- and l- forms respectively; Sk. karetah ‘finger-nail’, for extended 
forms. Cp. also kddayati ‘removes the chaff’, kadamkarah, kadamgarah 
‘straw’. Pali karala- must therefore go back to *kara-da-.] 

17. kci{dra- ‘projecting (of teeth)’, kaldrikd ‘kind of large (female) 
elephant’. [Usually connected with Sk. karala -, but cf. Maitr. Sam. kardfah 
‘Npr. of Gane£a’, and karafah ‘elephant’s temple’. Possibly < *kaddra - for 
* kardda -, kardtah.] 

18. kaldrikd ‘kind of (she) elephant’. [Cf. kaldrikd above.] 

19. kalimb(h)aka ‘a mark used to keep the interstices between the threads 
of the kathina even, when being woven’; the v.l. is kalimpaka -. [Etymology 
is uncertain, but cp. Sk. kafambah ‘Convolvulus repens, the stalk of a pot- 
herb; and kalamba(ka)h i kalambukd ‘Convolvulus repens’.] 

20. kalebara - ‘body, corpse, dead body, carcass; the step in a flight of 
stairs’. [BSk. kadebara -: Sk. kalevara mn., Pk. kalevara n,] 

21. kala(ka)- ‘dark, black’: also indiscriminately fco/a; fem. kdlika. 

[< *kdda-. 1 ] 

22. kifati ‘enjoys, plays, sports, dailies’; abhi- 0 ‘plays a game’; sam° 
‘plays, sports’; ki lita- (and vik-°, iifanaifea‘toy’ (and ri-°); iifand ‘sport, 
amusement*; fclfd ib.; kildpanaka- ‘toy’, ‘player’; ktyikd ‘sport’; ni-kilitdvin 
‘playful’. [Sk. lcridati, kn\ati in Ijtv. : Pk. kidfai, kUai.] 


1 L&dbbs, Antidoron , p. 300; Scsbabbb, Brahmavidyd I, i. 21, f.n. ). 



26 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


23. upa-ktilita- ‘singed, boiled’. [Sk. kUdayati (l$v. kufayatds) ‘bums,’ 
scorches’; cf. kmlati, krddayati ‘becomes thick, makes thick’; whence perhaps 
‘boils, thickens by boiling’.] 

24. keland ‘desire, greed’; pati -°, pari- 0 ; kdayati ‘fondles’: kejdyana 
‘playfulness’; kdayita- ‘desired, fondled’; kefi ‘play, sport, amusement; 
attachment, lust, desire, greed ’. [Der. from BJa- (No. 22 above).] 

25. khefa ‘phlegm, saliva, exudation from the skin ’ ; kheldkapa-, khefaika- 
‘eating phlegm’; vik-kh$i-kd ‘slobbering’. [Sk. khefah ‘phlegm’, tyvedah 
‘poison’, kwedate ‘emits sap, exudes’: Pk. khedaya m. ‘poison’, khela m. 
‘phlegm’, khelosahi ‘medicine for poison’.] 

26. gafati ‘drips, rains, drops’; galayati ‘drips, drops’; galita- ‘rough’, 
a-ga}ita - ‘soft’; gofa- ‘drop’, ‘swelling’, ‘(fish)hook’; gai&gaiam gacchati ‘goes 
from drop to drop’. [Sk. gadati ‘distils, drops’, gadah ‘goitre’, whence galati 
‘trickles, oozes’: Pk. galai.] 

27. ati-gaieti (according to PED), ati -galayati (according to CPD) with 
identical quotation ; the reading is uncertain here : ‘ causes to perish ’ ; upagalita- 
‘flowing out’; vi -galita- ‘dripping’; vini-gd\ati ‘drops down’. [Cf. prec.] 

28. nigaja ‘(iron) chain for the feet, a fetter’. [< Sk. nigada- mn. 

‘ shackle, fetter ’ ; nigadita- ‘ chained, fettered ’ ; Pk. niala-, ni-adia-, nvalia-.] 

29. gaiagaldyati ‘roars, crashes, thunders’. [Cf. Sk. gard garj-\ Pk. 
gadayadai.] 

30. galoci ‘a kind of shrub’; °-latd ‘kind of creeper’. [Cf. Sk. gudaci . 
guduci, guduci, guducika ‘Cocculus cordifolius’.] 

31 . gvla ‘ ball ; sugar, molasses ’ ; sa-° ‘ cake ’ ; guld ‘ swelling, blight pimple . 
pustule’; gudikd ‘a little ball, globule’; sanrn-gu\ikd ‘cake'. [Sk. gudah ‘pill, 
sugar, molasses’ ; guda ‘ pill ’ ; gudikd ‘pill’ ; in this latter sense cp. gufikd which 
has besides the meaning of ‘small pustule ’. gudaka - (f. gudikd) ‘prepared with 
treacle’. For /-forms see gulah, gulika , guld.] 

32. gcfyaka ‘a ball’. [Sk. godah ‘a fleshy navel’, golah ‘ball’, golakah : 
Pk. golaga -, golaya-.] 

33. cakkavafa- ‘circle, sphere’. [Sk. lex. cakravdfah ‘limit, boundary’, 
°-vd4ab ‘circle’, 0 -valah ib. : Pk. cakJcavdla-.] 

34. cirHikd ‘cricket’. [PED suggests the origin as a contamination of 
Sk. ciri and jhittikd, clrilli ; but cp. Sk. ciritikah ‘ a kind of bird ’ and the following 
variant forms for ‘cricket’: cmvdkah , cirikd, cirukd, cilikd, cillikd , ciUakah , 
ciUatah, ciUadah: all these point out to the onomatopoetic form ciri-, leading 
to PMIA *tirida(ka)-, *ciridikd, from a possibly earlier *ciri{a(ka)~ or *cirifikd.] 

35. cfyla ‘swelling, protuberance, knot, crest’; a4dha ° , kanm°; cdfaka. 
‘having a top-knot’, paflca 0 . [Sk. tibdnh ‘protuberance’, cdlaka « ‘crested’.] 

36. ctifanikd (from *tu]anika- ‘lesser’). [PED suggests derivation 
from culla- ‘small’, but indicates *ciidanika-< *cii4a-na-ka- f with *cdda- 
< *cu44a- (?) < kpudra-. Cf. Sk. cuftayati, cudfayati ‘becomes snfall’.] 

37. cUggafa - ‘a hole’; taja 0 ‘a key-hole [< *chigga4a- from an earlier 
*chiggata- (?) < Sk, *chid-ga-fa- ; cp, KohkapI iig\d ‘small pieces, parings’; 
Mffara ‘a thin paring of bamboo used as a pin M 



ON THE HISTORY OF l IN PlLI 27 

38. jafa ‘dull, stupid, slow \ [Sk. jada-, Pk. ja$a-.] 

39. takkala ‘tuberose 5 ; bi\dlli-° . [< *takka-da -, cf. Sk. takrahva , 
takrabhaktd ‘a kind of shrub 5 whence *tofcra-£a-.] 

40. ‘strikes, beats, flogs 5 ; am*- 0 ; scm-ni - ; abhitajita -; JdZa- 
‘beating, clapping of hands; key 5 ; ‘strike, blow 5 . [Sk. tddayati ‘beats, 
strikes 5 ; tadah ‘blow 5 ; tddakah ‘a kind of key 5 ; tddl ‘a kind of ornament’; 
talah ‘musical time 5 ; talakam, ‘lock 5 ; Pk. tddei , tdda JdJet, tfdfa-.] 

41. dadda\hati ‘blazes, shines brilliantly 5 , daddalhamdna (with v.l. 
daMhalamdna). [Geiger §185 gives daddallati , and §191 daddaUamdna - < Sk. 
jdjvalyate as intensive forms. The readings are less than certain and may 
perhaps go back to a *daddha]a - represented by the MSS. in either of these 
two varying forms. The uncertainty of the orthography may also be seen 
from a parallel difference where Geiger shows the ] form in opposition to 
PED J-form in bhindivd\a §38.5. If the reconstruction is accepted as daddha- 
lati , the form goes back to a *dagdha-fa; * dagdha-da -.] 

42. dohala ‘craving, longing (of a pregnant woman)’; doha\dyati ‘has 
cravings’; dohalini ‘ a pregnant woman having longings’. [Sk. daurhrda-: 
PMIA *dohada~, later Sanskritized as dohada- : Pk. dohala-.] 

43. fin-na^a - (also v.l. unnala-) ‘insolent, proud, arrogant’. [Perh. 
< Sk. *un-nafa-, cf. unnatayati ‘jumps up’ and Pk. unncvmia-, unnalia- ‘lifted, 
elevated’. With these forms Sk. un-natd - and un-namati may be compared.] 

44. nala- (and nala - also) ‘a species of reed 5 ; nafa-pin ‘a kind of aquatic 
animal’. The reading nala is given secondary importance by PED which 
also records nalirii ‘a pond 5 ; but LttDERS cites the following f-forms in P&li: 
nala-, nail, Na\inikd , Nalinl. [Sk. naddh (l$v. na\ah) ‘reed’, nadinV reed bed’, 
nalah , nalinl ‘lotus flower’: Pk. nala-, nalinl.] 

45. dhjana-nd\i ‘collyrium box’; na\ikd ‘stalk, shaft, tube, pipe 5 , pa-°; 
naf,l ‘ hollow stock, tube’, pa-°. [Sk. nd4% ‘tubular stock 5 , ‘the box of a wheel 5 , 
nddikd ‘hollow stalk’; later Sk. nala-, ndlaka -, etc.: Pk. nddl, nala, nail. See 
No. 44 above.] 

46. nafikera ‘ cocoanut ’, ‘ cocoanut tree 5 ; °-ika- ‘ belonging to the c. tree ’. 
[Sk. lex. nadikelah, ndrikelah ; Su6ruta ndrikerah , nalikerah , Mbh. ncUikerah, 
Q -kdah : Pk. ndriera °-ela-, naliara °-era-.] 

47. ntfa ‘nest 5 . [Sk. nidd- ($v. nlfd-) mn. ‘nest 5 : Pk. ni^da nida-.] 

48. pdfi (also pali) 1 ‘line, row, norm 5 . [< *pdi%-\ Sk. palih f., but cf. 
pari-pdfi ‘order, arrangement, succession 5 whence *pdfi-: *pd4%-.] 

49. vi-pdHiyati ‘destroys’, ‘is destroyed 5 , passive from vi-pdteti ‘rips 
open, destroys 5 ; Sk. vipdfayati ‘destroys*. [< *vi-pd4iyati from a *pddeti, 
*paleti.] 

50. pd8v\a-, phdsufi, ph&sufi ‘rib \ [Sk. pdt&uh ‘rib 5 whence *parfai-fa-, 
*pdm-4a - ; tjie aspiration may be due to analogy with other forms for whioh 
see Geiger §40.1 (p. 57 f.).] 


1 Ltous, o.c. 90S. 




28 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


51. pilakd ‘a small boil, pustule, pimple'; 4 a knob*. [Sk. pidakah; 
pidaka ‘pimple’.) 

52. plleti ‘presses’, ati-°, abhi -°, abhini -°, o-°, nip- 0 , sam- 0 ; pilita -, ajjha- 0 , 
ahhi ° , wp-°, pa-°, po&*-°, pari 0 , sam-°; pi^a- with upa-°, wp-°, 5 am- 0 ; pajt- 
pilana-, abMnippttana ; pilaka-, pilana, pild. [Sk. pidayati ‘presses, squeezes’, 
ptdd ‘pain, suffering’: Pk. pidai, pidita-, pida; pilai , pilei, pilana -, jnZo, etc.) 

53. pHralasa- ‘sacrificial offering’. [Sk. pwodcWeto.] 

54. pefa in yaka-pela- ‘ liver- (lump)’ ; pefd ‘ large basket ’ ; pefiJca ‘ basket ’ ; 
on the first form PED suggests connection with pinda - on the authority of 
Pisohel §122 (p. 98), which is extremely doubtful. The form quoted by 
De&namamala pedhdla ‘round’ does not throw any light on the present form 
-pda- which shows -l- instead of the expected -\h- if the connection suggested 
was based on facts. For the forms see Sk. pefah, petakajk (from pidaka-, etc.). 
BSk. already shows the form pedd by the side of petd. 

55. balava ‘mare’; °-mukha ‘mare’s mouth’. [Sk. vddavd (also written 
‘ vddaba , bddavd, bddabd): Pk. vadavd, valavd.] 

56. baliyakkha- ‘a species of bird’. [Etym. uncertain, but cp. Sk. 
vadabhd ‘a kind of bird’ and valahakd- or baldhakd -, baldkah ‘ kind of crane’.] 

57. bijara-, bilarika , bilala -, bildlikd, bi\dli ‘ (he- or she-) cat’ [Sk. bidalah , 
vidalah , biralah, bildlah : Pk. biddla-, bidalia , bidali, birala °lia, °li ; bilada-, 
bilala -, °Zi.) 

58. bilibi\ikd ‘tittle-tattle’. [Cf. Sk. betati, bedati ‘swears’.] 

59. bubbvla (besides bubbula) ‘bubble’; °-ka- ‘bubble; iris of the eye’. 
[Cf. Sk. budabuda ‘bubbling sound’ and bvdbudah ‘bubble’; bvdbuda- ‘a parti- 
cular disease of the eye’. Pk. budabudei ‘makes a bubbling sound’, Desi 
bularhbuld f., bulabula- ‘bubble’.] 

60. kandala-maknla ‘ knob (?) of a kind of plant ’. [For the first member 
of the compound see under kandafa-. For the second member, cf. Sk. makufam 
‘crest’, Pk. madda - ( < *makuda-).\ 

61. mdia (besides mala) ‘a sort of pavilion, hall’; malaka - ‘a stand (for 
alms bowl)’. [< *mdda- from Dravidian.] 

61 A. mutoty (vv. 11, puio\i , mdfoli )' a kind of bag, sack’. [Cf. Sk. pvfa- 
mn. ‘fold, pocket’, mtUa - mn. ‘basket, bundle’, mu^ka-/mMaka- mn. ib.] 

62. rQja- ‘awful terrible’ com. = bhima-. [Sk. rurd- ‘hot, burning’; 
rodah ‘crushing, pounding’; possibly < rudri * rudda -, *rdda-.] 

63. lagvfa- ‘club, cudgel’. [Sk. lagudah ‘stick, staff, club’: Pk. ladda 
la&la -.] 

64. Idleti ‘fosters, cherishes’, nil- 0 ; apa-° ‘draws away’; upa-l&lita- 
‘ fondled, cherished ’ ; lafana ‘ dalliance ’ ; pa-lafita - ; lafati ‘ sports, plays, dallies ’. 
[Sk. laMti, la4ayati ‘licks’ and ladayati ‘cherishes, fosters’: lalati , Idlayati: 
Pk. toiol, lalei, Wlanti.] 

65. IvfcUi (and lufati) ‘stirs, shakes, agitates’, d-° ; alulita-*' unmoved ’ ; 
d-fajita- ‘agitated’; a-lvfa- ‘disturbed’, vi-°; a-lo]eti, nil 0 , vi-°; dlo\i ‘mud’; 

‘confusion, uproar’; vf-lofana -. [Sk. lodati ‘agitates’, lu4ati ‘covers’*, 
tofayati ‘sets in motion ’ : Pk. Mia-, Ivlai, Ida I.] 



ON THU HISTORY OF f IN PlLI 


29 


68. d>’\ambd(ray ‘a kind of drum’. [8k. d-^rnbatdh: Pk. ddamba/ra-.] 

67. vi-jayhati ‘bums’. [< 8k. pi-dahyati : Pk. vidajjhamdna and Pa. 
dahati < Sk. dahati .] 

68. apalfain ‘freedom from spite’ whence * apalasa - ‘spite’ construed by 
Trenckner as a-pa-\d8a -. [< Sk. ras but cf. BSk. pradasa - and Sk. pra- 
dasyati ‘dries up, becomes dry’, whence *pra-ddsa-, *pada8a - ; cf. Pk. padasa 
and jxiZdsa-.] 

69. pari‘\aha- ‘burning, fever; distress, pain’. [Sk. pari-ddhah , Pa. 
*pari-daha cf. vi-\ahati above.] 

70. vajto- ‘snake’. [PED reads vaja- which, if correct, shows derivation 
from OIA vyddah* snake, a beast of prey’, vydla- 1 : Pk. vala-.] 

71. vafabhd-mvJcha- ‘submarine fire’. [Sk. vadava-mukham, vadavdgnift ; 
Pk. vafavamuha-.] 

72. vaiabhVToor. [Cf. Sk. vadabhi, vaiabhi ‘ridge of a roof’ : Pk. valahi.] 

73. vajavd ‘ mare ’. [Cf. ba]avd above.] 

74. vaja- ‘snake, music’. [Cf. va\a- above.] 

75. a-vela- ‘turning round’ ; ave^a ‘garland’; ave^in- ‘wearing garlands’. 
[Cf. Pk. amela-ga °-ya-,aved/i-(ya)-,d/rnettia- i garlanded’ < Sk. d^w^aA' chaplet 
tied on the crown of the head’.] 

76. veluriya- ‘lapis lazuli’. [Sk. vaiduryam: Pk. vedujja-, veduria-, 
vervlia veluria velulia -. 2 ] 

77. 8ala\a- ‘a kind of sweet-scented tree’. [Cf. Sk. daldfu, dalalu ‘a kind 
of fragrant substance’.] 

78. 8a\-ayatana - ‘the six organs of sense’. [Sk. §ad-dyatanam.] 

79. safava- ‘a kind of salad dish’. [Sk. §ddavah ‘confectionery, sweet- 
meats ’.] 

80. sdhvfa-civara- ‘ coarse cloth ’. [Cf. De6i sahvli , °lid ib. ; < Sk. *sadhu - 

fa/fa- ( 1 ).] 

81. sihafa(ka) ‘Ceylonese’. [< *8Vmha-(La-. Sk. siwiAafo-: Pk. sithhala-, 
siAoia-.*] 

82. 8o\asa ‘sixteen’; °-kkkatum i °-ma. [Sk. $odai&: Pk. solasa , 8olaha.\ 

83. htfeti ‘is vexed, grieves, vexes, scorns, disclaims’, ati -° ; Atftto- ‘des- 
pised’; hlfana-y °-na ‘disdain, contempt’; o-Aifand ‘scorn’. [Sk. Ai^afi, hida- 
‘ instigator’, hi$itd- ‘angry’; he<iate ‘makes angry’, held ‘disrespect : Pk. 
Atfal.] 

II. OIA -#->Pi. -|A- 

1. afha(ka)’ ‘a kind of measure’. [Sk. d^haka- mn. : Pk. dfyhuga-, 
ddhaya,’.'] 

i Mm* 0’C. compares Pa. Andthapit&l »- or '-pitfada- with BSk. Anathapttfxka, equating 
pe4%. with piftfi-. On the etymology of pixtfa* see Ledbn, AUindisch. und wrg. SprachgetchicU , 
pp. 87-8; on an improbable etymology see Thtehe, ZDMQ 93. Both ptdha^, pe$hfila- 
may be ultimately connected with pUh&n ‘spleen’ through the base pith- (plehate) giving us 
.*pKf-da-, the first giving us the prototype for pefa- of P&li meaning ‘spleen’ and the 

second pefha- of Pk. If this etymology is accepted, we have in yoka-pefo- a double compound 
each member of which indicates the same idea, 

• LOnsns, Fut. E. Kuhn, p. 307. *•> 


30 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


2. aihika °-iya- ‘ rich, happy, fortunate * ; and\hi-ka - ya- ‘ poor, miserable,* 
destitute’. [Sk. adhyd - ‘opulent, wealthy’: Pk. miAia-.] 

3. ur&lhava- ‘large, bulky, immense, great, big, strong’; v.J. is ub-bifyha- 
q-v. - 

4. grd/Aa- ‘strong, tight, close, thick’, acc-o-° , pa-° , ajjh-o -° , a£i-°, a- 0 , 
pariy-o- 0 ; ni-gttyhilca- ‘immersed’. [Sk. gadhd - : Pk. gra^Aa-.] 

5. gr^Aa- ‘hidden, secret ’, ni-°. [Sk. gftdhd - ($v. gulhd -) : Pk. gfttdAa-.] 

6. daJAa- ‘firm, strong, solid, steady, fast’; da$hi f. [Sk. drdha-, l$v. 
dr\hd - : Pk. dadha -, dtdAa-.] 

7. dvejhalca - ‘doubt’, advelhaka- ‘certain, without doubt’. [Sk. *dvai%- 
dhaka -, 1 ] 

8. pilhaka- (v.l. mfykaka-) ‘cess-pool’, ‘dung-beetle’. [PED corrects the 
reading to mllhaka- < Sk. mupidm , mllhdm ‘excrement’ whence mUhaka. For 
the variant pilhaka- is to be explained by the parallelism of m&hati ‘voids* 
urine’: par§ate ‘becomes wet’, pf§at n. ‘a drop of water’, etc.] 

9. baiha- ‘strong’, °-tara , °-gilana-\ ati-°, vJb -° , pa-°, pafi -°; ba$hika- 
‘prosperous’, sw-°. [Sk. bddhd-: Pk. bddha -, 6dAa-.] 

10. abbttfhati ‘pulls out, draws out’, abbvfhana ‘pulling out, extracting’; 

cf. abbvlha- below. * 

11. ab-bvlha- ‘drawn out’, parib- 0 , sam-upab -°; ab-bv}hita - ‘pulled out, 
removed’; ub-bvlhavant- ‘large, bulky, etc.’. [Cf. Pk. uvvddha uvvldha -, 
the form - vddha - < *vf%$ha- from the base t?fA-. 2 ] 

12. milha- ‘excrement’; °-kdpa-, °-ka ‘cess-pool’. [Sk. mldhdm, mllhdm. 
Cf. pi\haka above.] 

13. mwJAa- ‘erring, straying, confused, infatuated’; a-°-vinaya - ; pa-°\ 
sam -°, sam-pa-°. [Sk. mOdhd -: Pk. m?ZdAa-.] 

14. vi-yulha- (read as vi-y-Hiha -) ‘massed, heaped, thick, dense’; $am-° 
‘collected, composed, gathered’. [Sk. ddha-.] 

15. rtZjAa- ‘grown’, ajjh-a-° t abhi-°, d-°, ^pa-°, pa-°, vi-°, samupa- 0 , 
sam- 0 , samvi - 0 ; mfAt ‘ascent, growth’, cm- 0 . [Sk. r#$Ad-.] 

16. RJAd ‘grace, ease, charm, adroitness ’. [Sk. lidha- ‘licked ’ and Ilia.] 

17. pa-vd\ha- ‘carried away, turned away, distracted, dismissed’ with 
v.l. pabbdlha - q.v. 

18. vfyha- ‘carried away’; sam 0 . [Cf. H\hx- (No. 14 above).] 

19. ds&lha , °-i ‘Npr. of a month ’. [Sk. dfddhd ‘a lunar mansion ’, dgadhl 
‘the day of full moon in the month so named ’.] 

20. usselheti ; cf. next. 

21. u8solhi(kd) ‘exertion, belonging to exertion ’. [8k. eodha -.] 

III. OIA -n- > Pa. -J- 

1. n-efa- ‘blameless, faultless’, anejd- ib.,' anelaka- ib. [Cf. Sk. inas 
‘sin, offence, fault, crime’; Geweb §43 reads da, anelaka - here.] # 


* Helmer Smith, B808 SO < *dvi$-dhd; Wacxxbvaohl, At. Or. in, p. 508. 
5 B808 8.882-4, WAoxxbvaobl, Altindisohe und Mittelindisohe Mimilkn. 



ON THE HISTORY OF f IN PlLI 


31 


l khifa - ‘hard skin, callosity*, [v.l. is kina-, corresponding to Sk. 
kinah ‘corn, scar, cicatrix, callosity’.] 

3. mulala - ‘ stalk of a lotus ’, bhisa - 0 ; muldll ib., °-puppha- ‘ lotus ’ ; muldlikd 
ib. [Sk. mfnalam : Pk. munala -.] 

4. api-\andha - ‘adorned with’, apilandhana- ‘that which is tied on’, 
apilahati , °-landhati ‘ fastens on’, pilayhati ‘fastens on, puts on, covers, adorns’. 
[Geiger §43 gives only the Z-forms. Sk. waAyoZi.] 

5. veZtt ‘bamboo’, mluka - ‘a kind of tree’, veluva- ‘made of bamboos’. 
[Sk. vinuh, vinuh ; Pjk. verm-, veZw-.] 

IV. Miscellaneous Group 

In this group we have to consider a number of examples where Pali l 
seems to correspond to OIA l, r or to certain nexi, and whose exact etymologies 
cannot be reconstructed on the present evidence. On further investigation it 
may be possible to demonstrate that even these vocables show the existence 
of a pre-Pali -d- corresponding to Pali -Z-. 

1. Apaldla ‘Npr. of a nagaraja 5 CPD. [Cf. Apaldlaji ‘ Npr. of a rak§asa ’ 
in Sk. Possibly *a-patala- ‘not falling’: *a-padd1a-.] 

2. dtadvaraka- at J.v. 81, 82 (v. 81 has afiraka) which PED emends to 
advaraka ‘doorless’; possibly Pk. ana- for a- (priv.). 

3. aldna-'peg, post, etc. to which an elephant is tied’ with v.l. aldna-. 
[Sk. dldnarn : Pk. anala -, d\dna-. The /-reading is found at DhA where all the 
MSS. agree. Cp. Sk. d-dyati ‘binds’, a-danam ‘fettering’. The existence of 
d- and Z-forms in OIA, though at different stages, indicates the intermediate 
stage d-*dana - with a possible cerebralization of the base dd-.] 

4. dldrika -, °-riya- ‘cook’, the comm, giving the synonyms bhattakaraka- 
and supika -. [Cf. Mbh. dralikah ‘cook’.] 

5. alinda - ‘terrace or verandah before the house door’ with v.l. dlinda. 
[Sk. alindah , dlmdah.] 

6. u^uiika- ‘ladle, spoon’. [Geiger §17.2a and §42.3 connects this with 
Sk. vdatik&h* pail, bucket’: Pk. udaftka-, with a>u in PZLli.] 

7. elaluka (or elaluka) ‘a kind of cucumber’. [Cf. Sk. dvdlukam ‘a kind 
of fragrant substance’.] 

8. ka]dya- (and kalaya-) ‘a kind of pea’. [Sk. kaldyah , but cf. kafdyanam 
‘ Andropogon Muricatus ’.] 

9. kaftftgara- (and kalibgara-) ‘log, pieoe of wood, plank’. [Cf. Sk. 
Icalifigah ‘kinds of trees: Caesalpina Bonduoella, Wrightia antidysenteria, 
Aoassia Sirissa, Ficus infeotoria’ and Jcatfamkarah, katfwhgarah ‘straw’.] 

10. kaiira- ‘top sprout of a plant’; vam$a-° ; velugulma. [Cf. Sk. kafira- 
mn. ‘iliao region’, ‘cave, indentation*; < Sk. kartra- mn. ‘shoot of a bamboo’. 
Compare also kalilod ‘the bottom or peg of the Indian lute (made of a cane) ’.] 

11. kafopi ‘vessel, basin, pot’, ‘basket, orate’; °~mukha- ) °-hatiha - and 
khaiopl ‘pot’. The variants are khalopi, kalopi. [Cf. Sk. kaforah , kaford 
4 a* kind of oup*, kafiha(ka ) ‘pan, pot*, kcufacchakab ‘a kind of spoon, ladle*, 



32 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


kadatram ‘a kind of vessel’, kaldiah ‘pitcher’, all of whioh indicate a possible 
*kafa-> *J fcada-, as the basis for these forms.] 

12. Icakola- ‘raven’; °-gana\ v.l. kdkola -. [Sk. kdkolgh ‘raven’ but in 
the sense of ‘snake’ comp, karkofah,] 

13. kukku\a - ‘embers, hot ashes’, °-vas8a - ‘shower of embers’. [Cf. 
Sk. kukula - mn. ‘conflagration made of chaff’.] 

14. kelasa- ‘Npr. of a mountain’. [< Sk. kaildsah.] 

15. pari-keland ‘ adornment variants are °lepand, -keldsana, pati-kelam. 
[If not connected with the base krld Pa. kll -, comp. Sk. ketanam ‘ensign, 
flag’.] 

16. ke]i- ‘play, sport, attachment, lust’: Sk. kelih goes back to Sk. 
kri#-, Pa. kil-, already noted under I. 24 above. 

17. kclamba - (variant kolamba-) ‘pitcher’; cf. kalopi above. [Cf. Sk. 
Icolambakah ‘the body of a lute’.) 

18. koj/dpa - (and koldpa-) ‘dry, sapless’, ‘hollow tree’. [Cf. krodd- 
‘ hollow’.] 

19. lcolika in pili- 0 ‘having boils of the size of a jujube'. [Cf. Sk. kolam , 
kolih ; but cf. krodd-.] 

20. kovildra - ‘sort of ebony’. [Sk.Pk. kovidara -.] . 

21. khilana- ‘scorn’. khl]eii ‘derides ’. [Perhaps < k§ved-.] 

22. paccaggala- in °-e affhasi ‘struck in his gullet’. [< pratyakga\a~ 
< Sk, gala - ‘throat’.] 

23. culdmti (besides cvMsiti) ‘eighty-four ’. [Cf. JM culdsii.] 

24. da\idda- ‘poor’, °-ta ‘poverty’ ; daliddiya - ib. ; as LUders has pointed 
out these Z-forms are scribal errors for the correct dalidda [Sk. ddridra -: 
Pk. daridda dalidda-.] 

25. pacM\iyam khipati ‘throws into the lap (?)’. [Cf. paksdh ‘flank’: 
*pak$ali-, *pak§ddi->] 

26. pavala (besides pavala-) ‘coral, shoot, sprout’; kalavalli - 0 ; pdvala- 
‘hair’, nipphofam ‘pulling out one’s hair’. [BSk. pravadah , Epic Sk. 
pravdlah: Pk. pavala.] 

27. pufava- ‘worm, maggot’; °-ka- ib. [Cf. Sk. pvfakah ‘kind of 
vermin’ : Pk. pulaa-,] 

28. putyna- (besides pvlina-) ‘sandy bank or mound in the middle of a 
river ; a grain of sand’. [Sk. pvlina - mn.] 

29. malorikd ‘a stand or tripod for a bowl, formed of sticks’. [PED 
suggests the emendation mdlaka for mallaka. For the form cf. Sk. marolika 
‘a sea monster’ and for meaning mallakah ‘ lamp-stand ’.] 

3Q. u pa-\dseti ‘sounds forth’, uppa-\dseti ib. for which it is a variant. 
[< Sk. upa-rd&ayati ‘yells, roars’.] 

31. vaftna- for which the comm, reads valina-, synonymous with dkular. 

[Sk. valina - ‘shrivelled, wrinkled, flaccid. 1 ] • 

32. virafa (besides virala-) ‘sparse, rare ’ : viralita - ib. [Sk. vira-la-i Pk. 
virfc ‘is destroyed’ as a dhatv&defe for vi-liyate, viral ‘shatters, splits’ (asdhv. 
for bhaftj -) or ‘beoomes perplexed’ (as dhv. for gup-): M. vir-ni ‘to melt* 



OK THE HISTORY OF l IN PlLI 


33 


wnefloe we can posit a *vira- seen in all these forms. Pa. shows the presence 
of so that both Pa. and Sk. forms can be traced to a vira-da- (from an 
earlier * virata- ?).] 

33. velldlin- ‘flashing (of swords)’. [Cf. Sk. vella - ‘shaking’.] 

34. salikd ‘ a bird ; the maina ’, spelt saliya at J. vi. 425 ; the other spellings 
are salikd , saliya , etc. [Cf. Sk. iarika , sarikd , idrih f., iarikah ‘the maina bird, 
Gracula Religiosa or Tardus Salica’.] 

It will thus be seen from a survey of the principal vocables of Pali con- 
taining the lingual l that this l must go back to an earlier d ; even of this last 
category and the few exceptional changes of -n- > -Z-, a little consideration 
shows that there is still a possibility of discovering or reconstructing a form 
containing the -d- in the primitive MIA stage. The other interesting fact 
which emerges from the preceding analysis is the apparent correspondence 
. between Pali l and Sanskrit r or l in the majority of cases, where the reconstruc- 
tion shows either the presence or absence of the -d-. 

Our present knowledge of MIA linguistics is not sufficient to show us all 
the stages of this wide change over the whole length of the country and to 
distinguish clearly the inherited elements from the elements loaned from 
cognate groups. Fortunately as far as Pali is concerned, the presence of l 
where the orthography is not uncertain, or where Pali has not palicized 1 the 
vocables borrowed from other MIA languages, definitely indicates a derivation 
from an 'earlier l. While one could understand the correspondence existing 
between d and l (in such periods and dialects where the orthography shows 
but one l) the correspondence existing between d and l or r makes it at least 
probable that the earlier form must have contained an original d or a d cere- 
bralized by the presence of certain cerebralizing phonemes. On the whole 
it appears to be almost certain that in cases where Pali shows a l in opposition 
to Prakrit d, an earlier d has to be assumed for both forms, and the Pali 
vocable has to be considered to be a loan from some MIA dialect which has 
not preserved the l if the graphy is not at fault. Similarly the Sanskrit 
vocables showing a \ to Pk. 4 come under the same category. 

With reference to the correspondence postulated by Pischel 2 between 
\ and r (as shown by Sk. vaidurya- and Pk. verulia) LAders has correctly 
remarked that it is not so much a change from 4 to r as from l to r. # The 
other examples for this correspondence quoted by LAders are Alar a: Ardda 
and the Sanskrit 6trdia-: Pa. bi]dra-. LAders has rightly suspected the 
influence of New Indo- Aryan dialects on the multiplicity of forms indicated by 
the vocables for ‘ cat ’ in the variants of birala - etc. 

In his excellent paper on Middle Indian -d- and -$d- 4 Turner has fully 
considered the question of New Indian treatment of these phonemes and his 
findings are as follows: 1 

Group Consists of NIA languages which obliterate the distinction between 
MTA and -44~' I 11 the case of Kumaoni, Central and West Himalayan 


* 1 LCders, Antidoron, 
* LCdkbs, o.c., 807. 


» Gr. Pr. 8pr. t §241. 

* Futgdbe Jacobi , 34-45. 



34 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


dialects and Hindi both are reduced to -r-. Gujarati and Marathi reduce fhenf 
to -d-, while Rajasthani dialects and Oriya with its dialects have either d or r 
according to the particular dialect concerned for both -d and -dd-. Bengali 
and Assamese belong to the group of -r- dialects observed above. Gypsy 
reduce both to -r-. 

Group II consist of dialects where the distinction between -d- and -dd- 
is maintained. They are : 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 
6 . 
6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 


Sina: -d - is lost, -dd- > -r-. 

Ka&nlri: -d- > -r- (or r)-, -dd- > -d-. 

West Himalayan: -d- > -r-, -dd- > -dd- or -d-. 

Lahndi: -d- > -r-, -dd- > -dd- (and -d- after long vowels). 
Panjabi: ib. 

Sindhi: -d- > -r-, -dd- > -d-. 


Nepali: -d- > -r-, -dd- > -r-. 

West Hindi 1 ) , . „ n . „ 

East Hindi J ^ > ,r ’ ^ ^ 

Bihari: -d- > -r-, -dd- > -r-. 
Singhalese: -d- > 4-, -dd- > 4. 


If we observe the nature of the changes which have affected -d- and -d$- 
we notice the following correspondences : 

1. -zero-: -r-. 2. -r- or -r-: -d- (or -dd ). 

3. -r-: -r-. 4. -d-:-d-. 


These may now be grouped together in a linguistic series, showing the possible 
continuous evolution of the change as follows: complete loss of occlusion: 
r : r : d : dd on the one hand, and to l : d on the other. The complete loss 
of occlusion is seen, however, in only one dialect, and if it is excepted, we have 
the following series, in the increasing order of phonetic effort required to 
pronounce these phonemes: r : f or l : d : dd. This shows that in dialects 
of MIA which possess both l and r, the l - forms should be phonetically speaking 
earlier than the r-forms. The only question which requires further investi- 
gation is of l and r forms : whether Z-forms are derived from r-forms or directly 
from J-forms. It is not, however, the object of the present paper to deal 
with this question. 


MADHAVA, SON OF 6rI VENKATARYA, AND SAYAtfACARYA 
By Db. Lakshman Sakup, M.A., D.Phil. (Oxon) 

The only hitherto available commentary on the whole of the Ijtgveda 
is the commentary of Sayanacarya, who mentions several predecessors by 
name, e.g. Udgltha, M&dhavabhatta, etc. But the commentaries of Sfiya^a’s 
predecessors were lost. The recent discovery of the work of Sfiya^ag 
predecessors, Udgltha, Skandasv&min, and MSdhavabhatta is therefore an 
Important event in the history of Yedic exegesis. The hitherto discovered 
commentaries of Udgltha and Skandasvamin are on a part of the Jjtgveda only . 



MJDHAVA, SON OF Sri VB^TKATIRYA, AND SlYA!?j65ltYA 35 

But tAe commentary of Madhavabhatta, whom I have identified with Madhava, 
son of &ri Venkatarya, is on the whole of the IJgveda. I am preparing a critical 
edition of this Madhava ’s commentary on the Rgveda. Three volumes, 
bringing the commentary up to the end of the fourth mandala of the Rgveda, 
are already published by Messrs. Motilal Banarsidas of Lahore. The rest is 
in the press and is expected to cover six or seven volumes. The discovery 
and publication of a pre-Sayana commentary on the whole of the Rgveda 
will therefore be welcome by Vedic scholars, as it will enable us to make a 
comparative study of Sayana’s commentary with that of Venkata Madhava 
and to see to what extent the former is indebted to the latter. 

There is a belief among European scholars that Sayana’s commentary 
is his own individual interpretation and that he did not inherit any unbroken; 
uniform tradition of Vedic interpretation. There was some plausibility to 
support this view as long as the work of Sayana’s predecessors had not been 
discovered. This view becomes untenable after the discovery of the work of 
Sayana’s predecessors. 

In this short paper, I wish to adduce evidence to show that Sayana’s 
commentary is not his own individual interpretation and that he did inherit 
a tradition* of Vedic interpretation. A comparison of Sayana’s commentary 
with that of Venkata Madhava cannot but lead one to this conclusion. I have 
put both commentaries side by side on the same Rgvedic stanzas and scholars 
will be able to see for themselves that Sayana’s interpretation is traditional 
and not individualistic. 

In explaining RV. X. 31. 11, both Sayana and Venkata Madhava 
paraphrase atra by ittham. 

In commenting on RV. IX. 5. 3, VM. explains rayi as data and S. as 
abhVstaeya data. In most other passages of the RV., rayi is generally 
explained as ‘ wealth ’ .. 

In RV. X. 11. 8, both explain atra as tadanxm. 

InRV. X. 149. 1, both use the term yaimna-aadhanaih to explain yantraih. 

In the following cases, the explanation is almost identical. VM. does not 
repeat the words of the original Vedic stanza. I have put the original Vedic 
words within brackets in the commentary of Sayana in order to facilitate 
comparison of interpretation. 

%. m?m. 

frrotr girTO fira* nSw % *n*nr- ^ 

*r?»j ijitg iremnv ^tnirntn! [vrr *cw] favnr [*t] 

nn f fo r: fare* trim* 

'TCfllftWT ’HIST- 

sfwll i wrbnrfat 

q fr wkm fr j Tfonwrf [O 



36 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


%. wt. 

m-iiw iiw ; i <rnR^*rrfHiiT: i 
cnaw i «|+n^ ^r»rnnx : i 

w^t f w ft ra i taw i i^wTftati i m- 
*fan: i mrcnfiraTs i nfrmv i 
wr«r i towt %^ui i mfww i 
W#*rRICTDT s I 


%. m. 

qitott trrerar: i i i 

i wnivt m\i$v nfw- 
frora^ i tost tot: i smsnfN: i 
TOST?fafwriremTTOmn yumi 
sT i wrfwps^ i u^f% i 
nviV9 hot i fa^Rwrfwprtiir- 
gTO[i I* mi frhRwgwg^R^ 1 
mrnrfwf 1 upfa%rwf: 1 


%. *TT. 

awrof'i watmi 
«Hfrnf*m»ni»r 1 *ro[ 1 atom 1 
mum 1 mr#w 1 mW fatft 1 
#otiivti wot 1 ^pStfti*nri 
TOrfmn top^i 1 *r- 

f)w umftjfiw 1 vn ci fir mfa 

_ _ *s . 

TOR 6TOI I 


•ItBIU- 

tHUffl- 

[at^TTi] TOfrt sfcmT' I [toPt- 
mrms] ^uni) » t rfWgT= 1 [mw] % 
turor: [tottott:] TOTOflfcrT: [to- 
fws] «i$ifiifiiJlg ro [tow] 
'■uTTf^T* [ wwg;^! ] [ , «i«nc T : ] 

wrcfrars [mr] wr*r [toAto<] 

[TOf*RTTi] (EBIPPCfW 1 [m- 

araiPTf ] fsnmjTr: 1 

«li.8l<i. 

wnm. 

t^iraf*] pm utto! [to] 
totos msffa [tow] y4f% [aim] 
mfsmipsE^ [ aft ] TOtft^[TOS^] 
jpmrt m»r mTTOrnifmr^ [top] 
tobtot to [ tfvtv- ] Jrrosftwi: 
[to%;] TOrfm [sum] mufysa^ 
[ r*iRpTt ] fsnrcnrfmi [ mm® ] pt® 
[from] wrafn: 4tfro w uar 
[tw] rntrorogTO^ [*fat] 
[ «4fw ] 1 

•itBie 

mm. 

[«**[] mror [TO^ff] to* j$fmi 
[*?fct®] [ *rf^n ] rnfa- 

toitt 3 n rnfar r* ufhnn mrmn f n 

®v 

[mfi^] TOITOT [TOT] TO$N 

[ *3 ] toto mW [ tohi ] iwt tot 

[ T?hcn ] TCT! TOT! [ TOfW ] UTflfllfiTJ 
TO [TO%] TOffir [TOfrtfto] 
cfrof TOffwTOP IJCTOT! I 



MiDHAVA, SON OF 4 rI VENXATJRYA. AND SlYANlCZRYA 


37 


ttt. wro. 

wiftfa www wrars wnf 

wm to wifwj to i i tpt w»ifa to 

Rrctfrr i . 

*• Vi<W 

%. ttt. wro. 

wiflOTflfii vn i «mx to to ^Ifti [to] 
wi totoji Trap i to [ g] froTOi [TOt] ifft 

%TOn n^pjn jft*nra i tottoN wj Wi *t [^*ro] wtftro 

^ i wjto* i ■ i ??*T5- w*rr %toi tt tow? to rfror 

■tfp! i ww i TO i TOt win- [tot] TOnrrihr [trop] wn= 

*PSt «rm: I TO VTO:— » W WII [t*$] TrrTO% [TOW*] tftTOTO- 

Shnfh ^i vrfar wtrormi sfpp [toi] totoi [^g<]TO*TOP 

«TOi i wrt vro' i totitoto ww I to wto ! i 

* $ tod sr farrarf* i ftrorw 

*r TOfa [tow] tow ww wnr- 
4 WIWtotttpi tow TOfa i 

ie« T,«I«4H,V 

%. TTT. TO, 

^TOTTOm^P wfa TOR I TOTR%* TOPTO RftwWJ *Ef«PTT%- 

^TFT I I TOP I HIT I [ TO ] TOlttTO^n 

Rtn?5 TOTOfa ‘TTCRra VO^: J*R| TOft^ : Tlf^ TOTO JlTOftl 

TOT! u flro TfaWWfro ’ Tfw ‘ IR'I^! ‘TOT! Tt irfWt- 

WTO^l KH*H I 


%. WT. 

trogurowfip owfftxft 


*• VW* 


WTO. 

nfw! uwfiiil 


*• v«W<- 

WTO. 

%Gtl $TO?*TOJ f’rtftroi^sfvTfw- 
t?Wt i 

*• vwi 


touw i 


[ TOW! ] «PJW? I TOfuftl TO- 
TO [m<] TOTOtrohr qwm i 



THE OTIYA-VAI&SIKA CONCEPTION OF MIND 

By 

Dr. Sad ana^da Bhaduri, M.A., PhD 
1. The mind as a distinct sense-organ 

In the Nyaya-Vaisesika system, as in other orthodox systems of Indian 
Philosophy, the mind ( manas or antahkarana) has been recognized as a distinct 
substance. It is only the Buddhist and Jaina schools which do not admit 
the independent existence of the mind apart from the self or consciousness. 
There is uniformity of tradition among the philosophers of most of the orthodox 
schools that the mind is an internal sense-organ (antarindriya) which stands 
apart from the five well-known external organs of sense. 1 The problem 
of the existence of the mind is, therefore, just on a par with that? of the sense- 
organs. 

The self is ubiquitous and eternal; it is always connected with everything 
that may become an object of knowledge. Theoretically, therefore, the 
condition of the knowledge of every possible object is present for the self at 
every moment of its existence. But it is a matter of common experience that 
one does not have all possible cognitions at the same time; thes6 cognitions 
are found to arise only in succession. The self’s incompetence to cognize 
all possible objects simultaneously in spite of contact with them makes the 
presupposition of other conditions of such cognition a matter of logical 
necessity. Apart from the problem whether the self is a conscious principle 
having consciousness for its very essence and being, or is a substratum or 
condition of consciousness, the existence of the self is not the sufficient condition 
of cognition. The existence and activity of the sense-organs are to be posited 
as further conditions. The sense-organs may be looked upon as so many 
limitations or fetters obstructing the free activity of the self in regard to the 
external reality. The self, situated as it is, is therefore dependent upon the 
good offices of the sense-organs for the realization of its activity in the shape 
of cognition, feeling or conation. It is only those objects which come through 
the channel of the sense-organs that can be perceived by the self. But, for 
the emergence of the psychical phenomena the existence of the self and the 
external sense-organs are not sufficient conditions. This is proved by the 
fact that though all the external sense-organs may be on the alert and the 
objective conditions of perception may be present in full, and the connection 
of the self both with the sense-organs and with the objects concerned is an 
undisputed fact, the cognition that takes place is related to a particular object 
and a particular sense-organ. It is often found that when a man sees a thing 
which interests him, he does not perceive a sound or any other perceptible 

object. Although it may be contended, as it has actually been done by the 

* 

1 The Advaita-Ved&nta, however, regards manas not as an independent sense-organ but 
only as a particular aspect of antahkarana (mind) ; manas, according to it, is the mind in a state 
.of indecision {samiayb). But this is a view with which other orthodox philosophers do .not 
agree. 



39 


THB NY lYA-VAldBfIKA CONCEPTION OF MIND 

Mlmimsakag, that a person can have simultaneous cognitions of various 
sense-data, such as colour , taste , etc., it is still a problem why all possible 
perceivable objects are not perceived. Moreover, it happens not infrequently 
that when a person is preoccupied with the perception or thought of a particular 
thing, many things escape his observation. What is it that makes such pre- 
occupation and the consequent failure of cognition of perceivable data possible? 

It is certainly neither the self, nor the senses severally or jointly, nor even 
any defection on the part of the latter, that can account for this usual though 
epistemologically unexpected phenomenon. Certainly, then, the offices of some 
other organ have got to be requisitioned for the realization of a particular 
cognition. If some additional condition is postulated to complete the appa- 
ratus of cognition, and if the function of this condition be a contingent fact, 
the non-emergence of simultaneous cognitions will find its explanation. This 
. additional condition is called the mind . 1 Thus if we suppose that a sense- 
organ can successfully produce a cognition when it is associated with the 
mind and not when this association is absent, we can explain why the other 
organs, though they are competent and actively employed upon their relevant 
objects, do not succeed in producing the cognitions of the latter. The point 
at issue i» this that a sense-organ can produce its relevant cognition only if 
it is in relation with the mind, and it follows that the mind cannot be in relation 
with all the sense-organs at the same time. The intermittent character of the 
mind’s activity is thus easily deduced from the fact that we do not have more 
than one sense-perception at any particular moment. 

It is apparent from what has been stated that the mind serves as a sort 
of post-office between the sense-organs on the one hand and the self on the 
other. It works, moreover, as a regulator of the sense-organs in their activity. 
The proof of the mind in this regard is more or less of a negative character, 
which is furnished by a reductio ad absurdum. But there is positive evidence 
also. Memory is a purely psychical fact which cannot be accounted for by 
the activity of any external sense-organ, as the former emerges only on the 
cessation of the latter. It may be asked: How does the mind come in so far 
as the emergence of memory is concerned ? The answer is that memory being 
a positive effect and a quality of the self at that, it must be effectuated by a 
combination of three causes, viz. f the material, the non-material and the 
accessory. The self is the material cause ( mmavayikarana ); the latent 
impression (samskdra) and its stimulation by a stimulus constitute the accessory 
cause ( nimittakdrana ). But what is the non-material cause (asamavdyi- 
kdrana) ? It must only be the conjunction of the self with some other substance. 

As the bearing of the external sense-organs upon memory has been ruled 
out, an additional substance has got to be posited for this purpose, and this is 
the mind.* But though this argument proves the necessity of the mind as a 
separate entity, its independence of the external sense-organ is not established 

1 Vaite^ikasutra, HI. ii, 1 ; Nyayabh&$ya and Ny&yav&rttika under sutra I. i. 16. 

, • Ny&yakandall (Vixianagrara Sanskrit Series), p. 90; Kira^&vall (Benares Sanskrit Series), 
p. 153. 



40 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


beyond doubt. Memory is but a reproduction of sense-experience, and though 
the external sense-organ may have ceased to function when memory is pro- 
duced, its bearing upon the latter can by no means be denied. The mind, 
it is true, is a necessary condition of memory, but it is not proved to be abso- 
lutely independent of the sense-organ, inasmuch as it comes into play only 
in the wake of a sense-organ. Thus the mind seems to be a sort of appendix 
to the external organ. In point of reality, however, the mind is an 
independent organ and has got an independent scope and function of its own, 
which cannot be usurped by any other sense-organ. It is the internal organ 
(antahkarana) ; and even when it acts in association with an external organ, 
it functions not as an appendix but rather as a regulative principle. The 
independence of the mind qua an organ is attested by the direct perception 
of such psychical phenomena as cognition, pleasure, pain, etc. These purely 
subjective experiences being perceptual in character presuppose the activity 
of an organ, just like the perceptual cognition of external objects. Whatever is 
perceptual is conditioned by an organ. The psychical experiences noted 
above are perceptual in character. Therefore they are conditioned by an 
organ. As external organs can obviously have no jurisdiction over these 
internal experiences, we have got to posit an internal organ for their reali- 
zation. This is nothing but the mind. 1 

A problem has been raised to the effect that though the mind may have 
been proved to be an internal organ, it does not necessarily follow that it is 
anything different from an external organ in its structure and constitution. 
Each external organ, in the Nyaya-Vai6esika view, is a subtle material product ; 
it is composed of the physical element (bhuta) whose specific quality ( viiesa - 
tfuna) it apprehends. The smelling organ, for instance, cognizing odour alone 
which is the specific quality of earth, must be earthy in its constitution; and 
similarly for the other organs. What, then, is the harm if the mind also is 
conceived to be a form of matter, say a special type of earthy substance? 
That it is cognizant of internal psychical phenomena is no proof of its being 
other than earthy. It may well be composed of earth, just like the organ of 
smell. Nor can it be contended that the mind being devoid of a tactile attri- 
bute is not of the nature of earth. The absence of tactility in the mind is an 
unproved assumption. One cannot argue that being unproductive of a sub- 
stance (dravyandrambhaka) it must be accounted as devoid of tactility, because 
this argument is a case of plain non eequitur. What can be the possible product 
of the mind ? A material product must be either a cognizable object (vi$aya) 
or a physical organism (farira) or a sense-organ (indriya). But none of these 
can be said to be the product of the mind, as they are all composites produced 
from their own constitutive causes, tnz., atoms. Nor can the mind be sup- 
posed to be productive of any other special sense-organ. The recognized 
sense-organs have got their distinctive causes, and the mind as the si^xth 
organ being competent to cognize internal phenomena, there is absolutely 

1 Nyftyakandail (Vizianagram Sanskrit Series), p. 00 ; Kira^&vall (Benares Sanskrit Series), 

p. m. 



THE NYXYA-VAISe^IKA CONCEPTION OP MIND 41 

no necessity for another extra organ that may be supposed to be produced 
by the mind. If an additional organ were produced, it would have no scope 
and distinctive function of its own. Thus the mind’s failure to produce any 
substance is due to the absence of any necessity for the possible results, and so 
this cannot be made the ground for inferring the unearthy constitution of the 
mind. That the mind is an earthy substance is supported by the further 
consideration that it cognizes also smell, the specific object of the earthly 
organ. If in spite of its functional community with the organ of smell it is 
regarded as unearthy, the smelling organ may also be regarded as having an 
unearthy constitution. The argument that the mind cannot be distinguished 
from the organ of smell is only by way of illustration. It may be proved by 
employing similar lines of argument that the mind does not differ from other 
organs also.. The upshot of the contention is that though the mind be an 
additional organ, it need not be structurally and constitutionally different 
from any one of the four material substances. An atom of earth or water 
or light or air can without any logical incongruity be credited with the function 
of the mind. By the same logic it may be shown that the mind cannot be 
distinguished from akaia too . 

The YaiSesika argues that the argument is suicidal in its results. The 
respective functions of the different sense-organs must be regarded as mutually 
exclusive. The denial of this rule will render the postulation of different 
organs superfluous. Thus the earthly organ must be restricted to the cognition 
of smell. If it were competent to cognize taste also, there would be no necessity 
for positing the gustatory organ over and above the organ of smell. In 
short, one organ would do the duty of all the organs taken together. But 
this is an impossibility, as the loss of the organ of smell does not entail incom- 
petency for the perception of taste. So the postulation of different sense-organs 
is an epistemological necessity. Though the mind is competent to perceive 
smell or taste or colour or touch, it cannot be subsumed under any one of the 
recognized sense-organs. The reason for differentiating the mind from other 
organs lies in the fact that the different sense-organs have got their provinces 
sharply demarcated, one from the other. The organ of smell, for instance, 
is competent to perceive smell alone in the midst of an assemblage of various 
sensible qualities, to wit, smell, taste, colour, touch and sound. But the 
mind is not restricted to any one of them like the external sense-organs. It 
is a common organ for all of them, though in external perception it is effective 
only in association with a particular sense-organ and not in its unaided capacity. 
It has already been shown that the external sense-organs are absolutely 
ineffective without the co-operation of the mind. The universal jurisdiction 
of the mind as a regulative principle of the different sense-organs is proof 
of its distinctive individuality. The difference of the mind from the four 
materially constituted sense-organs, viz., the organs of smell, taste, vision and 
touch, is further proved by its competency for the perception of the specific 
qualities of a ubiquitous substance. It is thus on a par with the auditory 
organ which also is oognizant of the speoific quality of a ubiquitous substanoe, 



42 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The mind is cognizant of the specific qualities of the soul; and the auditory 
organ, of that of akdia. The mind, again, is differentiated from the auditory 
organ on the ground that it is not marked by the possession of any specific 
quality, whereas the auditory organ is only an adaptation of akata in which 
its specific quality, viz., sound, inheres. Moreover, dkaia and for the matter 
of that the auditory organ are held to be possessed of unlimited extension, 
while the mind, as we shall presently see, is believed by the Nyaya-VaiSesika 
philosopher to be of atomic magnitude. The intactility of the mind is also 
capable of being proved by inference, and so it cannot be confounded with an 
atom of any one of the four material substances. The mind is the substratum 
of the conjunction which is the non-material cause (asamavdyikarana) of cog- 
nition and the like, the other such substratum being the self; and since the 
self is devoid of touch, the mind also cannot be otherwise. Besides, any 
eternal substance possessed of touch, e.g., an atom, is invariably the cause of. 
a tactile substance. But the mind is not known to have any tactile substance 
as its product. This functional divergence of the mind from all recognized 
tactile substances is also proof of its intactility. All these considerations go 
to show that the mind is a separate organ, particularly when an attempt at 
its identification with the other organs leads to a series of absurd conse- 
quences. 1 

2. The magnitude of the mind 

The problem of the magnitude of the mind has received elaborate attention 
at the hands of the exponents of the Nyaya-Vaiiesika school and of the 
Mimamsakas, whose views are diametrically opposed to each other. The 
sharp difference of opinion and the vigorous advocacy of the respective positions 
have given the problem a prominence which appears to be out of all propor- 
tion to its intrinsic philosophical importance. After all, it is a side-issue 
. between the Vai^esikas and the Mimamsakas, as they are equally agreed upon 
the independent existence of the mind as a separate organ. The Nyaya- 
Vai&sika school holds the view that the mind is possessed of atomic magni- 
tude, while the Mimamsakas maintain that it is of unlimited magnitude like 
the self. Although the problem primarily arises from the necessity of account- 
ing for the temporal order of the data of experience, in its final development 
it assumes the character of a metaphysical problem, the psychological issues 
being explained with more or less equal plausibility in conformity with the 
metaphysical conclusion maintained by each of them. 

The Nyaya-Vai£e§ika philosophers infer from the regular succession of 
psychical events that the mind is atomic in its magnitude. If the mind were 
not atomic, it would have to be maintained as of unlimited magnitude, as these 
two kinds of magnitude alone are predicable of an eternal entity, which the 
mind must be held to be. If the mind were a perishable entity, the unbroken 
continuity of the career of the soul through numberless incarnations would 
be unaccountable. In fact, it is the mind which is responsible for the pos- 

1 Ny&yalllAvatl with Ka^hibharaga and Prak&Sa (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series), 
pp. 323-333. 



THE NY*YA-VAU$E$IKA CONCEPTION OF MIND 


43 


sibilrty of experiences of pleasure and pain that are the invariable concomitants 
of worldly career. Both atomicity and ubiquity are psychologically incapable 
of being proved. They are rather presuppositions, and as such, of a hypo- 
thetical character. According to the Naiyayikas, the successive emergence 
of psychical phenomena can be satisfactorily explained only if the inter- 
mittent activity of the mind is postulated, which, again, is possible only if 
the mind be of atomic magnitude and thus capable of being connected with 
only one sense-organ at a time. If the mind were other than atomic in mag- 
nitude, it would be connected with all the organs, and so there would be left 
no reason why all possible cognitions should not take place at once. More- 
over, if the mind were ubiquitous like the auditory organ, it must have a 
medium of limited magnitude for its apparatus. If a part of the body be 
supposed to function as such an apparatus, just as the ear-cavity does for the 
auditory organ, then its activity would be confined to that portion only and 
be neutralized if there be a defect in the apparatus. So the Mlmamsakas 
must admit that the whole physical organism must serve as its apparatus. 
But in that case the localization of psychical experiences in the different parts 
of the body will become an impossibility. Thus experiences embodied in 
such propositions as ‘One has got pain in the head and pleasure in the foot’ 
will be left unaccounted for. The localization of experiences is conditioned 
by the non-material cause (asarimvayikdrana), i.e., by the localized conjunction 
of the mind and the self. But here the mind and the self being both ubi- 
quitous, and their conjunction being unspecifiable in respect of the location 
of its incidence, the sensations in question should be felt all over the body 
and not in a specified area. If a supersensible subtle medium is requisitioned 
to explain the phenomenon, it would be logically more economical and con- 
sistent to regard that medium itself as the internal organ. The Nyaya- 
Vai6e§ika position, however, is free from these difficulties, as it admits the 
mind to be atomic in magnitude. 1 

The Mlm&msakas have sought to explain the successive occurrence of 
psychical phenomena by having recourse to the theory of metempirical moral 
force (adrQfa), which is supposed to work as a regulative factor.. So the 
ubiquity of the mind does not make the graduated emergence of cognitions 
an impossibility. But this appeal to the metempirical moral force as a sort of 
dens ex machina whenever one is confronted with an apparently insurmountable 
difficulty is considered by the Naiyayikas as tantamount to a confession of 
defeat. Udayana in his Nydyakusuvndnjali propounds a twofold law relating 
to the function of the moral power, which makes appeal to such power in season 
and out of season a discreditable procedure. In case where the metempirical 
power is effective only by bringing about a combination of all the empirical 
conditions necessary for the production of the effect, there the effect invariably 
materialize»on the completion of such combination. So the metempirical power 
fulfils itself as soon as the totality of empirical conditions is realized, and it has 


i Ny &yakuBum&n j ali (Bibliotheca Indica), part I, p. 348. 



44 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


no other effect to produce. The second law is this that where there is no 
positive medium such as the combination of empirical conditions noted above, 
the metempirical force works out its effect independently and directly. The 
first motion of an atom on the eve of creation is the outcome purely of such 
moral force. The truth of the first law is illustrated in all cases of causal 
operation open to observation. Thus it is never seen that though the last yam 
is woven on to the warp, the cloth is not produced, or that if it is produoed it is 
devoid of its qualities for the default of moral force. The fact of the matter 
is that if in such cases there be any defection on the part of the moral force, 
the conditions of the production of the effect would fail to be realized. But 
when the empirical conditions of production are present, it must be presumed 
that there is no default of metempirical power. Applying the law to the 
present case, we find that the condition itself of the production of cognition, 
viz., the combination of the object, the organ and the self, will not be produoed . 
if there is a drawback to suspend the activity of the moral force. But if such 
a combination is present, the effect must materialize ; and if the effect is not 
seen to eventuate in such a case, no appeal to the moral force can be considered 
as a legitimate way of explaining the phenomenon. Thus though the self and 
the sense-organs and the objects of cognition are in relation, the simultaneous 
emergence of cognitions is seen not to take place. So something else is to be 
postulated as an additional condition, and this must be the mind. If the 
mind be ubiquitous, it will be in connection with all the organs; and thus the 
conditions of all sense-perceptions being present in full, there is no reason 
why such cognitions should not take place, all at the same time. If the 
mind be regarded as atomic in magnitude, the difficulty vanishes at once . 1 

The Mimamsakas contend that the arguments of the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
philosophers in support of the atomicity of the mind and also against the 
possibility of its unlimited magnitude are inconclusive. If definite analogy 
be any guide to the determination of the nature of things, it is in favour 
of the Mimamsa position. To put the argument syllogistically: Whatever 
is an intactile substance is of unlimited magnitude, e.g., the self; the mind is 
such a substance; therefore the mind is of unlimited magnitude. The same 
result is obtained from a different line of argument. Thus the sense-organs 
that are eternal are of unlimited magnitude, e.g., the auditory organ; the 
mind is such an organ; therefore the mind is of unlimited magnitude, More- 
over, the mind being a substance devoid of any specific quality {viiemgwm), 
and also being an eternal substance unproductive of any other substance, 
like time and space, should have the quality of unlimited magnitude like its 
analogues. * Again, being the substratum of the conjunction whioh is the non- 
material cause of oognition, like the self, the mind should have the same magni- 
tude as the self. It is no use multiplying the logioal grounds for establishing 
the ubiquity of the mind, because each one of these arguments is believed 
by the Mim&msakas to be sufficient to support the conclusion * It may, 


> Nrtvaknrom&fijftU (Bibliotheca Indica), part X, pp. 360 - 352 . 


• Ibid., pp. 346-847; 


THE NYiYA-VAI$E$IKA CONCEPTION OF MIND 


46 


however, be said in reply on behalf of the Naiyayikas that these arguments are 
mostly cases of non eequitur. They are all inspired by mere analogy, and as 
such, lack independent cogency. Besides, they render the contact of the mind 
with the soul impossible, for it is inconceivable that two eternal and ubiquitous 
substances should have between them a relation which is contingent. And 
even if the possibility of eternal conjunction (ajasamyoga) between them be 
admitted, as is done by the Mimamsakas, such conjunction will have no 
causal efficiency with regard to the contingent emergence of psychical 
phenomena. 

As for the argument that the simultaneous connection of the mind with 
the sense-organs should make the simultaneous emergence of all possible 
cognitions a necessity, the Mimamsakas point out that it is not capable of 
invalidating the position maintained by them. The phenomenon can be 
explained by the very circumstance of the mind being an organ. It is a law 
that an organ can produce only one cognition at a time. The validity of the 
law is attested by the phenomenon called collective perception (samuhd- 
lambanajnaria). Thus when there are several objects, a chair, a table, a pen and 
a clock, all connected with the visual organ, the result is one single cognition 
having for its object the whole group of substances, and not a plurality of 
cognitions corresponding to the plurality of objects. How can it be explained 
unless you posit the characteristic of sense-organs as formulated in the above- 
mentioned law ? The Naiyayikas retort that if in spite of the contact of the 
mind with all the organs the different sense-perceptions do not take place, 
then what is the warrant of supposing the mind to be possessed of unlimited 
magnitude ? If the hypothesis is resorted to to account for the simultaneous 
perception of pleasure and pain in different parts of the body, then there is 
no reason for denying the possibility of a single cognition apprehending even 
the objects of different senses, although the simultaneous emergence of 
diverse cognitions of different sense-data is sought to be avoided by the 
above law, viz., the emergence of one sense-perception at one time. The 
Mim&msakas, however, maintain the possibility of one cognition comprising 
different sense-data and cite the example of 'eating a big cake’, in which the 
taste, odour, touch, sound and colour are simultaneously apprehended in one 
act of oognition. The Naiyayikas are not convinced of the necessity of the 
hypothesis of the unlimited magnitude of the mind even on the evidence 
of the particular experience adduoed as proof. It is not capable of being 
definitely decided on the evidence of our experience, whether the cognition is 
one, or even a case of synchronism of multiple cognitions. The verdict of 
experience in this case as in many other cases is absolutely non-committal. 
The point at issue, therefore, can be determined by consideration of the logical 
possibility. If the synchronism of different sense-cognitions is admitted, the 
law of one •cognition for one organ has to be thrown overboard. And if, 
alternatively, the oognition in question is regarded as one with a fivefold con- 
tent, it will be very difficult to assign the cognition to the class-category of 
any one of the sense-peroeptions. To be explicit, the cognition cannot be 



46 


fc. C. LAW VOLUME 


characterized either as visual or as tactual or as auditory or as olfactory br as 
gustatory. Nor can it be regarded as a mongrel cognition participating in 
the characteristics of all of them, because being mutually exclusive, these 
characteristics cannot coalesce in one substratum. So there appears to be 
no logical necessity for postulating the existence of a ubiquitous mind. At 
any event, it does not give any advantage over the N y ay a -V aisesika position. 
The only case for supposing the extensive magnitude of the mind is, in the 
Mimamsa contention, the simultaneous cognition of pleasure and pain in the 
different parts of the body. But whether it is a case of one cognition or 
of two different cognitions happening in quick succession is a matter of dispute. 
There is good reason for believing it to be a case of two successive cognitions 
and for regarding the notion of simultaneity as due to extreme shortness of 
the interval between them . 1 • 

It is a matter of common experience that when a man is preoccupied ■ 
with something he does not perceive anything else, though the sense-organs 
are in contact with their relevant objects and are in a state of perfect fitness. 
When charged with inattentiveness, the man simply pleads that his mind was 
fixed on something else, and so the sense-data escaped his focus of attention. 
In other words, only those things are perceived which come within»the focus 
of the mind. But if the mind be in contact with all the sense-organs and 
thus is supposed to be ubiquitous, there is no sense in the assertion that the 
mind is focussed on a particular sense-organ and through it on a particular 
object. It may be argued by the Mimamsakas that it is not the actual contact 
of the mind but rather the desire to know (bubhutsd) that is the deciding factor 
in the emergence of successive cognitions. But such desire, reply the 
Naiyayikas, cannot be the condition of the cognition of a particular object ; nor 
does the desire to cognize an object obstruct the emergence of the cognition 
of another object. If the conditions of perception are present, the absence 
of the desire for a cognition does not operate as an obstacle. If it were an 
obstacle, one would not perceive a piece of cloth when one opens one’s eyes in the 
expectation of perceiving a jar. Desire or no desire for a cognition, the latter 
takes place if the object is there and the sense-organ in association with the 
mind is in operation upon the object. Such desire may be the condition of a 
vigorous cognition which leaves behind an effective impression of it, so that 
a revival of it in the shape of memory becomes possible. But the desire to know 
and also attention (pranidhdna) do certainly play an important part in cases 
where many things are simultaneously presented before the senses and only 
one is cognized. This is possible because the desire and attention only serve to 
connect the mind with one object (through the relevant sense-organ) and 
detach it from all others. Thus when many sounds are presented, even a faint 
sound is perceived if the desire to know and attention are directed towards it. 
So this only furnishes a corroboration of the transferability of thfc mind from 
one organ or one object to another organ or another object, and this is incom- 

1 Ny&yftkusum&fijali with Prak&6a, parti, pp. 361-353; Kuaum&ftjalibodhan! (Saratwati- 
Bhavana Text*), p. 98. 




THE NYlYA-VAI^E$IKA CONCEPTION OP MIND 4*7 

patible with the unlimited magnitude which is predicted of the mind by the 
Mimamsakas . 1 

The Mimamsakas have, however, contended that though the mind is 
ubiquitous, its functional activity (vydpdra) is subject to succession in time, 
and this accounts for the successive emergence of different cognitions. But 
the contention lacks cogency. If the function be anything different and 
distinct from its contact, it is not capable of being affiliated to any known 
category; and if capable of subsumption under any one of the categories, 
it will run counter to the Mimamsa position. Thus if the function of the 
mind be of the nature of movement, that will be incompatible with its ubiquity. 

A ubiquitous substance is incapable of movement. If it be a quality and 
eternal at that, no succession can be predicted of it. And if the quality is 
supposed to be a non-eternal event, it cannot possibly be brought into existence 
.unless a limited substance operates for its production. If such a limited 
substance be postulated, it is better to regard this substance as the mind, 
particularly in consideration of the fact that the mind of unlimited magnitude 
does not contribute to a better explanation of the psychical activity of the 
soul . 2 

The same result is obtained from the consideration of the possibility 
of dreamless sleep (susupti). Dreamless sleep is characterized by the com- 
plete suspension of all psychical activity. It is therefore possible only when 
the mind is detached from all sense-organs, for the self’s contact with the 
mind which is in association with any sense-organ is held to be the cause 
of a psychical phenomenon. The Naiyayikas therefore suppose that the 
mind enters into a particular gland (purltat) on the eve of dreamless sleep and 
is thus dissociated from the sense-organs. The condition of a psychical event 
having thus ceased to exist at that time, the self becomes absolutely 
unresponsive to any external stimulus that may be theoretically supposed to 
come through the channel of a sense-organ . 8 But such explanation is not 
possible for the Mimamsakas who advocate the theory of an all-pervasive 
mind. They can only seek to explain the phenomenon by an appeal to the 
metempirical moral force. But that is undoubtedly an unphilosophical way of 
deciding a philosophical issue. In fact, the Mimamsa theory of the mind 
is hedged round with so many qualifications and reservations that they only 
serve to accentuate its inherent weakness. 

The Ved&nta holds that the mind is a created substanoe and so composed 
of parts. The mind, therefore, must be of medium magnitude (madkyama- 
parmdna ), i.e., of limited extension, since a composite substance can be 
neither infinite nor infinitesimal in magnitude. This theory is exposed to all the 
difficulties which lie against the ubiquity of the mind. Moreover, if contrac- 
tion and expansion of the mind be assumed to account for the supposed 
simultaneity and the undisputed succession of psychical activities, this would 
only serve to introduce unnecessary complexity. Contraction and expansion of 


, l Ny&yakusuxn&ftjaii with Prak&ta, part I, pp. 358*354. 
• Ibid., pp. 355-356. 


» Ibid., pp. 357-358. 



48 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


the mind being events in time must have their causes. We have already shown 
that the metempirical moral force cannot be requisitioned for this purpose, 
as it serves rather to throw discredit upon a philosophical theory. Nor can 
attention or the desire to know be supposed to function as conditions of expan- 
sion and contraction, as we have already found that the scope of its activity is 
circumscribed within narrow limits. 

3. Can a plurality of minds be affiliated to a single organism ? 

Each self is provided with a mind and a sensitive physical organism in 
order that it may be in a position to cognize objects and to experience pleasure 
and pain in accordance with its past karman. Since different individuals are 
found to have cognitions arising simultaneously and since a single mind of 
atomic magnitude cannot conceivably be shared by them, it must? be supposed 
that there are as many minds as there are individual selves. In fact, in the* 
Nyaya-Vai^esika view, each mind is attached exclusively to a single self and 
can function only inside the organism with which the self in question is 
connected. 1 

It follows from what has been said above that only one mind should 
be postulated for each organism. The assumption of more than* one mind 
in an organism is, therefore, not only unnecessary but is also found to come 
into conflict with the presupposition of our experiences. If five different 
minds were postulated as auxiliaries to five different senses and if they could 
operate simultaneously, the successive emergence of psychical phenomena 
would be difficult of explanation. And if they are supposed to work in suc- 
cession, there is no necessity for postulating a plurality of minds, as one mind 
in succession can bring about all the activities under consideration. The 
notion of simultaneity of different cognitions (or volitions) can be explained 
away as an illusion due to the extraordinary swiftness of succession of the 
mental events. 2 


A PEEP INTO THE IDEAL OF EDUCATION IN INDO-ARYAN 

SOCIETY 

By 

MahImahopIdhyIya Vidhusekhaba Bhattachakya 

It is evident that none can live without air and space, nor can one grow 
if air and space are not sufficient, just as a man put into a box cannot do. 
Similarly what air and spaoe are to a living animal, education is to a social 
being. This or similar consideration led India once to make her education 
compulsory, and necessarily free also, for without making it free it can on no 
acoount be made compulsory. Let us peep into the matter and $ee how India 
did it. 

* Kira^SvaU, p. 154. 

2 Ityftyabhlfya, HI. ii. 56-58; Vaifefikasutra with Upaftk&ra, HI. ii. 8. 



A PEEP INTO THE IDEAL OP EDUCATION IN INDO -ARYAN SOCIETY 49 


In the Indo-Aryan society which was originally composed of three classes 
of people, viz. Brahmanas, i.e. those who were mainly entrusted with edu- 
cation, peace and the spiritual side of the country; Ksatriyas, i.e. those who 
were engaged to rule and defend the country; and Vai6yas, i.e. those who 
were employed to take care of the financial condition of the country by such 
means as trade and agriculture. One class more representing the artisans 
and labourers, i.e. Sudras, was added to it afterwards. We are concerned 
here with the society before the fourth class was included therein. 

Readers of the social history of India know that the initiation ceremony 
(upanayana) is still a compulsory one in Indian society for every boy belonging 
to eaoh of the three classes alluded to. The main object of the ceremony 
was to entrust a boy for his education to a teacher in his house. In case 
the ceremony was not done in its proper time, 1 * * * it might wait for a few years 
.more 8 ; but after those periods the boys who had not gone through the cere- 
mony were regarded as outcasts ( vratyas ). It means that those boys were 
excommunicated, as being un-educated they had no place whatsoever in 
society. Parents had to be careful about it. They must get their sons 
educated. It was their unavoidable duty ( dkarma ) and it must be observed. 
Indian parents still do it of their own accord, there being no outward force, 
no punishment from the Government. 

This responsibility for the education of a boy lay with the parents, no 
doubt ; but it was equally shared also by society itself, since it had made it 
compulsory. Society had to see that education was easily accessible to every 
boy without the least consideration of his being rich or poor. It was not 
that some people were allowed to have special privilege at getting the highest 
possible education, because of their moneys as is seen now. The organizers 
of the society we are concerned with could not think of such inequality. 
According to them when a boy was bom he belonged to the entire society, 
his iherits and demerits having direct effect on society for good or for bad. 
Up to a certain age the parents looked after him, but when the time for edu- 
cation came they simply took their son to a teacher and after that they had 
nothing more to think of or do for him. They had no longer any anxiety 
for their son’s food and shelter or as to who was to look after him, though 
he was of so tender an age ; or above all, as to who was to meet the expenses 
required for his education. How did ancient Indian society provide for 
these things ? It did everything that was possible in those days. It was 
so organized that nothing which was absolutely required for education was 
wanting. The boy taken to teacher’s house lived there as one of the teacher’s 
family, the members of it being in foot those of his own family, especially 
the wife of the teacher taking in reality the plaoe of his own mother. Thus 
there was no difference whatsoever of treatment towards a student in the 

1 Generally the proper time for a Brfthmaga boy is his eighth year, for a K^atriya boy 

eleventh year, and for a Vaifiya boy twelfth year. But it can be done earlier. 

, 8 A Brihmapa boy might wait until the sixteenth year, a Kfatriya boy until the twenty* 

second year, and a Vaiiya boy until the twenty-fourth year. 



50 


B. 0. LAW VOLTJMB 


house of his teacher and iD the family of hie own parents. The sorrow# and 
joys of the teacher’s family were equally shared by the student. 1 

Now, as regards the expenses for the eduoation of the boy. Who wm 
to meet them ? Why, the eduoation was absolutely free, and there was no 
question of expenses to be paid by a student. Yet, was not there the question 
of at least the daily food for both the student and the teacher ? How was 
it provided for, and by whom t Evidently by the sooiety itself and in the 
most remarkably economical and simple way that could be thought of. The 
food was daily collected by the students themselves begging from door to 
door, and it was a religious and obligatory duty of e^pry householder to supply 
a student with as much food as he could afford. It was enjoined in the 
scriptures on the wife of a householder (and not on the householder himself, 
as the latter might be more often absent from the house than the .former owing 
to his outdoor works), that when a student approached her for food she must 
not refuse him, otherwise all her previous good actions would be of no avail. 
This threat was in no way an exaggeration, for if owing to want of food 
education in a sooiety were stopped, the evil that might arise from $ would 

certainly destroy many a good thing that had already been gained by the 
sooiety. 

That offering of food to students by householders was in no way consi- 
dered a burden by the latter ; it was rather a very pleasant duty for them. And 

the food thus collected by the students was shared alike by their teacher as 
well as by themselves. 


T , £ C h&n >mn weTe taken for their education to teachers. 

The Sanskrit word for these teaohers is Ac&rya. If* significance is that he 
not only taught his students how to practise what was taught to them, but he 
himself practised in his life what he taught. 

, °S, 0f ^ e m ° 8t things that was always kept in view and 

ollowed by the students with great care under the guidance of their teaohers 
was the i restraint ^of their senses coupled with the observance of strict oelebaoy 
during the penod of study. Moreover, generally the teachers were not rich 
people and the students who lived with them had to lead a life of much hardship 
borne with a cheerful mind, and they had to discharge various household 
&tms equaUy witt the family members of the teachers themselves. This 
gave them an additional benefit of practical experience in various ways of a 
WMto. am. m, th, y to adopt, m 
TOMhing the courses of their respective studies 

a.i • * . „ . 


. . . ’ <» education and the arrange- 

W6re f ° r CMTying them out “ by the memfcTof 

the Indo- Aryan sooiety in ancient times. 


knowledge, sat. Why, pray, do yon not oat ? ’ Stuasnlof 



A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HISTORY OP JAINISM 


By 

Dr. H. L Jain, M.A., LL.R, D.Litt. 

In my article on ‘6ivabhfiti and ^ivSiya’ 1 1 have tried to identify &Va- 
bhiiti, the author of the Botika schism according to the Mfila Bhafya, with 
Arya 6ivabhfiti of the Kalpa Sfitra Sthaviravall on the one hand and $ivarya 
the author of the Digambara work Aradhana on the other, so as to make the 
three names referring to one and the same person only who flourished 609 
years after the Nirvana of Mahavira. One of the verses of the Mula Bhasya 
from where I took my start makes mention of ‘Kodii^a-kutta Vira* 2 as sub- 
sequent successors of ^ivabhuti, and the purpose of the present paper is to 
make an investigation for discovering the lineal descendants of &ivabhuti or 
J§iv&rya. 

My first inquiry brings to light the following facts : — 

1. SivabhGti’s pupil and sucoessor, according to the Sthaviravall, was 

Bhadra 3 

2. Bhadra or fc$ri Bhadra, according to a 6rava$a Belgola inscription, 

• became universally known as Bhadrabahu , who had for his pupil 

Candragupta. 4 

3. It is this Bhadrabahu, and not the earlier one who, according to 

the 6ravana Belgola inscription No. 1, foretold the twelve 

years* famine and migrated to the South from Ujjaini. This 

Bhadrabahu is given a special title Swdmi . 6 

4. The Acarya who enjoys the special and almost exclusive title of 

Swami 0 in the Digambara Jaina literature is Samanta Bhadra the 


1 Contributed to the Nagpur University Journal , No. 9. 

vcw’CTOraymiT n»« i 

* w voffanvtw ^ mw i fi i v i x x x % 

forwr wi wmwj* i ^ i 

4 See Ins. 40 (64) : 

[9t] wrwijft ^ w I 

w w frufamfr * wffr i » i 

v# ># a 

mi i 

mi wnn n ^mfw ti’ c ifinn iNt 1 1 1 

wr wm ft wi m wfi wmi>m i ft i flnnH i<»i miwfiJwT flrflrirt 
wftil — i 

4 See R»tiA-kait^(^-4r&vak&c&r&. Introduction by Pt. Jugalkishore Mukhtar, p. 8 : 

“ ** wt % ftmt 1 t* 1 ** * ^ wid wra ^ wit 

mflt Hfirr wit mmrtm mnr wr tfmw ^ I wf wf wnrrwt wwr ftTtwt * wro 
(•rift) fHfm % wm wcw flwr % m fWm mwrwwmim% vrwTWT’Www 


52 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


author of Aptantfm&msa. Tradition associates him with Slvakoti 
or Sivdyam. 7 He is also said to have joined the temple raised by 
Sivakoti and to have revealed an image of Candra prabha 8 out of 
an image of &va, as well as to have started his career at 
p&taliputra, and from there to have travelled to Malwa, Sindha 
and T hakka and subsequently to Kancipura and Karahataka." 

5. S&manta bhadra is celebrated in the ^vetambara Pattavalis as an 
* AcSrya of the Candrakula and the founder of the Banav&si 

Gaccha . 10 

Let us now see what these facts lead us to. Bhadra and Bhadrab&hu are 
easily identifiable on the basis of the information furnished by the Sravapa 
Belgola inscription No. 40 (64) according to which Bhadrabahu’s former name 
was Bhadra or Sri Bhadra, “ and there appears to be nothing that would 
revolt against this identification. As regards Samantabhadra and Samanta- 
bhadra, there is practically no difference in the two names. The lengthening 
or the shortening of the vowel is of no consequence. The fact that Samanta- 
bhadra founded the Banavasi Gaccha clearly shows his association with the 

% fa aa% are ar ura ; ua aa aar % i ^ fiyaf nar aiatai 

wnfT vc, «r % 'snfnr ftrvr %, wit 

^aaamaaafltaaar*^ aaat % fa ‘areV a* t aiaia«rfHa * faaft afva 
vftfk aft i " 

3etrama4Min*)sn#ia«.a aaaaaxv ’ i it # 

(Sravaqa Belgola Ine. No. 105 ( 264).) ‘ f*w\ afh?) fanftfkareT fwaiaa: Wrwfvvt 

affcjh’ (ftrarei^ttita areai) 

8 at jawnfNaaflafWfiw i 
uaanilfta t fy ftm faia a** i 
aiai arawawa a sfrfft fawat nare i 
a na fa aa arfau a ire«rm i 
flraar vfaaT «ag^l i 

earn: aauare waatarofl ana i < # 
war » aaawywrfaa r an, an.re a i aa ia *ta of Nemidatta. 

8 3$ naffsaauiaa* t?t an aifam i 
aaranaa-ftw-aafini% aia^y^ i 
mflsa avanra wwn fatfha* ua* i 
mpaT fs a ium tnl »n^af*a?Haa i a i 
S ravage Belgola In*. No. 54 (67); also quoted by Nemidatta in his ArSdhani-kathikotfa. 

10 ^aanaiaflsatniitnaaMftf'i'iwfii- 1 
ant ft ^nraaarar 1 naannft flrftaifkn^t i ( t 
( yiaanaaaa q of jnnrefv ) i faftnuta^St amnft anpft i area- 
a^t ifraaat taamt 1 1 i ff l anaftvi taw taiaaiawffc i a a gtamfano* 
InMftfaWUlw awi twfiaarftaarwmt wan^flaaroiafl*' ar* van^rfa 
sr^ai ( i (ann* nrrn?t) i firirn ^t^aaffaaaiaava: tifia: gfaiu afar taro- 
a wi frlf h areamwuj i u • ( ) Also see airoitatarc (t<) 

(t<) published in viisfryq a a of «jfJigiiaf*ara i 
u ffee footnote 4 above. 



A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HISTORY OF JAINISM 


58 


South where Banav&si was the name of North Kam&taka. It was also the 
name of the prinoipal town in that area called Krauncapura , situated on the 
river Bar add, an affluent of the Tungabhadra. 12 The foundation of the 
Banavasi Gaccha could be better understood in the light of the information 
about Samantabhadra preserved in the Digambara traditions according to 
which he, having started his career at P&teliputra, carried on his religious 
propaganda in Malwa, Sindha and Thakka (Punjab) and then travelled on to 
Kanclpura and Karahataka. The last of these places is no doubt identical 
with Karada in the district of Satara in the Bombay Presidency, and this being 
so, Kanclpura, it appears to me, should be identified with Krauncapura in 
Karnataka and not with the town of that name in the Tamil country near 
Madras. The word Vaidiia which in all probability qualifies Kanclpura in the 
traditional verse, 18 may denote the river BedavaXi which was another name 
. of Barada on which Krauncapura was situated, 12 and it may have been parti- 
cularly used to distinguish this place from the more famous s town of the same 
or similar name. 

Other Digambara traditions associated with Samantabhadra become 
similarly intelligible if we try to understand them in the light of the & vetambara 
traditionstconnected with Samantabhadra. That he joined the temple raised 
by &ivakoti 14 can easily be understood to mean that he associated himself with 
the organization of &ivabhuti or §i varya as a pupil or associate, and that he 
revealed the image of Candraprabha out of the Siva image 16 may be a fine 
allegory of the fact that he established the Banavasi Gaccha of the Candra 
School within Si varya’s Samgha. Manatuhga the author of Bhaktamara 
Stotra is said to have belonged to this very Candra Kula just four generations 
after Samantabhadra 10 and Kanakamara Mum the Digambara author of the 
ApabhramSa Kavya Karaka^dacariu also calls himself as belonging to the 
Candra Gotra. 17 

The time of Samantabhadra according to the Svetambara Patt&valis is 
also favourable to this identification. According to the Tapagaccha Pattavali 
Vajrasena attained heaven 620 years after Mah&vira’s Nirvana. He was 
succeeded by Candra Sfiri who in his turn was succeeded by Samantabhadra. 18 

12 See Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval India by Nundolal Dey. 

is See footnote 9 above. It does not really suit the context in the verae to interpret vaidiia 
as VidiAa, identical with Bhilsa, in Malwa which country has already been mentioned before in 
the verae. Hence Lewis Rice, who first interpreted the firavaga Belgola Inscriptions, translated 
it as ‘the out of the way Kind ’ and Mr. Ayyangar translates it as the * far off city of 
K&fic l\ 

14 « iftiNT w frnftfo* fryn i 

wxftli HfNNffWIM etc.( W TWWWT^)l 

1* See footnote 8 above. lf See Pa^vah-samuccaya. 

17 fta i ffcnww I 

wwrt i i (TOhnrfcs 10 * 28 * 1 * 2 ). ^ 

18 w ^ jN fi W t xxx qwto q rtifiinflm i tt* dirhem 

^ mim i x x x war- i wiW Tftr ™ 

x x 4N«nlMI i 



54 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


He could thus be easily regarded as a junior contemporary of &iv&rya who 
organized his Order in 609 after Nirvana. 10 This period is quite suitable for 
Samantabhadra the author of Aptamimamsa. 20 

Having thus merged Bhadra of the SthaviravaU and Bhadrabahu of the 
Digambara inscriptions into one personality, and having identified Samanta- 
bhadra of the 6vetambara Pattavalis with Samantabhadra of Digambara 
literature, let us now see whether the two that emerge from these identifications 
could be further resolved into one. For this purpose let us concentrate upon 
the Sravana Belgola inscription No. 1 whioh is the earliest and therefore the 
most reliable authority about Bhadrabahu and his activities. A oareful 
reading of this inscription leaves us in no doubt about the fact that the Bhadxa- 
bahu who foretells the twelve years’ famine at Ujjaini is not one of the five 
Srutakevalis, but the one who comes long after him in the line.* 51 He must 
therefore be regarded as Bhadrabahu II, and the famine which he foretold- 
must be the one which is mentioned in the AvaSyaka Curni and Malayagiri’s 
Vritti according to which a very severe famine lasting for twelve years occurred 
at the time of Vajra Swami who, in consequence of it, toured into the South. 2 * 
Vajra Swami according to the Pattavalis was the predecessor of Vajrasena, 
and lived from 496 to 584 years after Nirvana, 28 i.e. just about the time of 
Samantabhadra whose great-grand-predecessor he was. Not only that, but 
according to the Vira-vam&avali , 24 Vajra Swami passed his Caturmasa in the 
South at a place called Tungia which I am inclined to locate at the TugabhadrS. 
where we have already located Krauncapura or Kancipura of Samantabhadra, 
not far away from the Katavapra at Sravana Belgola where Aearya Prabha- 
candra, according to the inscription, ended his life. 

Another very important clue furnished to us by this inscription is that it 
gives to this Bhadrabahu the designation of Swami which in literature has 
almost exclusively been used for Samantabhadra. In fact even great writers 


19 wiKii « vn faf* i 

ifr wtfirwm i m t etc. ( wttow i 
80 See Pt. Jugalkiahore’s ‘Swami Samantabhadra ’ pub. as Introduction to Ratna-karan<jla- 
$rtvak&c&ra, pp. 115S. Samantabhadra is traditionally assigned to the second oentury of the 
Vifcrama era by the Digambaras. 

11 See footnote 5 above. 

” tyfi v ftvcfir i w wn* wrcwfwi i wft 

fwrnr i flrcnrT i nr% Pnr i ( 

«nn, } flwfii jtt^t wmiV ) 

1 iwt w w*™ x x x g ii guiglft =« 4NVcni *njr- 

jft wfiwfcra 1 

V * St* ifcfire, wit 

jjflrwT wrt itinwr ^ 1 




A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HISTORY OF JAINISM 


55 


like Vddy&nanda 88 and V&dir&ja Stiri 88 have referred to him only by the title 
of Sw&mi without mentioning the name Samantabhadra, and this they could 
do because they knew that their readers would understand nobody else but 
Samantabhadra by that title. This piece of evidence taken together with all 
that has been said above goes to establish almost beyond doubt that Samanta- 
bhadra and Bhadrab&hu II are identical. 

This identification of Bhadra, Samantabhadra, Samantabhadra and 
Bhadrab&hu into one person, whom let us now call Bhadrab&hu II, leads us 
into corollaries that appear to be startling. The first of these is that we must 
acoept Kundakunda to be the pupil of this Bhadrab&hu II who within the 
Digambara hierarchy is no other than Samantabhadra the author of Apta- 
mlm&ms& himself. Kundakunda in his Bodha P&huda clearly mentions him- 
self to be the pupil of Bhadrab&hu 87 who could be no other than this Bhadra- 
• b&hu II. The only difficulty that might come in the way of this identification 
is that here Bhadrab&hu is said to be acquainted with all the Twelve Afigas 
and the Fourteen Pfirvas and was thus a Sruta-jfi&ni. But we must remember 
that our Bhadrabahu who was definitely different from and much posterior to 
Bhadrab&hu I has also been called a Sruta-jfianl in a number of inscriptions . 28 

This point becomes still more clear when we come to consider the case of 
Bhadrabahu who is the author of the ten Niryuktis included in the Svet&rn- 
bara Agamas. Their author is also claimed to be a &rutakevali 88 but 
obviously he is not the same as Bhadrabahu I because in his Ava^yaka Niryukti 
he mentions events with persons and dates right from the time of Lord 
Mah&vira down to 609 years after Mb Nirvana . 80 He also pays a great tribute to 


VI - ' 

tout *ftni TO-tmuifro i i 

’* to «c« * ft*mi**H i 

*ro*«r Irorfo ) i 

” t mflw iO «i far* i 

^ TO to! * TOnro Mtl 
tov TOfTO* i 

lTOfa«TO » to i i 

88 See, for example, footnote 4 above. Alio tee Ini. 10S (258), vereee 8-9. 

88 For example, Malayagiri (12th oent.) in hii commentary on Pi^ujla Niryukti iayi — 

I 

In the et f qH f np H ) mi ancient work, we findr- 

TOffr Hfwm rmftroTOWTOf* I 

M Thaw ooo ur in oonnection with the varioue eohieme that took place once the time of 
Lord Mah&vira. The vereee that mention their yeare are ae follow* : — 

• *1*9 tfTO TOT TO I 

TO TO* TO W ^TOTT I I 

TOTO 'jWtVr rtt TO TOTO I 

toit Iron err I TO* | 


V**t*fa^ to to i 



56 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Arya Vajra who lived from 496 to 584 years after Nirvana and to Arya Rak$ita 
who was his contemporary. 81 From all these mentions it appears that the 
author himself lived about 609 of Nirvana and was personally associated with 
Arya Vajra about whom he has given us some personal information and who is 
credited with having split up the $ruta into two parts Kalika and DrstivMa 
which were further split up into four by Arya Raksita. 82 In my opinion 
the author of the Niryuktis and the teacher of Kundakunda, the author of 
Aptamimamsa and the head of the Banavasi Gaccha and Candra Kula and the 
sage who foretold the twelve years’ famine and migrated to the South are all 
one and the same person, and that person was the pupil or associate of 
Sivarya. 

This is not all the glory that &varya has to his credit. There is yet another 
bright jewel to his crown which I shall now proceed to introduce to you. Let 
us examine the PraSasti which we find at the end of the Tattvarthadhigama • 
Bhasya. 88 Here we are told that the author Umasvati was the grand-pupil 
of 6iva6ri and pupil of Ghosanandi. Neither of these two dignitaries has so 
far been identified. SivasrI may be easily identified with &ivarya. Besides 
the name being the same in the two cases except for the variable suffix, 
there is the name of his pupil with his name ending in Nandi which appears 
in the names of Sivarya’s teachers and was a favourite name-suffix with the 
teachers of the Nandi Samgha, while it is prctically non-existent in the early 
l§vetambara lists of names. 34 Another piece of information that we find 
in the Pra^asti is that Umasvati was bom at Nyagrodhika. Since I had 
identified Rahavirapura where Sivarya organized his Order with Rahuri 

friuTJr ( ) l 

32 See verees 763-778. 

** qmtuwi fmfw miiMinw afuw)* i 
fW^t » x « 

ftwn f swrrftr i 

wrfinwfcr » » i 

i v i 

w ii ntflwn i wmm ifl wi ' 1 1 1 

wm fr ren i mfii f | 

ircwroq ii < i 

See Pt. Sukhlal Samgha vi’s remarks on the pradasti in his introducfciSn to 

pp. 4ff. 

14 The names of &v&rya’s teachers mentioned in his JLr&dhand are Jinanandi, Sarvagupta 

Hitranandi, for which and for other information on the subject see my paper on ‘£ivabhtiti 
and div&rya’ in Nagpur University Journal, No. 9, 



A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HI8T0RY OF JAINISM 


57 


in the Ahmadnagar district, I looked into the locality for this name as well, 
and to my pleasant surprise I find a plaoe called Nighoja in the same district 
and not very far from Rahuri. Nighoja may easily be identified with 
Nyagrodhika the birth-place of Um&sv&ti. 

A few more statements in the PraSasti that deserve a close study are as 
follows : — 

1. Um&svftti’s teacher of Agama was Vacan&carya Mula. 

2. Though bora at Nyagrodhika he travelled on to Kusumapura (Patali- 

putra in the North). 

3. It was at Kusumapura that he explained or elucidated the 

Tat tvfirt hadh i ga ma , i.e. wrote the Bhasya. 

4. This BhS$ya was written on a work which he had compiled earlier 

• on the basis of the utterances of the Arhat and the traditions that 
had come down to him through a line of teachers, on finding 
people afflicted with pain and vitiated in their outlook through 
improper ideas. 

These statements could not be understood fully unless one takes into 
consideration the whole position of the Samgha as it appears to have developed 
at that tifne. &ivarya was succeeded by Bhadrab&hu II who in his turn was 
succeeded by Kundakundac&rya. Umasvati being the pupil of Ghosanandi 
who was another pupil of $ivarya, was obviously Kundakunda’s contemporary 
and rival. Kundakunda tried to introduce serious changes into the creed 
as well as the practice of the monks. While Sivarya had permitted cloth - 
bearing to all nuns and some monks under special circumstances, 86 Kunda- 
kunda considered the position anomalous afcd sought to make nakedness as 
the absolute rule for all monks, allowing no exception whatsoever. 36 And 
since women could not for obvious reasons be asked to give up clothes they 
were declared as unfit for salvation and could remain in the Order as apprentices 
only. 87 Elaborating the cryptic teaching of his preceptor the author of 
Aptamlmamsa that the true saint (Apta) is one who is free from all weakness 
and obscurity (Dosa and Avaraga), 88 he preached that an all-wise saint must 

35 See Ar&dhan&, G&tha 79-83. See my paper on ' &ivabhuti and &i varya \ footnote 5. 

30 wnrwftfir ini n frx htkn i 

gift TKNTKfa | t* I 

ww vfcorfNTM ** * tn fWJR E I 

fft XVfwS ftwrt vfVNTCfWt fNVTWTVt 1 t* I 
wrft fom wrtt II W K nw mx ft ftr i 
Kufft wva IKT I N 1 ( ?Wff ) I 

87 mt KKT WWT WN m ft KEHTT I 

WftN vW * VTWNT NpINT I H I (^innff) I 

88 i 

ift H TNT fftwbfW I « I 



58 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


be believed to be free from all feelings of pleasure and pain . 89 He was not 
satisfied by merely putting forth these views; he appears to have proceeded 
to see that every member of the Order conformed to the rules. Those who 
would not or could not do so, were to be expelled and all the texts that went 
against this creed were to be suppressed. A piquant situation must have 
developed in the Samgha, specially amongst those members of it who came 
within the exception to &ivarya’s rule and would not forget or forego the 
study of the previous texts. Umasvati appears to have led this section. It 
was during this period of tension when feelings ran high on both sides that 
he wrote the Tattvartha Sutra in which he logically proved the position 
with regard to the existence of hunger and thirst in a Kevali , 40 but did not 
openly raise any question with regard to the wearing of clothes by monks 
and salvation for women, though food for thought was provided on these 
subjects in the definition of the Nirgranthas 41 and in the various points of views 
from which the absolved beings might be considered . 42 Umasvati probably 
offered this work as his compromise formula. But Kundakunda and his 
adherents rejected it probably at a session specially convened for the purpose . 48 
The consequence was that the no-changers had to leave the Order — they were 
expelled from it — and so they formed a separate Order of their own which came 
to be called the Ydpaniya Samgha M 

It was with a memory of these bitter experiences that Um&svati, probably 
with a band of the younger members of his section who oould undertake the 
long journey, went to the North with a view to effect a union with the com- 
munity there. It was in this way that he came to Kusumapura where he wrote 
the Bhasya in which he expressed (Spastam) what he had kept understood 
in the Sutras ^yith a view to avert the inevitable crisis. 

Kundakunda, on his part, having thus got rid of all the reoalcitrants, 
proceeded to establish the new Order with a thoroughness which was extra - 


mm wficfw wt< iwtr 5 w 1 ( wmrc, ) 1 

nw ft ywi ft q’ ffcrw 1 

fihr iw Wt tw * 1 1 ( tfnnrrww ) 1 

49 see* wnfov, c.f. 

41 866 „ < f 


48 The question appears to me to have been put to the vote of the congregation by Kunda- 
kund&oirya in the form of the verse preserved for us in his qw w WTV t, 

♦ wpifH tfn* to fir i 

^ wr n vfk^sfk i 

44 For an account of the activities of the Y&panlyas see 4 Y&paniya Sahgha— a Jain sect 4 
by Dr. A. N. Upodhye in the Bombay UnimrtUy Journal, I. 6, May 1933, end WN 
•ft by Pt. ran in hi* tv SlK Tflmn. How the Yipenlyee wen 

eobeequently Mebeorbed into the major community end -how their feowd books were alee 
made acceptable to the letter it being dealt with by me in a eepaiete paper. 


A HIDDEN LANDMARK IN THE HISTORY OF JAINISM 


59 


ordinary. He mercilessly suppressed everything that went against his prin- 
ciples in the slighest degree, or reminded of anything of their past affiliations. 
He even suppressed his own name whioh was Padmanandi 46 because it aroused 
memories of the Nandi Samgha. He, in all probability, prohibited the study 
of all the former Agamas which were henceforth taken as totally lost and made 
up for the deficiency by himself writing a large number of texts called Pahudas 44 
which henceforth became the sole authority on all matters religious or philo- 
sophical. He called his organization the Mtila Samgha in view of the fact 
that he went back to the position of the last Tirthamkara whose original 
creed he claimed to have revived . 47 It is also possible that this significant 
name suggested itself to him readily because it was borne by the Vacakacarya 
who had taught Um&svati and^probably himself also, and therefore he indirectly 
wanted to commemorate him. 

The difficulty that still remains in regarding Samantabhadra as the 
preceptor of Kundakundacarya is that inscriptions and Pattavalis persistently 
mention Samantabhadra after Kundakunda and not before him. My explana- 
tion of this tendency on the part of all subsequent writers is that they were 
interested in showing Kundakundacarya as the first and foremost of all the 
teachers of the present age, and therefore a deliberate attempt was made to 
obscure all the previous history. Secondly, there have been more than one 
Samantabhadra even after Kundakundacarya . 48 In spite of all that has been 
said in support of the Ratna-karanda-^ravakac&ra being regarded as the work 
of Samantabhadra the first, 4 ® I now feel convinced that it was certainly not 
the work of the same author who wrote the AptamlmSmsa, particularly 
because it explains the word Do§a 60 in a sense which could nevef be intended 
to be conveyed by it by the author of the AptamlmamsS . 61 I think the 
RaHa-karanda^dvakacara was written subsequent to Kundakundac&rya ’ s 
preachings and in support of them. The author of this work may also have 


46 wit^ wr v vwfHTO«nfinnir. i 


Ml 


( 8 * <8 ) 


44 Tradition attribute! to him the authorship of 84 such tracts of which about a dozen are at 
present available to us. See Fravacanas&ra: Introduction by Dr. A. N. Upadhye, pp. xxiv fl. 

47 firwrrtxv ini i 

fooNl vnnrt wri i i 


44 Six such Samantabhadras have been notioed by Pt. JugaUrishore Mukhtar, for which 
see his Introduction to lUtna-karan^a-ir&vakAo&ra, pp. 5-9. 

44 See ante. 

40 i 

* WIT- « wWt l<l ( WKW I IWUH , X ) I 

41 See on verses 4 and 6 of quoted above in footnote 

88. Also see vdkse 98 where the existence of the feelings of pleasure and pain are recognised 
in a VUardga, and the whole argument there rests on that fact. 

S* ipi Hlft 5 s *!*!* T I 

fTWtTIT HTWTWfDiDfT JWTTlTinRf! I 




60 


B. C. IjAW voltjmb 


been the teacher of Sivakoti the author of RatnamalS. which is certainly not 
the work of our Sivabhuti or $ivarya the author of the Aradhana. 62 The 
use of the title Swami as well as the attribution to him of incidents which were 
really associated with his earlier namesake may be due to confusion or even, 
no wonder, deliberate. 

The results of my investigations in this paper may be summed up as 
follows : — 

1. 6ivabh0ti who, according to the Mula Bha§ya, founded the Bodika 

Samgha was identical with Arya Sivabhiiti mentioned in the 
Sthaviravali, and Sivarya the author of the Aradhana, as well as 
£ivafoi, the grand-teacher of Umasvati. 

2. Bhadra, who was mentioned in the Sthaviravali as the pupil and 

successor of Sivabhuti, was identical with Bhadrabahu the author 
* of the Niryuktis, the divine who foretold the twelve years' famine • 

at Ujjaini and migrated to the South and the teacher of 
Kundakunda, as- well as with Samantabhadra the founder of 
the BanavasI Gaccha and Samantabhadra the author of the 
Aptamimamsa. 

3. Kundakunda introduced drastic changes in the creed of the Order 

which were unacceptable to one section led by Umasvati who 
wrote the Tattvartha Sutra as a compromise formula, but being 
unsuccessful in averting the crisis he went away to Kusumapura 
where he wrote the Tattvarthadhigama Bhasya. 

4. Those who left the Samgha in consequence of Kundakundacarya's 

reforms, or were expelled from it, formed themselves into ail 
independent community which came to be called the Yapaiuy* 
Samgha. 

6. Kundakunda tried to efface all the vestiges of the past including 
literature, and called his organization the Mula Samgha. 

6. Samantabhadra who is mentioned in inscriptions and Pattavali 

after Kundakunda is different from the author of the Apta 
numimsa and the pupil of &ivarya, while he may be the autho 
of the Ratna-karanda-4ravakaclira and teacher of 6ivakoti th 
author of Ratnamala. 

7. As 6iv&rya organized his Order in 609 after Nirvana, we may alkn 

20 years more to him after it and another 20 years to his successo 
Samantabhadra or Bhadrabahu II, and thus we get about 66 
years after Nirvana as the time for Kundakunda and Um&sv&t 


u Fot th© text of tHWTWT critical remark* on the same by Pandit Nathuram Prei 

fti w w mfetw* (VT. S. t ft ). 



DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN MAN (BHUNA) ? 

By 

Prof. N. K. Bhaowat, M.A. 

Introduction : 

It is the fate of World Teachers that they are liable to be misunderstood 
by those that surround them. The life, thoughts, speeches, actions and 
dealings of these Teachers are not generally appreciated in their ultimate 
value by the common run of people, who differ from such Teachers both in 
degree and in kind. These dissenters are so deeply sunk in their own con- 
victions and way of thinking that they are unable to isolate themselves 
dispassionately and enter into the spirit and letter of these World Teachers 
to truly evaluate them as thinkers and guides. The dust of prejudice and 
perverse understanding combined with partiality to one’s own convictions, 
narrowness of outlook and absence of a spirit of liberal interpretation — are a 
few causes as to why Great Teachers and Prophets were greatly traduced 
during their lifetime and it was only after centuries that their greatness, 
efficacy of teachings, the profound significance of their mission in life, and the 
grandeur and glory of their personality were unfolded to the vision of next 
generations. The same fate has awaited Gotama, the Buddha, who is rightly 
called the ‘Teacher of gods and men ’. 1 During his lifetime there were 
many ascetics and Brahmins and they misunderstood him being misinformed 
and Gotama had, several times, to enter upon a vigorous protest against false 
charges and wilful distortion of his teachings . 2 In some places he tried to 
reconcile and explain his position, where there was honest difference or incon- 
sistency or apparent contradiction, discovered by other sectarians in the usual 
course of comprehension . 8 He personally carried on talks and controversies 
with notable personalities of other Faiths and clearly demonstrated to them 
his unflinching position and the drawback or defect in their reasoning. He 
was conscious of the fact that his teachings ran counter to the then prevailing 
principles and bend of human mind and in fact he wanted to refrain from 
propagating his doctrines to a people who were sunk in lust (Alaya ). 4 During 
the centuries that followed Gotama, his teachings passed through various 
stages of development, expansion and ramification, that gave rise to not less 


1 ‘W fon q qpi l WTWT ’—repeated in so many suttae, e.g. irf HH rfW ItJW - 
Tp yrcur — (No. 7) Devanagarl Edition, page 27 (by Rajvade and others). 

8 E.g. u v* w ww wn wt wi- 

I (No. 22)— fiiWTW— Devanig&r! Edition, page 99, by 

Rajvade and others (1919). 

3 E.g. srfurar — ftn iffMW — ii W WW -'Biirmeee Edition— Hanthavaddy Press- 
page 291. Here in his conversation with he explains how "he (Gotama) may be desig* 
nated ai ffroarfr, vwlt, TOgjft— but 

without any detriment to his original doctrines. 

. 4 to tot toutot urounft 

DevanAgarl Edition of the Bombay University, { t. t, P*8® 7 * 



62 


B, 0. LAW VOLUME 


than 18 different sects, 1 * * so that the last oharge that was brought against 
Gotama was that he preached nothing but Nihilism (6ftnyav§da). In this 
paper a humble attempt is made to examine one aspect of this Nihilism 
which is summed up in one word, ‘Bhtaahft' (killer of the child) and which 
constitutes a charge, brought against Gotama by the Paribb&jaka M&gandiya 
in the Majjhima-nik&ya.* 

The Paribbajakas : 

The Paribbajakas formed one of the prominent sects in Gotama ’s times. 
Their creed was ‘A belief in perfect bliss after death for the self, purged from 
evil and as a conviction that the bliss can be won by Brahmacariya (celebacy), 
by freedom from all evil in acts, words, aims and mode of livelihood*. 8 All 
these four standards were bodily incorporated in Gotama 's Noble Eightfold 
Path and the last of the four (Ajivo) gave the Ajivakas their special name as 
a separate seot. 4 * The Buddha differed from the Paribbajakas as is attested 
by the conversion of Sariputta and Moggall&na, 6 who were the Paribbajakas. 
The goal of the latter was Deathlessness (Amata), ‘which to them probably 
meant birth in the world of the Brahma'. 8 Gotama has made free use of 
this goal of the Paribbajakas in his sermons. He, however, was known as 
‘ VibhajjavadI ’ or Champion of the Method of Analysis and he taught causes 
and effects of states of consciousness. 7 Again the Paribbajakas were 
speculators in the questions bearing on metaphysics, philosophy and ethics. 
In the Majjhima-nikaya (Majjhima Pa^nasaka) their speculative philosophy 
has been repeatedly mentioned and it concerns itself with etemality or non- 
etemality of the world, identity or difference of life and spirit, life of the 
Arhant after death, and so forth. Further, the Paribbajakas stigmatized 
Gotama as teaching ‘non-action' or non-activism. 8 In general, they were 
not ascetics, except in so far as they were celebates. They were Sophists or 
Teachers, who passed 8 or 9 months of every year wandering from place to 
place for the purpose of exchanging in friendly conversational discussions on 
matters of ethics, philosophy, nature-lore and mysticism. Many a time they 

1 Mentioned in the Kathavatthu. Also compare page 07 of the ‘ Patna University Reader, 
ship Lectures on Abhidhamma \ 1029. 

* wfawfimw — w ftl HHWIW — «wm«iy w (No. 76), Devan&gari Edition (Bombay 
University), page 173 and onward. 

1 The P&li names are : — 

wnfwit, TOnrnrr, tmrunrait, t remifrft i 

* The head of the wot was for hie view* compare 

Vol. I, Devanigarl Edition (Bombay University), page* 94.66. 

6 — ttTItnreft — Devanlgarl Edition (Bombay Univernty), pa y* 
60-66 ,, *, W-'t. 

‘ W|W T cf - Vol. I). 

7 The oft-quoted verse: 

‘ t if#T W WUlfl WT* I 

Devanlgar lEdition, page 81 . 

* MB words d r ftfawre . 


DID THB BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN MAN (BHtJNA) ? 68 

were hair-splitters and showed a muddle head. They possessed big hermitages 
and the Nik&yas mention a few Paribbftjakas of eminence and enjoying sooial 
status apd public esteem . 1 * * It is a matter of common knowledge that the 
celebrated philosopher of the Vedanta, Shankara, is designated as the ‘Aoharya 
of the Paribbftjakas ’. 8 


The word Bhtoahti is explained by Buddhaghosa as Bhfiti-hanaka, 
Vuddhi-nfisaka or destroyer of what is prosperous or glorious (in man ). 1 The 
P&li dictionary connects it with Bhtita+gha(hana) or a destroyer of beings. 
It is instructive to note in this connection that the Pali word Bhtinahtl 
is traceable to Sanskrit word * Bhrui^aha * or ‘killer of the embryo* or ‘causing 
abortion *. 4 * ^ Again the word ‘ Bhrftna ’ in Sanskrit is applied to a learned 
1 Brahmin *. 6 On looking to the context in the Majjhima-nikaya, however, it 
is used by the Paribbajaka Magandiya, who maintains that Gotama *s des- 
cription as a ‘Bhunahu’ occurs in the sacred scriptures of the Paribbajakas as 
well . 6 It is not easy at this stage to find out what exact texts are meant 
in this connection ; but, later on, from the conversation between Gotama and 
Mfi-gandiya after their meeting, Gotama refers to the ‘Doors of the Senses* 
and the influx of impressions, instincts and emotions that is caused by them to 
arise in human mind. It is a well-known fact that Gotama has, so many 
times, exhorted his Bhikkhus to exercise control over his sense organs , 7 and 
for this purpose he has prescribed various methods and given practical direc- 
tions. In doing this, however, it is contended by the rival sects of Gotama 
that he tried to deal too summarily with the natural and primary instinots 
and emotions by unnecessarily and unnaturally stopping the gates and * per- 
versely attempting to play o£F the instinct of repulsion and the accompanying 
emotion of disgust against other emotions and instincts which are of more 
abiding value for the religious life *. 8 If we enquire as to what constitutes 
the ‘man* or 'being*, it means not the physical form (Rtipa) so much as the 
‘individuality* of ‘self ’ which in turn depends upon the expansion and develop- 
ment of feelings, perception, predisposition and contingent consciousness. 
The latter group forms the ‘crux’, ‘ohild*, ‘embryo* or ‘Bhfiti’ (glory) in 

1 I have freely drawn for this information about the Paribb&jakas upon the ‘Dictionary 
of Pili Proper Names’, by Malalasekera, vol. II, pages 159-161. 

* The epithet * q fcll W flWW * “ applied to Shankara and his successors. 

1 Quoted from the P&li-Euglish Dictionary by T. W. Rhys Davids and W. Stede, page 
32, under ‘BfomoAcT. 

4 * Sanskrit-English Dictionary’ by V. S. Apte, Poona (1890), page 829, under w-l** 1*1 
quoting YAjfiavaikya 1. 84 (Mandalik's Edition): WTOf WT * 

1 P&U-English Dictionary quotes J. V., 286 * wwft * which is explained in the common- 

VUIT'I * 

• wirffcnUMJw'tit MajJhima-QikAya— Majjhima PawAaaka, Devanigari 

Edition (Bombs? Uni vanity), (78), page* 173-188. 

» 360-861. * 

, » 'Gotama Buddha' by K. J. Maunder. (The Heritage of India Sertoa), Calcutta, 1923, 
PH* 97. 



64 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


man and to suppress it is to destroy the self (Bhrtoja). As for the meaning 
of the word ‘ Bhfinahu ’ as * killer of a learned Brahmin ’ it is true that Gotama 
attacked Brahminical social and religious institutions and tried to elevate 
other castes and to that extent he killed the ‘birth-right’ of the Brahmins and 
emphasized on the ‘worth-right’ of man. Metaphorically he did kill the 
Brahmin and Brahmanism. Thus, when we examine all the meanings, 
given above, of the word ‘Bhunahu’, we come to realize that the word means 
‘one who destroys (or suppresses ) by his teachings the essential nature of Beings, 
which consists of their primary and fundamental instincts and emotions . 
Gotama thus, according to the Paribbajaka Magandiya, plays the rdle of a 
suppressionist or a killer of the potential being (Bhruna) or a destroyer of the 
development of what is best and glorious in man. In this paper, we try to 
discuss this alleged position of the Buddha. • 

Ootama’s Primary Aim : 

Under the Bodhi Tree at Buddhagaya Gotama attained full enlightenment 
and succeeded in tracing the origin and cessation of the mass of suffering. 
He solved the problem of suffering prevalent in this world and arrived at its 
solution. Secondly, he found that his teachings in this case were recondite 
and unintelligible to the common run of people, who were immersed in Tapha 
(Alaya). To such, his teachings of pacification of all Sanskaras, relinquish- 
ment of all limiting adjuncts, extinction of grasping desire, desirelessness, • 
cessation, Nibbana would be quite foreign and unheard of . 1 He, however, 
threw open the gates of immortality at the request of Maha Brahma* He 
taught a doctrine which constituted the subsidence of Egoism (Asmimana). 
While speaking with Upaka, the Ajivaka, he speaks of himself as emancipated 
by the extinction of grasping desire.* In his first sermon to the Five Bhikkhus 
at Isipatana, Deer Park, he described two extremes — one of indulgence in 
sensual pleasures and the other of addiction to self-torture, and struck at the 
Golden Mean, which he rightly styles as the Majjhima Patipada, which endows 
one with eyes to see and makes one know, leads one to peace, insight, enlighten- 
ment and Nibbapa . 4 Further, the spotless eye of truth is described as: 


i Two points of his main position are these : (i) contingent 

existence by dependent origination, and (ii) 

firttVt fai r * . Further the eye of Truth * fafa *1 IT fa^O***! admirably 

9 ums up these two points. What is subject to the condition of origination is subject to the 
condition of cessation. Thus which is not subject to condition of originati on te not subject to 
the condition of cessation — it is Vimokkha or fagT* ifaKgFT W (Kevafcta 

Qutta), i.e. Transcendent, Infinite, Luminant Vinnai^a, which is nothing but Nibb&i^a. 

* * ^tvtt 3N tnnng p* 10 * 

* P&li expression: ****** P» 12. 

4 puj Sermon is known as the **|*«uimi«VTPT. The Text # in eatenso runs 

a* vnwfwn * 

^ wj*** wfWwr <rf***r inrrrtw 1 wyrc*. 



DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN MAN (BHUtfA) ? ' 65 

That which is subject to the condition of origination, is likewise subject to the 
condition of cessation. He knew that the world consisted of different minds 
and temperaments 1 and to suit this divergent world one uniform way would 
not do. He carried on talks on preliminary subjects like charity, character, 
heavens, evils of sensual pleasures, advantages of desirelessness and when with 
these talks the mind of the hearer was softened, elated and pleased, then alone, 
he taught him the crux of his teachings— viz., the four Noble Truths— suffering, 
origin of suffering, cessation of suffering and the path leading to the cessation 
of suffering . 2 He further interpreted the old notions, customs and associa- 
tions in the new light of his teachings and put in new life into the old and 
neglected and discredited things of the past . 3 In all this, his ideal was to 
reform, reconstitute, replenish, interpret what was handed down and not to 
destroy nor demolish it. He is known as a great Religious Reformer and not a 
• Prophet . 4 He wanted to teach men how to live as human beings — in a 
dignified way. Great stress is, therefore, laid in his scheme of teaching on 
ethics and psychology and less stress in laid* on metaphysics and speculative 
philosophy . 6 To illustrate this statement, Gotama used many parables and 
similes and one of these parables is known as ‘The parable of the cloth *. 0 We 
shall briefly indicate the parable. If a piece of cloth were to put on the dye 
well, it must first be pure and clean, free from foulness and dirt. When the piece 
of cloth is thus rendered free from all stains, then it may put on any dye and 
come out with a good shining colour. There are similarly stains and impurities 
of the heart. There are avarice, malevolence, anger, malice, jealousy, envy, 
hypocracy, pride, arrogance, indolence and so forth. These impurities must 
first be done away and when one succeeds in doing it, one entertains full and 
listing faith in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Samgha. This unflinching 

wwwro, waforre fwnrre i k% 

Devan&garl Edition, page 15. 

1 »ro*T¥T3pft fir i 

* For example, quotes the Pali Text in exteruo. sr^TTOft — f imqflui — JJTT- 

tprft— Devan&garl Edition, page 24, ‘ {1444 qqn, qrtum 

STffW, tWi WTTWWW WWTO I 

• For example, mWTfit, fwrtw * f^T wft l WI , 

UPW— ' (>“ ‘he wwn), jfnrag (feeing). ? 

etc. 

* cr. gmnfi wrwt mft i Also ft* wmw, imnror i 

Itrfwift HDCWTT I **^—Devan&garI Edition (by Buddha Society), verse No. 276. 

4 The Paribb&jakaa asked him standardised questions: about the eternality or otherwise 
of the world, post-mortem existence of the Tath&gata, identity or otherwise of the Body or Life. 
Also compare the Brahmaj&la Sutta of the Dlgha-nlk&ya, vol. I, wherein 62 heresies are detailed. 
Also all these theories about the soul have been styled by Gotama as: fcffytr, fitfpnpr* 
ftftnnr , I It is one of the Four Depravities or the 

Asavas. yw W~Devan&garl Edition by Rajvade and others, page 4. 

• Known as fffTOpi, constituting the Sutta No. 7 of the WW — 

Devan&garl Edition by Rajvade and others, pages 26-29. Only the gist of this Sutta is given 

# in the body. Vide* pages 18-15. 

5 



66 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


faith enables one to renounce all selfishness and self-seeking and the attainment 
of the fruition of spiritual welfare and its causes follow as a matter of course. 
Thus the heart goes on the forward march of gladness to zest, and thence to 
tranquillity of body. With the latter enjoying tranquillity, a person experiences 
satisfaction, wherein is found the peace of one’s heart. This pitch of meri- 
torious states of consciousness once reached, one may not hurt or harm any 
one. The heart has undergone a process of purification, like gold or silver. 
With heart pure and mind steady, radiant thoughts of love, compassion, 
rejoicing and equibalance of mind pervade each of the four quarters and this 
proceeds triumphantly to embrace vast and boundless life, in which there is 
no hate nor ill-will. This state of mind paves the way for deliverance from 
bonds and cankers and depravities. He realizes that he has successfully lived 
the highest life and there is nothing more to attain for him. • This is the 
true washing of the inner life and then nothing will purify him — since he is- 
purity itself ! This parable of the cloth admirably sums up the regular steps 
through which the Bhikkhu must pass to attain to the complete unfoldment 
and development of his personality. There is no destruction of being but 
the being is carried to the highest pitch of expansion and universality — to 
the building up of a personality characterized by chastened thoughts, develop- 
ment of noble and generous and altruistic sentiments and emotions and com- 
plete absence of self-seeking. It is an identification of the personal and the 
Universal ! 

< It may, on the other hand, be argued that this may be all right for the 
Bhikkhu ; but what teachings has Gotama to impart to lay persons, to family 
men and women, who have dealings with the world and to lead life in the world. 
To them, the ideas of the suffering and the noble truths would not at all help 
to live happily on this earth. For them Gotama has delivered exclusive 
sermons and taught them their duties and responsibilities. To the Brahmin 
householders of Pataligama he has brought home the advantages of a virtuous 
life. A man of a strong rectitude acquires great wealth and glory through 
his untiring efforts, earns good reputation abroad, he enters into any society 
as confident and self-possessed and when the inevitable death overtakes hin> 
he dies without anxiety and is bom in a noble state . 1 He has always 
emphasized on the necessity of leading a good life. Again in his sermon to 
the Brahmin heads of families in the village of Sala (in Kosala) he clearly 
distinguishes as to what constitutes Righteous or Dhammacariyfi and 
Unrighteous life or Adhammacariya. Recognizing three avenues of actions of 
the body, speech and mind there are found three acts of the Body, four aots of 
Speech and three acts of Mind: 

(i) Abstinence from killing, from theft, and all sensual misconduct — 
These constitute Righteous acts of the Body . 

1 This Suita is addressed to the Brahmin householders of P&talig&ma and oooura in many 
placet like, Dlghe-nikAya, Vol. H, Mah&vagga (Vinaya Pifaka) and Udina. We here quote this 
8utta from the IHgba-nik&ya, Vol. (No. 16)-Dev.. Edition (Bombay 

University), pages 69-71. A gist of the Sutta is given in the body. 

9 » 


DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IK MAN (BHTJNA) ? 67 

(ii) Refrain from deliberately lying or citing false testimony, from 

indulging in slander and obstructing harmony and good-will, from 
bitterness of tongue and ensure development of pleasantness and 
urbanity in speech, and from indulging in tattle and thereby 
cultivating a habit of speaking in season, illuminating and well- 
supported — These constitute Righteous acts of the Speech. 

(iii) Not anything to do with covetousness, malevolence or wickedness 

of thought and developing right outlook and correctness in 
conceptions — These constitute Righteous acts of the Mind. 1 * * 

Again, while speaking with lay disciples, Gotama talked to them in terms 
of human aspirations, aims and ideals which make a man successful in life. 
He had a conversation with Mallika, the chief Queen of Pasenadi of Kosala* 
To a questioh from the Queen he answers how one obtains health, beauty and 
social position. The necessary qualifications are given as absence of violent 
nature, expression of anger, rage or hatred, a disposition to charity and 
munificence and rejoicing in the prosperity of others, or when they get 
honours. This development of nature qualifies one to naturally win the 
honours and blessings of worldly life. Further, Gotama taught men their 
duties as family men and the necessity of living a successful life in the midst 
of storms, worries and miseries of life. In a number of small Suttas, like the 
Mah& Mangala Sutta, the Parabhava Sutta, the Vasala Sutta, the Vijaya Sutta 
and Sigala Sutta,* he has given such advice, diagnosed life of the world like 
a chemical analyser, pointed out pitfalls, and given his ideas of success in life. 
He has taught how to develop nature, how to form character and ensure 
fairness in dealings with others, how to foster friendliness and fellow-feeling 
towards man and man, how to enlarge one’s outlook and broaden the vision 
by eschewing accidental circumstances or difference due to birth or family, 
how to purify and strengthen the avenues of actions and in general, how to 
create an atmosphere, in which ‘ being* in man should blossom forth and radiate 
its lustre and love, pleasing, comforting and holding out hope to all ! Thus in 
his scheme of life, whether intended for the homeless Bhikkhu or the house- 
holder, his sole aim seems to have been to add lustre, dignity and all com- 
prehensiveness to life and the child in man. 

Buddha' 8 ideas of Good and Evil used in the development of man : 

While considering the charge of BhunahCi, it is expedient to see how 
Gotama analysed the mind and its processes and formulated a scheme of 
Psychological Ethics with a view to build up a powerful personality and not 
to weaken or degenerate it. He discovered three Hetus or Causes of Raga or 

1 *r#*V*.— "(No. * 1 ) — • Edition by Rajvade and 
others, pages 191-195. In the body, only a gist is given. The opposite of these constitute 
the *1 JnrighUou* Life', 

* Known as the — An^tteu^a-mk&ysk. Translated in 4 Buddhism in Transla- 

tions*, by Warren— IV— 197 (P.T.S., pages 228-231), 

* All these are from the 8utta Nip&ta, only the last is in the Dlgha-nikiya, Vol. HI. 



68 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Cupidity, Dosa or Malevolenoe and Moha or Infatuation or stupidity of 
mind ; as also three opposite Hetus. By analysing human consciousness he 
found it to consist of 89 types. He invented his theory of states 
of consciousness (Dhamma) and grouped them under three heads of 
Kusala or Meritorious, Akusala or Demeritorious or Abyakata or Inter- 
mediate. 1 He found* the mind to be always carrying on a struggle 
between these three types of the Dhamma or states of consciousness. These 
further proved to be a feeder to the material form or Rupa, Sensations 
or Vedana, Perceptions or Sanna, Predispositions or Sankharas and Life-con- 
tinuing contingent principle or Vinnana. He thus gave to the world his 
notion of Five Groups or Pancakkhandas, in which he admirably summed up 
‘sentient existence’. Happiness or suffering is caused by the operation of 
either the three Motives or springs of Action — Raga, Dosa and Moha or A-raga, 
A-dosa and A-moha. The first group causing demeritorious states of conscious-, 
ness and causing suffering, while the other group causing meritorious states of 
consciousness and producing happiness. Thus by analysing the mental 
phenomena, Gotama taught man to struggle on towards perfection of the 
child-man by eliminating the demeritorious states of consciousness and placing 
instead meritorious states of consciousness, 2 so that good thoughts alone may 
be the permanent feature or character of man and consequently his actions 
through the avenues should turn out to be only good and not evil. To achieve 
this end he prescribed various methods, which are well defined in the Nikayas. 
In giving to the world his ideas of Sentient Existence, Gotama introduced the 
truth that our life is in a continual state of flux or becoming and this perennial 
change, being the essential characteristic of life there is nothing everlasting or 
permanent like the Soul or the Atman. 8 This, however, produced the greatest 
misunderstanding about him: that he was the Teacher of the Annihilation of 
man (Ucchedavadi). He killed the soul in man. But the fact that Gotama 
accepted the Law of Kamma should have been an eye-opener to those who 
levelled this charge against him. Gotama distinctly states that none can 
destroy one’s kamma or the fruit of good or bad deeds of life. None can 
escape this tribunal. Gotama thus admitted abiding and lasting in man and, 
at the same time, accepted progression in life. Life means going from lower 

1 Compare the Dhammaearpgam — First page. Devan&garl Edition (Bh.O. Series, No. 2) — 
by Bapat and Vadekar, 1940. 

* The struggle for the production of good thoughts and the destruction of evil thoughts 
is known in Pftli as WWHTT Four Eight Efforts. The original Text reads thus:— 

wiw *n$*ii*f viiaitu wurnft i vpnrm vrvamr a rwnft i wpprcrm 

fWWTW WlfW WTWHft I fWW fintftWPTTO WTOTlft. The 'afcwiTOft— • 

Burmese Edition— Hanthavaddy Press.— qwtff xri^^.^i^W^fWJft—Section No. 343, 
page 78. * 

8 All this Physical and Mental Existence, which Gotama Buddha analysed, was traced to 
ttpHW, ^flPWWarT^t. It is this contingent existence that it is examined in the light 
of the Three Characteristics of Anicca or impermanence, Dukkha or suffering and Anattft or 
esseooelessnees or absence of Atman. This Anatmatfi is, in other words, the theory of Dham- 
mu, which are 'characterised by the absence of any character of true TUalitv. 1 Bmrnnri this 
lie has not explained, but left it Aby&kata or unexplained. 



DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IK MAN (BHUyA) ? 


to high, high to higher, and higher to the highest and thence to the tran- 
scendental. Man thus has ample scope for expansion and development and 
through this limited region, the unsubstantial character of which is to be first 
realized by anicca, dukkha and anatt&, we pass into to the causeless, uncondi* 
tioned and illimitable liberation (Vimokkha), which is and to be realized by 
experience . 1 He thus admits the existence of what he calls as the Nibb&na. 
In this connection reference has already been made to the Nirodha or cessation 
(vide : Gotama' s Primary Aim). This cessation has been misunderstood 
and coupled as it is along with the Nibbana., it has been argued that 
the Nibbana too is a negative ideal and it stands for ‘Nothingness ' — it is 
'Annihilation of Self'. In the famous formula of the Dependent Origination 
(Paticca-Samuppada), the Vinnana gives rise to Nama-rfipa or Name 
Form and *with the cessation of this Vinfiana, there is cessation of 
*Nama-rupa. The conception of DhammS or states of consciousness is 
introduced as contradistinguished from that the Dhammadhatu or the 
Nibbanadhatu 2 The latter is a radiant universal VinMna as opposed 
to the Vinn&nakkhanda of the Five Groups. Both consist of the 
Vififiana-essence; but while one is identical with the radiant universally pure 
ViMdna (Pabhassara-citta), the other is the starting point of the cosmic 
evolution of the Dhatus and is the Kilittha-citta, appearing in connection with 
the sensuous shape on the plane of Nama-rupa, its essence as principle of 
impermanence being manifested in the PratiyasamutpMa. In the Kevafta 
Sutta of the Digha-nikaya 8 Gotama has given a real picture of the Nibb&na 
by the introduction of Vinfiana. 'In this ancient Buddhist Vijfianav&da, the 
quality and position of the radiant Vijfiana was not that of a permanent element 
within the impermanent structure of things, i.e. within namarupa, or even 
that of the pure nama-dharma, but that of the transcendent infinite Vijfi&na, 

1 The verse from the Dhammapada reads thus: 

OTift wfwfirrft w firefrwfr w i 

*T*T%*W SJWT* irfff W II Arhant Vagga (No. 7), verse No. 92. 

It is in fact attributeless existence, whioh we have in another place shown to be ‘ transcen- 
dental shining VifiMna* . 

a I am greatly indebted to the work, entitled ‘ N&ma-Rupa and Dharma-Rupa’, by 
Dr. (Miss) Maryla Falk, D.Litt., and published by the University of Calcutta (1943). The author 
has treated the subject of the Nibbana in relation to the main position of the Upanishadic thought. 
I have freely drawn upon this work in dealing with this question of the Nibb&na and in the 
body of this paper I have given the number of page of the work whioh I have either quoted 
or drawn upon the phraseology in course of the treatment of this subject. 

• (No. 12) (TOft tfTlft ) — Devan&garl Edition (Bombay University, 

1942), page 250. Gotama asks the Bhikkhu to restate the question, for the solution of which 
he had wandered among gods and heavens, thus: 

WT wtft * arnffw i TO *1 ^ 1 ** * nwi 

The answer to this corrected question is as follows:— 

'pn'i w I mufti 

^ vthjh i w wn** ^mwxft i 

«TOri&’fti 



70 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


where contingent nama as well as rtipa have ceased to exist . . . The immobiliza- 
tion of VifinSna (Vififianassa nirodhena) is the transformation of the con- 
sciousness stream into the transcendent, radiant, universal ViMajia.’ Here 
the implication that the four elements as constituting rtipa have their foothold 
in the individual nama (but) they have no foothold whatsoever in the 
undifferentiated transcendent Vijnana (pages 68-69). 1 Thus Gotama accepted 

the existence of the Nibbana as a transcendent reality comparable to the 
immeasurable Great Ocean in which * the manifold streams of name and form 
cease to exist ’. The impermanent, suffering and essenceless test concerns the 
whole range of the notion of contingent really both in its sensuous and un- 
sensuous aspects. 2 The Dhamma or states of consciousness were the elements 
of manifold experience constituting contingent existence as opposed to the 
unique ecstatic universal experience constituting the transcendent reality 
(Dhamma) (page 63). Again on the Sutta of the ‘Noble Quest’, Gotama' 
distinguishes that quest as noble, which aims at reaching the Nibbana, which 
is self-existent, without decay, transcendental and incomparable security. 2 
Other epithets of the Nibbana as uncreated (Akata), ineffable, peaceful, from 
which there is no coming back, point to its unique character of its being really — 
existent. This hope, this ideal, as real as the Upanishadic ideal of the Brahman, 
this simmum bonum of life creates in man an urge and a goad to act and to 
move. The child in man is thus urged on to struggle and to attain what is 
real, existing and where all disharmony ends in harmony, incompleteness in 
completeness, imperfection in perfection, and emptiness in fullness. Further, 
this is not a mere phantasy of the brain, not hallucination, not an imaginary 
satisfaction nor a mere hope. Those Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, who have 
realized it, have recorded their experiences in those outpourings of hearts, 
constituting the TheragathS. and the Therigatha* Gotama did not preach 
them the doctrine of Annihilation (ucchedavada). He taught them that 
there was other existence, richer, fuller, and universal. There was always 
operative in this world the law of cause and effect, the law of Kamma, the 
existence and persistence of Kamma ; that the centre of self-consciousness must 
yield to universal consciousness and that though suffering be the law of the 
world and the body be the evil, still, out of this body, the hope and redemption 

* This ftwTO which is transcendental and shining corresponds to the (uncon- 

ditioned freedom). 

* Of. *lft ftflTT ¥WT mtfttTT tntonrr | tpnv*— verse II. 

* Edition by Rajvade and 
Others (1910), pages 115-116. The original P&li words are wni q frufrq ftw I 

* Read, for example, the following: 'Very many of the Theris were no doubt women of 

acknowledged culture and they did preach as teachers of men and did expound on various ooca- 
sons the essential and subtler facts of human Ufe and experience ... we see in these verses 
the expressions and energies and emotions, newly awakened or diverted iijto new channels. 
(Refer to the Devan&gari Edition of the Bombay University, pages ii and iii). 

Xiao compare the following verses from the Dhammapada:— 

syi ** Shro ttota i 

trittv Svcw 1 |— No, 197, m *1(0 the next three vereee. 




71 


DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN HAN (tiEUfA) ? 

of humanity will emerge as a certainty. The Bhikkhus ought not to commit 
suicide nor put an end to their life. 1 They must purify this body, cultivate 
this body, keep this body hygienically pure, properly dress it, and learn to 
behave decently, and with dignity with others. In thought, in deed and in 
action they must be perfectly tolerant, considerate, sympathetic, serviceable 
and self-sacrificing. The turbulence of spirit, unruly behaviour, want of 
manners, not to show proper distance towards elders, display of licentious 
conduct, immoderation in food, absent-mindedness, sloth and torpor, stupidity 
and inaction and want of understanding — these were strongly condemned. 2 
Gotama trained his disciples, removed their wildness and boorishness, intro- 
duced discipline, encouraged fellow-feeling and mutual understanding, built up 
moral and emotional nature, and thus strengthened, purified and developed 
their powers and intellect. Thus he built up the child in man on surer founda- 
tions of character, mental culture and knowledge. 8 

i 

Charge of Repression of Instincts and Emotions : 

Before we finish this paper, it is necessary to deal with the following 
charges brought against Gotama: Firstly, the ‘Method* of Analysis’ which 
Gotama employed in the solution of the problem of suffering had the conse- 
quence of ‘arousing disgust’ against other emotions and instincts, which 
are of more abiding value for the religious life’. Secondly, ‘this Method of 
Analysis destroys all it touches ’ ; ‘ and is it not better to sublimate the instincts 

and emotions than to repress them ? The instinct of curiosity and the 

emotion of wonder are of greater worth to religion and to morality than the 
instinct of repulsion and the emotion of disgust’ (p. 98). Thirdly, ‘it is surely 
a radical fault in the method of Gotama as teacher that he dealt too summarily 
with the natural and primary instincts and emotions, which a great teacher 
must sublimate and not repress'* 

In the proceeding treatment, a reply to these charges will be easily dis- 
covered, but we shall further pursue these charges and try to meet them. 
In the first place, the ‘Method of Analysis’, which Gotama applied, is the most 
effective and scientific method of the modem times. To remove the fear, 
obsession, helplessness and the consequential pessimistic outlook of life, 
Gotama analysed the suffering itself and found therein nothing but a 
‘ bundle of categories * and contingent existence that come together and that, 
therefore, could be destroyed . Gotama thus created a feeling of confidence 

l Milinda Pafiha — Devan&garl Edition (Bombay University) — by Vadekai*— pages 194-195 
< ^ Also read the translation from ‘Buddhism in Translations* 

by Warren, pages 436-440. 

» Compare the (No. 69) of the n ft nufaf uft, q ft MW Devanftgarl 

Edition (Bombay University), pages 139-144. In fact, Gotama’s Bhikkhus and Bhikkhmps 
were always characterized by neatness, deoency, outward form or deportment, sweetness 
and affability df nature, compassionate heart, and may be compared to the Catholio Fathers 
and Mothers of the Christian Church, which came into existence 500 years after Gotama. 

t Known as Jhi, *wif*r * nd TO- 

4 4 Gotama Buddha* by K. J. Saunders (The Heritage of India Series), Chapter VH, ‘Gotama 
as a Teacher*. The above quotations are from this chapter. 


72 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


amongst his hearers. He first softened, elated, enoouraged and pleased the 
minds of his hearers 1 and then he taught them the crux of his teachingsr- 
the four Noble Truths. Gotama resorted to this Analytical Method so that 
he could afterwards impress upon them the synthesis of Life. Having proved 
that the Five Attachment Groups (upadana khandhas) constituted the suffering, 
he further showed how they can be sublimated by the detachment of UpadSna. 
Being concerned with ‘suffering’, he had to develop softer instincts and emo- 
tions like compassion, sympathy, fellow-feeling, consideration, encouragement, 
tendency to isolate with a view to finally join . He taught the value of peace, 
composure, placidity, freedom from flirtation, worry and restlessness, removal 
of the turbidity of surging waves of blind love or lust, and the necessity of 
clarity of vision, birth of understanding, development and expansion of outlook 
and dropping off the curtain of ignorance, impulsiveness and* momentary 
olouding of the reason. He did succeed in doing this and it can be proved 
by a number of stories from the Thera and the Therigatha or the Dhammapada 
Atthakatha. What were the circumstances in which those men and women of 
the world approached him ? They were like ‘unhappy incidents of the worldly 
life, like the death of an only child, widowhood, disappointment or a rude shock 
received by the conduct of the husband or one’s children, disgust, degradation 
or demoralization in the domestic condition, or such unusual incident in the 
walk of life’. 2 What did Gotama do ? He was filled with Mett& and Kanina 
(Love and Compassion) for them. His magnetic Personality combined with 
the affability of temper immediately produced assurance and comfort into the 
hearts of lady visitors. He proved to them the futility of grief, operation of 
the inexorable Law of Cause and Effect and wide universality of the suffering 
and thus succeeded in removing the poignancy, intensity, turbidity of their 
emotions. 3 To Kisa Gotami (No. 63) or to Ubbiri (No. 31) or §on& (No. 46) 
or Patacara (No. 47) or to Canda (No. 49) or to Vasitthi (No. 61) — majority 
of whom suffered from the shock of personal loss — he used the Method of 
Analysis to show that the subject of their bitter lamentation was nothing but 
a bundle of Five Groups and thus the dawn of reason made them pause 
and think . Gotama did not arouse disgust, but aroused their ‘ faculty of thinking * 
and awakened their reason. They found that Law of Death was not res- 
tricted to them, but was of general application. Thus Gotama tried to remove 
the narrowness of instincts or emotions and substitute universality of outlook 
and consequently, the universality of their feelings and emotions. They 
put off their personality and entered into relations with the universe on the 

l The usual phrase is arwftnr, fafhnc* ftni, ***fiPT, TOlrfVn. 

* Compare the ‘Preface* to the Therigatha, Dev. Edition (Bombay University), page vii. 
Tbs numbers and names mentioned above in the body are from the Therigatha. 

* Having thus removed the outer or surface disturbance of the flurry and turbulence of the 
minA f Gotama succeeded in implanting and stabilizing what Mr. Saunders <&lls ‘the natural 
a nd primary instincts and emotions, but now disrobed of all their wildness and narr own es s . 
Hair love for the world was no longer that of a child's curiosity and wonder, but understand- 
jng and satisfaction of curiosity— elements whose importance in religion and morality cannot^ be 
BoOtttriiaMUa \ 




DID THE BUDDHA KILL THE CHILD IN MAN (BHUNA) ? 73 

strength of ohastened, broadened, and universalized properties of the mind 
(oetasika) and the Brahmavih&ras or exalted states. They chastened their 
pride by humility, resentment by forgiveness, narrow love of kinsman to 
universal benevolence and family life to the selfless and impersonal brother- 
hood. 1 With this new implication and interpretation of life and universalized 
vision, they found themselves in a new world of action and active piety as 
messengers of hppe and consolation. They were not disgusted with the world, 
nor did they abhor the world, but they entered the world with these sub- 
limated feelings 2 and reclaimed many souls like the Theris Ambftp&li, the 
Ganika, Addhakasi or Vimala (both harlots) and the Theras, like Angulimala, 
the Highwayman, Sunlta, the Sweeper, Upali, the Barber. All these souls 
were reclaimed not by physical force, not by rod or sword, but out of bound- 
less love for them. The two or three examples which Mr. Saunders has cited 
•on pages 95-97 of his book and especially about the loathsomeness 
and the foulness of the Body as evinoed in Cemeteries (Sivathik&s). 8 
They are intended as a discipline to a person, who has been indulging 
in the pleasures of the Flesh. This discipline by understanding the 
unsubstantial nature of the Body is meant not for all but for those who 
have to bring their mind under control. Such disciplinary practices are 
found even among the Christian Fathers, who know that ‘the Body is 
the Temple of the Holy Spirit’ (page 98). Why, many a time the 
body used to be whipped and it was necessary for disciplining it. Gotama 
taught the Asubha Bhavana or realizing the foulness of the Body to remove 
the influx of undesirable tendencies of lust or sensual thoughts, thoughts of 
envy or malice or vengeance, or thoughts of egoism or pride. There also the 
doors of the senses or five sense organs were not closed to the natural and 
primary instincts and emotions, but they were guarded . 4 Gotama did want 
his Bhikkhus to see, hear, smell, taste and feel the touch and entertain good 
thoughts (Dhamma), but only do it in such a way as to shut out the demeri- 
torious states of consciousness (Akusala Dhamma) and entertain, foster, 
develop and expand only the meritorious states of consciousness (Kusalfi 
Dhammfi,). In the note on the Sammappadhana or Right Exertions 
it has been shown that Gotama abhorred vacuum in the mind and 
hence the gap, caused by the destruction of the demeritorious states, was 
to be filled up by good ones and thus the mind was to be completely 
filled by meritorious states of consciousness. 5 They are visible in 

1 ‘Patna University Readership Lectures* (1024*1026), by self, pages 32-33. (Published 
1020 .) 

5 We would prefer the term ‘ohastened* to ‘sublimated*. 

1 Buddhaghosa has, in his Visuddhimagga, devoted one complete chapter to this form of 
disciplining and drilling the body. This, however, was not meant for all Bhikkhus. 

4 The Pill word is Compare the following:— 

(Sk. 9Vif » covered) t WP9HT W 

• 1 The idea was that the mind to be so broadened and expanded as to include the universe. 
It is comparable to the four elements, which oover aQ spoos. In the (No. 62) 



74 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Twenty-five Cetasikas or mental properties of the type of moral 
beauty . 1 They sum up the perfect development of the moral and emotional 
nature of Man. The Bhikkhus or the BhikkhuijJs of Gotama were not at all 
adversely affected by the teachings of Gotama, especially in the matter of 
controlling and restraining the sense organs, but they were fully appreciative 
of what is grand, sublime and beautiful in Nature. The Buddhist Bhikkhus 
and Bhikkhunls found the grand scenes of Nature like mountains, rivers, 
trees, peacocks, clouds, mountains, dens or dales helpful to their mental 
development and abstract meditation. In the Theragatha the Bhikkhus 
have sung the glory of natural phenomena 2 thus showing that they were 
keen admirers and appreciators of what is sublime and beautiful in Nature. 
Their liking and a sense of perception of the beautiful and the consequent 
development of nobler feelings and emotions is a direct repudiation of 
Mr. Saunder’s statement, which we have noted as the third charge. The* 
Buddhists were the first people to apply art for religious purposes. ‘Buddhist 
Art 5 has been a subject of wonder and admiration to the artist, the archaeo- 
logist and the antiquarian. If Gotama’s teachings had resulted in repressing 
the natural instincts of man, the glories of Sanchl, Barhut, Ajanta and 
Ellora and Amaravati, with their paintings and sculpture, the Toranas and 
gateways, their carvings and history in stone, the most artistic figures with 
eloquent expression and faultless symmetry — all these give a direot lie to this 
unwarranted statement. Again, Anathpi^idika’s Arama, King Bimbisara’s 
Vejuvana, Migaramata’s Pasada (Mansion), Ambap&li’s gift of a Vihara — all 
these bear testimony to the development of generous instincts and sentiments 
in the hearts of the Upasakas and Up&sikas, men and women of the world. 
Lastly, the fuller and richer perfection and culmination of these nobler and 
generous instincts, sentiments and emotions is to be traced to the later ideal 
of the Bodhisatta. In tracing the gradual development of thought and 
teachings of the Buddha, we find it passing from the intellectual (Arhatship) 
to the emotional (Bodhisatta), from the prosaic and dry to the religious and 
the mystic. Gotama J s call to the Bhikkhus to wander over the face of the earth 
in the interests of the masses (Bahujana) 2 found its culmination in the 
Bodhisattva Ideal. The Bodhisatta, though he was on the road to Buddhaship, 
exerts himself not for his own good or salvation but for the good of others; 


of the qftuwfta 1 1|— fffflfi* qq | W , Gotama exhorts rTWW thus, qrftai KTWQ HT¥*T Httfil 
wrftw wrftvi w m rwra vm mtfa. Meritorious states of consciousness to cover 

the internal and external existence of the Bhikkhu. This was to be in fact the Quantum of 
his Personality. 

1 • Patna University Readership Lectures ’ — Chart to face page 128 — they are known as 

* qnw ifnwwr • 

1 $K*Vm — Devan&garl Edition (Bombay University), Appendix: qyfjyqqpn (Mature 
descriptions). 

* HTTWft —ft WPl«< — ( ( ) IfTTWlt— Devanigarl Edition (Bombay Uni vanity) 
p**® M— font, ▼rfu* ww-wn Sfrnywn 



man’s reason and his quest of truth, good and beauty 75 

so great is his sympathy and compassion for them. He refuses the attain- 
ment of the NibbSna until his fellow-beings have also secured their freedom . 1 
Such is his boundless love for creation. In the Bodhisatta, there is develop- 
ment par excellence of the ten cardinal virtues or Paramitaa.* Says the 
Bodhisatta, 'Just as elements beginning with Earth serve in various ways 
beings, residing under the widest space, even so should I, residing under the 
oanopy of the sky, serve them as long as all of them have not attained bliss.’ 

Conclusion : 

It will thus be clear that Gotama’s teachings did not tend to kill the 
'Child in Man ’ but rather helped to build it up for the altruistic ideal of serving 
others even at the sacrifice of personal interest. Those teachings were in- 
tended to add lustre to personality by making it more dignified and supreme. 
Gotama laid down a scheme of life both for the Laity and the Bhikkhu, which 
would make them reformed , would vastly improve their potential strength, 
would increase their scope and extent of action from self-seeking to altruism, 
would create out of them a dynamic reality, untramelled by nothing, free, 
fearless and invincible, chastened in speech, body and mind and shining 
gloriously to emanate its energizing rays to revivify and rejuvenate the world ! 
History bears ample witness to this grand consummation ! 


MAN’S REASON AND HIS QUEST OF TRUTH, GOOD AND BEAUTY 

By 

Mr. Charu Chandra Dutt, I.C.S. (Retd.) 

The biologist tells us that the life of every animal is an effort to survive 
and to make a place for itself on the earth. The animal seeks to make room 
not only for itself individually, but also collectively for its family or its group 
as in a beehive or in an ant-hill or in a beaver colony. This constitutes the whole 
life of the lower animal. No doubt the same impulse has swayed man as well, 
but it accounts for only a small portion of his activities. For the rest he has 
been guided largely by his mind and intellect. He is pre-eminently the mental 
being, the animal that thinks and reasons. This is not the place to traoe 
man’s evolutionary history. Nor is it necessary to do so. Every thinking 
man of today knows how in the primaeval matter, apparently inert and 
ineonscient, the dormant life-force woke up, how in the subconscient living 
being a consciousness and a mind emerged, how that primitive mind gradually, 
through millenniums, evolved into a rational intellect. Man has, by exercising 
this new-born faculty of his, learnt not only to control the foroes of nature 
but also to Wild" up vast organisations and fulfil his life individually and 

> ‘Patna University Readership Lectures*, page 213. 

• The Ten P&ramitAs are: 

inn, n, *fVrn, *»n i 




76 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


collectively — fulfil, not like his animal predecessors only vitally and physically, 
but on a higher plane, mentally and rationally. He has today become an 
expert in both curing and killing, feeding and starving, educating and enslaving 
his fellow-men, and he is clever enough to justify every thing that he does. 
But surely, this miserable state cannot be the ultimate aim of human evolution, 
the end of Nature’s long travail. A greater harmony must be achieved between 
our intelligent will and the Truth and Light that lie dormant in us and of which 
we have had but fleeting glimpses. This is the high miracle for which the 
world is waiting. Tn the Master’s words, 

‘The animal is a living laboratory in which nature has, it is said, worked 
out man. Man himself may well be a thinking living laboratory in whom 
and with whose conscious co-operation she wills to work out the super-man, 
the god, or shall we say rather, the manifest God I ’ * 

Life-energy dormant in matter has emerged as a thinking and mentally 
conscious life. But involved in mind, and therefore in life and body too, 
there is a still higher faculty, a super-mind, ruler of the other three, which 
must also wako up in due time and take charge of man’s onward march. Man 
is destined to transcend his half-lit mind in order to realise his highest and his 
earliest aspiration. There is abundant evidence to show that with the first 
dawn of knowledge man started in quest of Truth, Perfection, Bliss and a 
secret Immortality. Periods of doubt and diffidence have no doubt inter- 
vened, but he has always come back to this original pursuit. What then is 
man’s true goal ? What must he do to perfect himself ? He must harmonise 
his inner with his outer self. He must discover the divine Reality and 
realise the ideal and complete Person within himself, and then in the light of 
his discovery and of his realisation shape his whole outer life. 

Since this is man’s true nature, neither the ancient Greek ideal nor the 
modem European ideal can lead him to the highest or the widest goal of his 
collective progress. The Hellenic mind was ‘philosophic, aesthetic and 
political ’ ; the modem mind lays but little stress on true beauty, it is principally 
‘scientific, economic and utilitarian*. Both take it that man is a mental 
animal, that the mentalised physical life is his field and that the rational 
intellect is his highest faculty. But we see already in the present subjective 
age a tendency towards an ancient truth and ideal. Followed to its end, 
this tendency will lead man to the realisation that he is, in truth, a developing 
soul seeking to fulfil himself in the three lower terms of his existence — mind, 
life and body. It is a spiritual and not a mentalised physical life that is his 
goal. At the end of his long travail towards a perfect culture and a rational 
society there looms man’s ancient spiritual idea of a kingdom of Heaven on 
earth. ‘We shall perceive before us the ideal of a self-illumined, self-possessing 
and self-mastering soul in a pure and perfect mind and body/ 

The spirit then and not the rational intellect is man’s sovereign faculty. 
Reason is an insufficient light to guide us to our high end. In our daily life 
we are content to be led by our intelligent will, but to achieve our true a/m 
we must entrust ourselves to a higher knowledge and will, and set free otir 



man’s reason and his quest of truth, good and beauty 77 

dormant soul-faoulties. Thus alone shall we integrally unfold the divine 
within us in our individual soul and in our collective life. Else we may simply 
revert to the old idea of a spiritualised typal society, such as was the basis 
of the ancient Indian culture. The principal feature of that culture was what 
is called the caste system, that is to say the division of the whole community 
into four types, which were elastic enough at the start but which culminated 
by convention into four rigid divisions. The whole system was challenged 
from time to time by various religious movements, small and great, that took 
their stand on rationalism. But what we should remember in this connection 
is that ‘the typal principle is not that of the ideal human society’. Even 
according to the Indian theory it does not belong to the period of man’s highest 
development, when he had realised his divine possibility — the Satya Yuga, 
the age of perfect Truth. Nor does it belong to the period of crude disorder, 
•when man has sunk back towards the life of instincts, impulses and desires — 
the Kali Yuga. It is rather the principle of the ages in between — the Treta 
and the Dvapara— when man sought to maintain some form of his Dharma — 
in Treta by law, in Dvapara by fixed convention. The law of the age of Truth 
can be realised only by the gradual awakening of the divine power and 
knowledge in us. 

Our intelligence is a mediator between the infra -rational and the supra- 
rational in us. The former is the animal part of our nature consisting in the 
main of our instincts and impulses, and of the obscure haphazard intuitions 
of our lower mind and will. It is struggling to be clear and precise but cannot 
succeed owing to an innate ignorance. It is the business of our intellect to 
enlighten it, to classify and organise its impulses and intuitions, and to help 
it along towards the definition it has been groping after. The supra-rational 
is the spiritual side of our nature which sees by its own light the Infinite in 
the finite, the One in the many, the Absolute in the relative. Our human 
intelligence looks up towards the One, the Infinite and the Absolute, but only 
with a sort of remote understanding, and is unable to seize its truth. The 
three powers of being are coexistent in all our activities. It is only when the 
spiritual in us takes up the lead that we are able to transcend all limitation 
and realise the ultimate Reality. ^ 

How limited the scope of reason is, becomes strikingly clear when we 
come to that large range of human experiences which constitutes man’s religious 
life. To begin with, the very words of the religious being are unintelligible 
to the man of reason. But the difficulty is not of language alone. The spirit 
and mood of religious thought and action are equally foreign to him; it is to 
him a str ang e life that the man of religion leads. The rational being may 
take the trouble of learning the native’s tongue, but he must also largely 
shed his own peculiar ways of thought before he can expect to understand 
the native. Otherwise, when he fanoies himself an adept at understanding 
the native tongue and goes on to express his own views regarding the native 
the situation is apt to be one of misunderstanding and misrepresentation. 
To* the man of spiritual experience the intelligent man’s learned words sound 



78 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


like the babble of a child trying to describe the ways of the adult. At the 
best, a rational explanation of a spiritual experience is superficial, and relates 
more or less to the externals. The attitude of reason face to faoe with religion 
is likely to be shallow and presumptuous. Either it looks upon religion as 
pure nonsense, a mass of superstitions, a survival of barbarism, or it proceeds 
to analyse religion as an affair of the mind and seeks to correct it. Often in a 
lofty patronising manner it concedes that religion is not without its uses for the 
uplift of the ignorant lower classes. But this is not half as bad as when the 
intellect proceeds to formulate that wonderful thing, a rational religion — which 
is as ridiculous as trying to find out a body’s weight with a tape or its length 
with a pair of scales. It must not, however, be lost sight of that the critical 
attitude of the intellect towards religion has been quite useful to man’s 
progress — nay, even to religion itself. To deny religion altogether is senseless 
as man has begun to find out already. It is very much like the foreigner 
considering the native’s ways to be absurd and untenable simply because they 
are not his own. The extreme rationalist calls upon the religious man to 
satisfy him by adducing material proofs. The difficulty, however, arises mainly 
from the reason’s proneness to judge every thing by its externals much as a 
superior foreigner tries to judge a native civilisation by the dress and habits 
of the native. Intellectuals of a gentler persuasion have attempted to frame 
a comparative science of religion, a pseudo-scientific anomaly on the face of it. 
These mild condonations of religion have fortunately never lasted long. Like- 
wise the benevolent attempts at erecting a rational religion have failed to 
convince anybody and have left no permanent effect on human thought. 

The reason is obvious. The aim of religion is to seek and find God, to 
know and realise Him in one’s own self and in every other self. To know 
Him is to adore Him. To adore Him is not only to climb up to Him but also 
to bring Him down in all love and devotion into our earthly life in order to 
transform it, to divinise it. All this has nothing to do with reasoning. The 
God-seeker does not look for proofs of His existence. He requires none. His 
intimate experiences do not proceed by scientific experiments or philosophical 
t hinking . There are indeed some kinds of religious discipline which outwardly 
resemble scientific experimentation, but these are in fact no more than mere 
verification of realisations that have come by revelation and intuition from 
above. The love of God, the delight in God, the surrender to God, these 
are all beyond rational limitation. In the Master’s words, ‘wherever religion 
really finds itself / . . its way is absolute and its fruits are ineffable \ 

Has reason then no part to play in matters religious? Yes, it has, 
but quite a secondary part. It can interpret the realisations of the spirit 
in its own language to the man of intellect. Just at the present juncture 
in human history this is an important function. Man seemsi to have got 
tired of his intellectual wanderings and has begun to look inwards in search 
of a higher truth. But even in this search the scope of religious philosophy 
is very limited. True knowledge it cannot give. It can only lead the 



man’s reason and his quest of truth, good and beauty 79 

intellect up to a certain point and then ask it to seek this true knowledge by 
subtler means that are beyond its own province. 

There is however another level of man’s spiritual life where the intellect 
can do a oertain amount of independent and legitimate work. We have 
already referred to man’s infra-rational life — his life of instincts, impulses 
and crude emotions — where his aspiration towards Truth had its first begin- 
nings ; much impurity, ignorance and superstition marked this stage of his 
seeking. It would seem that reason has a legitimate function to exercise 
here in bringing light and purity into the muddy current of man’s instinctive 
life. Reason has undoubtedly been able to do some work in this direction ; 
but only to a limited extent, because the whole urge of the religious being 
is to transcend the semi-obscurity of the intellect and soar into the full light 
of the higher regions. 

Rationalism has also done muoh useful work where religious systems 
have in course of time suffered decay, where ignorance and corruption have 
crept into man’s religious thought and practice. But here, too, there have 
been inevitable limitations. Often the intellect has applied the broom so 
freely that a great deal of what was true and beautiful has been swept away 
along with the rubbish. Moreover, a religious reform is seldom entirely 
rational; it is more often a replacement of one set of beliefs by another, the 
latter set more fanatical than the former. The Puritanic reformation in 
Europe, for instance, met with such tremendous success not because it had 
like the Renaissance movement a rational outlook but because it had in it a 
great measure of faith and fervour which was largely supra-rational in 
character. As the Master says , 4 If reason is to play any part, it must be an 
intuitive rather than an intellectual reason, touched always by spiritual 
intensity and insight ’. 

The spirit and the reason need not be hostile. What man needs is 
‘reason lifted beyond itself by the power of the spirit *. Then and there only, 
can it help man to attain to the supreme Truth. 

Religion, which is the quest of a Truth beyond reason, may well be 
outside the soope of the rational intellect. But it is urged that in all other 
spheres of human thought and aotion reason is the sovereign guide. Even 
this, however, does not prove to be all true. The rational intellect, no doubt, 
holds a prominent place in soience and philosophy and in matters practical. 
Prominent, that is all. In faot we find that in all things, theoretical as well as 
practical, it holds but a middle position, between the two faculties infra* 
rational and supra-rational. Its function is, on the one hand, to correct the 
lower instinot and impulses, and, on the other, to prepare the way for the 
advent of the spirit. 

This is especially clear in regard to man’s search for Beauty and his search 
for Good. L6t us examine first man’s functions from the aesthetio point of 
view. It is indeed in the great creative arts— poetry, music, painting, sculpture 
and architecture— that his quest of the beautiful finds its most satisfying 
expression. But taking a wider view it is obvious that the perfect individual 



80 


£. C. LAW VOLUME 


in a perfect community must see beauty more comprehensively. He muBt 
make his whole life and being beautiful. This quest, dearly, is not rational 
in its origin. The Master says, ‘It springs from the roots of our life, it is an 
instinct and an impulse, and instinct of aesthetic satisfaction and an impulse 
of aesthetic creation and enjoyment \ We see its beginnings in the beauty 
of the beehive and the swallow’s nest. We see it blossoming in the caves of 
the prehistoric man. The beautiful drawings in the Altamira cave and 
the lovely carvings on horn in the Magdalian period show that man was 
seeking aesthetic satisfaction long before he learnt the useful arts of building 
houses, of weaving cloths or of forging metal implements. But at that stage 
his seeking was crude and defective. It was necessary for his progress 
that a higher power should awaken and take up the task of enlightening 
and correcting his crude infra -rational efforts, should lay down. laws, and by 
improving his taste purify both his creative and appreciative faculties. It 
may be urged that man’s intellect was thus installed as the final judge of his 
artistic instincts. But a little thinking would convince us that this was 
only a middle stage in his aesthetic evolution. No great work of art — 
poetry or music or painting — can fall within the sphere of rationalism. 
‘The intellect is not the poet, the artist, the creator in us.’ Creation is the 
work of a light and inspiration from above. It may call in the intellect for 
some of its operations as an employee but never as a master. If artistic 
inspiration submits to the control of reason, the quality of the work produced 
suffers materially. A picture or sculpture that has come down to the 
intellectual level may be very clever, very good, but never the work of genius. 
Genius is always supra-rational. What we know to be talent is seldom so. 
Rational formulation is but a mechanical process. When genius submits to 
this process and its canons, it constructs but does not create. The technique 
may be perfect but the soul is lacking. These facts are almost axiomatic as 
every artist knows in his own mind. 

There have been periods in the history of human development when the 
rational has been the prevailing influence in art — periods of great aesthetic 
activity but devoid of any inspiration. The talented artist has been very 
prominent during these periods. His aim was not so much ‘the dis covery 
of the deeper truth of beauty, but truth of ideas and truth of reason’. 
Obviously this cannot satisfy the hunger of genius of the real creative artist. 
For, he seeks to realise and express, above all, the truth of beauty— not the 
beauty of the form, but the soul of beauty. It is claimed sometimes that 
classical art which is based largely on the perfection of technique and on 
the canons of reason is undoubtedly great art. Without going deep into 
this question we can state that the claim appears to us inadmissib le. A 
distinction has to be drawn between real classical art and the art that is 
pseudo-classical, and intellectual imitation of the external^ of the true 
classical. The former is the expression of an inspiration from within and 
owes no allegiance to reason. The latter is principally a rational con- 
struction and easily degenerates into the formal and academical. We have 



man’s reason and his quest -of truth, good and beauty 81 

a glaring instanoe of this in the singing of classical Dhrupads in present- 
day India. We see how what was really and truly the delivery of a soul 
message at one time has degenerated into vocal gymnastics — clever no doubt, 
but soulless. 

Allowing that creation of beauty depends very largely on inspiration 
from above, must it not be conceded that appreciation of beauty, at least, 
is principally a critical intellectual process? We have no hesitation in 
answering the question in the negative. To concede such a thing would be 
almost tantamount to acknowledging that a knowledge of anatomy is necessary 
for the proper appreciation of, say, the Venus of Milo or the Buddha of Samath 
or that a knowledge of optical laws is essential for the full enjoyment of 
Murillo’s Immaculate Conception. An anatomical or optical knowledge 
may, we admit, play a part, but a very subordinate part, the supreme judge 
• being the light from within. As we have remarked already, in the quest of 
Truth as in the quest of Beauty the important function of reason is to 
enlighten the obscure and the crude instincts of the lower mental. Here too in 
aesthetic appreciation the business of the intellect ‘is to analyse the elements, 
parts, external processes, apparent principles . . . and explain their relations 
and workings’. But that is all; as with the truth of religion so with 
the truth of beauty, reason cannot get at the inner soul unless aided by an 
intuition higher than itself. The unaided intellect studies only from the 
outside, and misses the intimate contact of soul with soul. The earliest 
stage of the appreciation of beauty was instinctive and inborn, natural and 
unenlightened. The rational stage is analytical but tends to be technical 
and artificial, and possibly academic. When technical analysis has gone on 
too long, the artist, the creator of beauty, rebels and in defiance of criticism 
launches upon a new principle of creation. Very often this revolt awakens 
a wider and deeper appreciation, the contact of soul with soul is established 
and rationalism prepares to exceed itself and open out to receive the intuitive 
light from above. Thereafter, in the words of the Master, ‘intuitive intelli- 
gence . . sufficiently trained and developed can take up the work of the 
intellect itself and do it with a Power and Light greater and surer than the 
power and light of the reason’. 

All this applies equally well to beauty in nature and beauty in life as much 
as to beauty in the great creative arts. In fact, all beauty is one. Beauty 
of form perceived by the senses, beauty of the ideas seized by the mind and 
the soul of beauty seized by the spirit, these are all manifestations of the 
ineffable Beauty of the Absolute, the Divine. It is the Divine whom we are 
ever seeking as much through beauty as through religion. ‘To find highest 
beauty is to find God.’ 

The principle and law underlying our quest of Truth and our quest of 
Beauty appljf equally well to our quest for the Good. In fact, the principle 
is of universal application. Behind all human movement lies the great truth 
that all active being is a seeking for the hidden Divine^— the God immanent 

in all beings and in all things— the One in whom all the diversity, the 

6 



82 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


disharmony and the discord of the Many find their unity. He is the supreme 
Truth, the supreme Good, the supreme Beauty — Satyam, $ivam, Sundarana. 

This quest of God is also the quest of our highest and completest self — 
‘some perfect highest term ... by which all our imperfect lower terms can be 
justified’. It is only by realising this true self that we can rise above the 
apparent division, attain to a sense of unity and divinise our life on earth. 

The religious being and the aesthetic being in man realise this easily 
enough, because in the cult of the spiritual and the cult of the beautiful there 
is always a certain amount of inwardness and abstraction. Herein lies the 
great value of religion and art to the man of the world. It is when we come to 
what we are pleased to call practical life that we fight shy of the universal 
truth and submit ourselves to passing utilities, become slaves of an outward 
necessity. But even so, the path upwards is not closed to us. .For, as the 
Master says, ‘All life is only a lavish and manifold opportunity for discovering, . 
realising and expressing the Divine.’ 

This great truth is quite apparent in our ethical life. The highest good 
is the same as the highest practicality or the highest utility. Reason, in 
trying to establish its own sway over ethics, clouds the truest truth and 
makes ethics out to be an observance of certain rational rules and regulations. 
The extraordinary system of utilitarian ethics formulated in the nineteenth 
century was a result of this. The Master describes it as the ‘reduction of 
ethical action to an impossibly scientific and quite impracticable jugglery of 
moral mathematics’. Equally untenable and futile are such theories of 
ethics as the Hedonistio or the Sociological, defining good as something that 
gives pleasure, or as something which satisfies social needs. Highest Good 
is certainly highest Bliss. It may also be conceded that there is a certain 
pleasure or satisfaction in accomplishing good. But, surely, that cannot 
make pleasure a standard of virtue in life. Often one has to undergo palpable 
suffering in order to do a good or virtuous deed. It may no doubt be argued 
that the doer feels a subtle and exalted delight even while he is suffering 
outwardly. But in reality the act is never motived by any pleasure or delight* 
however high; the ethical man in pursuing the good is obeying an innate call 
of his being, that is all. Likewise, the ethical man obeying an inner urge 
has very often to go against Society, has even to hoist the standard of revolt, 
And history records that more often than not he wins and Society loses. So 
the good that one pursues is independent of the mandates of Society. All 
these clever constructions of the intellect cannot bind the ethical being, for 
it follows its own eternal nature. It is a law unto itself. 

lake our search for Truth and our search for Beauty, our search for 
Good started from the infra-rational, from our ethical instincts and 
impulses. This we see clearly exemplified in the primitive animal life of today. 
The ant of the ant-hill and the bee of the beehive undoubtedly have instinct s 
of self-giving and joint action. Instinctively, but blindly, they follow a law, 
and appear to know what is right. The predecessors of Homo Sapiens, 
the* man-ape and even the sub-human dawn man must have done much 
6a 



man’s reason and his quest of truth, good and beauty 83 

the same thing. They obeyed a law without a knowledge of the why and 
the wherefore. Instinctively they felt that the law came from some power 
higher than themselves. Then when the intellect awoke in them, they sought 
to understand the law and to use their primitive impulses intelligently. They 
corrected the crudities of their instincts, arranged a system and laid down rules 
of conduct. But all reason’s efforts to enmesh the ethical being in its network 
of canons and regulations prove ultimately to be fruitless. Man in his 
upward trend glimpses an inner light, an inner being, whom he finds to be a 
surer guide than his half-lit intelligence and to it he confidently entrusts his 
future evolution. , 

Man thus realises that good and evil are not things to be mathematically 
calculated or logically reasoned out. He aspires to grow into the perfection 
of divine nature. He turns upwards to the purity of the divine being, to 
divine knowledge, divine might and divine love. This is the high transcen- 
dence towards which he has been struggling from the start. In the meantime 
he carries on with his rational intellect. Considerations of partial utility, 
transient utility, outward necessity guide his conduct. Highest and truest 
utility he does not see as yet. If he did, he would perceive the highest good 
as well. The rational man’s ethical standards are variable. He knows no 
permanent values. For instance, we believe implicitly that theft and adultery 
are evil and sinful. Yet a little thought would show us that there can be no 
theft where there is no law of property, and no adultery where there is no 
marriage. Again, Rama and Sita in the Ramayalna fulfil our highest ideal 
of the holy sacrament of marriage. Yet the Jatakas tell us that Slt& was 
the sister of Rama and that they got married with the full approval of 
their people. Such a marriage is outrageous and repugnant to our sentiment, 
but was by no means so to the writer of the Jataka. Again, polyandry 
was known to ancient India and is not unknown amongst certain peoples 
even in the India of today. Yet ethical considerations forced the author of 
the Mahabharata to put forward a phantastic story to account for Draupad! 
marrying the five Pandava brothers. Instances need not be multiplied. 
It is obvious that an act which is moral in one country may be immoral in 
another, that an act which is good in one age may be sinful in another. 
Rational ethics is therefore quicksand and man cannot build on it. He 
must move forward to firmer ground. Out of the infra-ethical he has emerged 
into the ethical; he will in due course transcend the ethical and enter into 
the supra-ethical. The supra-ethical is a consummation of the ethical, but 
before he reaches it, man must travel assiduously the long road of the ethical. 

We are now in a position to understand what the Master says. * Rising 
from its infra-rational beginnings through its intermediate dependence on 
the reason to a supra-rational consummation, the ethical is like the aesthetic 
and the religicftts being of man a seeking after the Eternal .’ 1 


1 Based on the philosophy of Sri Anrobindo. 



CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 

By 

Dr. M. N. Saha, D.Sc., F.R.S., F.N.I., F.R.A.S.B., 

Palit Professor of Physics, Calcutta University 

We all know and use the calendar which is an indispensable requisite of 
civilized life. It is a table of the days of the year, divided into months and 
weeks, showing the chief holidays and festivals, religious, national or 
otherwise. We are guided throughout the year in our activities by the 
calendar, which is prepared beforehand by calendar-makers, who are, or 
at least ought to be, astronomers, and we keep it suspended either on the 
wall, or on our table for ready reference. 

But calendars are as numerous as nations. The major part of the world 
uses the Gregorian calendar introduced by Pope Gregory VII in 1582 A.D. ; 
Europe and America for religious as well as economic purpose, the rest of the 
world for economic purpose which is a Consequence of European domination, 
but Hindus, Moslems and Buddhists have their own individual religious 
calendars. This multiplicity of calendars 1 produces serious inconvenience 
to the economic progress of many countries. 

Even the Gregorian calendar is unsatisfactory and arbitrary. The 
months are of unequal duration as expressed in the well-known doggerel : 
Thirty days hath September, 

April, June and November 
All the rest hath thirty-one 
Excepting February alone 
Which has twenty-eight 
And twenty -nine in each leap year. 

Why is this arbitrariness? Why has February 28 or 29 and others 
have 30 or 31 days ? But more serious is the inconvenience caused by the 
wandering of some important religious holidays. The Easter festival may 
fall any day between March 22 and April 25, a total amplitude of 35 days. 
The Easter is a pivotal holiday, and many others move with it. This periodic 
wandering of the Easter and associated holidays produces general 
inconvenience, and dislocates public and private work. Further, the cycle 
of 7 days known as the week runs on throughout the year, and there is no 
knowing, on a priori grounds, with what day of the week the year or the 
month is to begin. 

The now defunct League of Nations appointed a Calendar Reform 
Committee for a rational reform of the calendar. Two proposals have been 


1 In certain parts of Yugoslavia and in Palestine business is fully or partly closed for three 
days in the week, viz. Friday, Saturday and Sunday: Friday being Mahomedan prayer-day, 
Saturday being Jewish Sabbath, Sunday being Christian Lord's day. . In India, all public officials 
and industrialists are aware how much business suffers or is held up on account of frequent 
holidays coming at all times of the year. 




CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


85 


before the Committee, viz. the thirteen-month calendar and the reformed 
twelve-month calendar. The two systems are illustrated below. 

Thirteen-month Calendar 

In the 13-month calendar there are to be 13 months in the year, each 
of 4 weeks and each week of 7 days. Every month is to begin with a 
Sunday and end in a Saturday. This calendar is extremely simple compared 
with the present system where January may begin with a Sunday but 
February may begin with Tuesday and so on. According to this reformed 
scheme, the regular year will consist of 364 days, but as the actual year is 
nearly 365J days, it is proposed in the 13-month calendar system that in 
ordinary year the last day will be an extra day and will be called a second 
extra Saturday. For the leap year it is proposed to leave two extra Saturdays, 
one at the end of December (Year End day) and the other at the end of July 
(Year Middle day), having no name. 

All years alike. 

All months alike. 

Every month begins with Sunday and ends 
with Saturday. 

1 Month = 4 weeks = 28 days. 

1 Year = 13 months = 28 x 13 = 364 days. 

One extra Saturday at the end of the year 
(Year End day). 

Two extra Saturdays in leap years (Year End day and Leap Year day). 

The idea of stabilizing the calendar in the above way was suggested to 
the Vatican by an Italian Padre Abbe Mastrofini in 1834 and the idea was 
revived by the positivist philosopher, August Comte, in 1849. He wanted to 
rename the months after the great men of the world. The main opposition 
to this calendar has been to the introduction of 13 months in place of 12. 

v The Reformed Twelve-month Calendar 

The other system for calendar reform retains the 12 months as shown 
on the next page. 

This world calendar is a revision of the present calendar to correct its 
irregularities and discrepancies. It rearranges the length of the 12 months 
so that they are regular, making the year divisible into equal halves and 
quarters in a ‘perpetual’ calendar. Every year is the same, every quarter 
identical. 

In this new calendar each quarter contains exactly three months, 13 weeks, 
91 days. Each quarter begins on Sunday and ends on Saturday. The first 
month in eacfi quarter has 31 days and the other two 30 days eaoh. Each 
month ha # s 26 week days. 

# In order to make the calendar perpetual, at the same time retaining 
astronomical accuracy, the 365th day of the year, called Year End day, is an 


Thirteen-month Calendar 


s 

M 

T 

W 

Th 

F 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

0 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

10 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

26 

26 

27 

28 




86 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


First Quarter Second Quarter 


January 


April 

8. M. T. W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 

1 2 S 4 6 6 7 
8 9 10 11 12 18 14 
16 16 17 18 10 20 21 
22 28 24 25 26 27 28 
29 80 81 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 
29 80 31 

February 


May 

S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 

12 8 4 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
26 27 28 29 80 


12 3 4 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
12 13 14 16 16 17 18 
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
26 27 28 29 30 

March 


June 

S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
17 18 19 20 21 22 28 
24 25 26 27 28 29 80 




Third Quarter Fourth Quarter 


July 


October 

S. M. T.W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 
29 30 31 


1 2 3 4 6 6 7 
8 9 10 11 12 18 14 
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 
29 30 31 

Avgust 


November 

S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 

12 3 4 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
26 27 28 29 80 


12 3 4 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
19 20 21 22 23 24 26 
26 27 28 29 80 

September 


December 

S. M. T. W. T. F. S. 


S. M. T. W. T. F. 8. 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 


1 2 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10 11 12 13 14 16 16 
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 


intercalary day placed between December 30 and January 1, and is con- 
sidered an extra Saturday. The 366th day in leap year, called Leap Year day, 
is intercalated between June 30 and July 1 on extra Saturday. These 
intercalary or stabilizing days are tabulated as December 31 or Y and June 31 
or L and would probably be observed as international holidays. January 1, 
New Year’s day, always falls on Sunday. 

‘The revised calendar is balanced in structure, perpetual in form, 
harmonious in arrangement. It conforms to the solar year of 365*2422 days 
and to natural seasons. Besides its advantages in economy and efficiency, it 
facilitates statistical comparisons, co-ordinates the different time periods and 
stabilizes religious and secular holidays when approved by their respective 
authorities. As compared with any other proposal for calendar revision, it 
offers adjustment in which transition from old to new order can be made with 
minimum of disturbance’ (from Journal of Calendar Reform). 

The supporters of the world calendar reform publish a journal called 
World Calendar Reform and through the League of Nations they are trying to 
advocate the adoption of the reformed calendar throughout the world. But 
the 13-month calendar appears to have been given up, due to the un- 
popularity of the number 13 and due to some astronomical objections. But the 
12-month calendar is being advocated for adoption by the League of Nations. 

Principles of Calendar-making 

Let us now examine the origins of some of the more important existing 
calendars and their imperfections, and also discuss whether it is at all possible 
to evolve a calendar which would be scientific and at the same time would hot 








































CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


87 


have the defects of the existing calendar; and whether the calendars framed 
by the Calendar Reform Committees are satisfactory. 

The calendar has to deal with the great natural units of time, the Year, 
the Month, the Day and the artificial cycle of seven days called the Week. 
It has to accommodate religious festivals which have been bequeathed from 
antiquity and have to be fixed according to complicated rules of rather obscure 
origin: national festivals which fall on some definite month days (say July 4, 
the day of Proclamation of American Independence) ; further, the calendar 
has to satisfy certain psychological needs of mankind, e.g., the prescription 
of a day of rest after a period of work. 

The first requisite for the calendar-maker at any age is a proper definition 
of the periods Year, Month and Day and a knowledge of the lengths of the 
Year and the Month in terms of the day. In ancient times neither the 
definition nor the lengths of the year and the month were known accurately. 
As will be shown calendars were framed on insufficient knowledge and to make 
them acceptable to the people, religious sanction of various kinds was stamped 
on these systems. Though the mistakes were discovered sooner or later, it 
was found extremely difficult to introduce corrections, on account of non- 
inflexibility of these sanctions, and none but dictators, like Julius Caesar or 
Pope Gregory, were able to carry out any reform, and this also when the 
discrepancies became intolerable. 

Let us take for example the definition of the day. The day has been 
measured from sunset to sunset, or sunrise to sunrise, from midday to next 
midday and it is only rather late that different nations, sometimes quite 
independently, found that it is more scientific to reckon from midnight to 
midnight and adopted it in practice. But even then, if the length of the 
day so defined is measured with the aid of an accurate clock, it is found to 
be variable throughout the year and astronomers have to define ‘a mean solar 
day* as the fundamental unit of time. A more fundamental unit is the 
‘Sidereal day* which measures the period of a complete rotation of the earth 
round its axis, which may be taken to be constant throughout ages. 

The Year 

The next great unit is the year ; there are different kinds of year, but the 
year which is useful for calendar-making is the Tropical Year, which measures 
the period of recurrence of seasons. Its length in terms of the solar day is 
given by the relation 

Year = 305*24219879— 10~ 8 x 614J 1 (time reckoned since 1900). 

The length of the year is thus seen to be not a constant. In Sumerian 
times (3000 B.C.) it was nearly 365*2425 days. In modem times it is very 
nearly 365*2^22 days, and we can use this length for a very long period yet to 
oome. 

1 Here t stands for one Julian century of 86626 days. Aooording to astronomers the period 
of ‘rotation of the earth is getting somewhat longer owing to the earth's internal friction and 
friction as caused by tides. 




88 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


It is obvious that the ancients could not have determined the length of 
the year to such accuracy. In fact, most of the nations in the early part of 
their career took the vear to consist of 360 solar days, divided into 12 months, 
each of 30 days. This was certainly prompted by the observation that 
the year was roughly equal to 12 full periods of the moon, which is roughly 
30 days. But they did not take long to find out their mistake. Old Egyptian 
history has preserved the story of its discovery and the method of its rectifica- 
tion, which is illustrative of the ancient mind. Plutarch quotes the following 
story: 

‘The Earth god Seb and the sky goddess Nut had once illicit union. The 
supreme god Re , the Sun, thereupon cursed the heaven goddess Nut that the 
children of the union would be born neither in any year nor in any month. 
Nut turned to the god of wisdom, Thoth, for counsel. Thoth played a game 
of dice with the Moon-goddess, and won from her ^th part of her light out of* 
which he made five extra days. To appease Re, the Sun-god, these five days 
were given to him, and his year gained by five days while the Moon-goddess's 
year lost five days. The extra five days in the solar year were not attached 
to any month, which continued to have 30 days as before ; but these days came 
at the end of the year, and were celebrated as the birthdays of the gods born 
of the union of Seb and Nut, viz., Osiris, Isis, Nephthys, Set and Anubis, five 
chief gods of Egyptian pantheon.’ 

With the ancient Egyptians, the moon and the lunar month soon ceased 
to play any part in time reckoning. They had a month of 30 days divided 
into 3 dekads or weeks, each of 10 days. The ancient Iranians followed 
the Egyptian calendar with some modification. Long afterwards, during 
the French Revolution, some features of the Egyptian calendar were again 
sought to be introduced in calendar-making for the Revolution. 

But the Egyptians soon found that 365 days were not the correct length 
of the year. The fact is said to have been discovered by the temple priestp 
from observations of the heliacal rising of the star Sirius, and of the arrival 
of the annual flood of the Nile at the Egyptian capital. 

They found that the flood does not occur at intervals of 365 days. If in 
one year the flood arrived, say, on Thoth 1, after four years it occurred on 
Thoth 2, after eight years on Thoth 3, and the cycle was completed roughly 
in 1,460 years (called the Sothic Cycle). The flood may be delayed for some 
reason, but the bright star Sirius, which stood for the Egyptian goddess Isis, 
was carefully observed for ritualistic purposes, and it was found, probably 
as a result of long continued observations, that between her two successive 
appearance a little ahead of the sun just before dawn in the eastern horizon* 
the period was not exactly an Egyptian year of 365 days, but about 6 hours 
more— in other words, the sun returned to the same point in the heavens not 
after intervals of 365 days, but after approximately 365$ days. * 

Though the priests early arrived at this knowledge, they kept it to them- 
selves, for a knowledge of the number of years elapsed sinoe the beginning, of 
the Sothic Cycle (which they knew either from records or from the plaoe of 



CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


89 


Sirius on the first day of the year) enabled them to predict the date in the 
Egyptian calendar when the annual flood, so important for Egyptian economic 
life, would reach the capital. By keeping their hold on the calendar, they 
maintained their influence on the public, and Pharaohs are said to have, as a 
part of the rituals connected with their coronation ceremony, an oath promising 
never to try to reform the calendar. 

During the rule of the Ptolemies (320 B.C. to 40 B.C.) a determined 
effort was made to introduce the 365J-day year, but it failed on account of the 
opposition of Egyptian priests. It was only after the Roman occupation 
of Egypt, that this knowledge was brought to the notice of the Roman dictator 
Julius Caesar by the Graeco- Egyptian astronomer Sosigenes. The calendar of 
Rome itself was a hopeless mess, and Caesar, in his capacity as the Supreme 
Pontiff, effected a reformation which received the name of Julian calendar. 
‘It is pretty nearly the modem European calendar, with leap years occurring 
every fourth year. 

This was on the assumption that the true length of the tropical year was 
365-25 days, but actually the length is 365-2422 days, so there remained a 
mean error of -0078 days per year. By 1582 A.D., the error had accumulated 
to nearly 13 days, so that the Winter Solstice which in Caesar’s time fell on 
Dec. 24, and on Dec. 21, about 354 A.D. when the Christian era was introduced, 
occurred by 1582 A.D. on Dec. 1 1 . Pope Gregory, on the advice of astronomers, 
Clavius and Lilius, decreed that Oct. 5 in that year should be called Oct. 15, 
so that the date of the Winter Solstice was brought from Dec. 11 to Dec. 21 
(the date it had about 354 A.D. when the Christian era was introduced) and 
henceforth years ending in hundreds would not be considered leap years, 
except when they are divisible by 400. This makes the length of the year 
365-2425, an error of -0003 days per year; this will introduce an error of 1 day 
in 3,300 years. Tho Gregorian calendar was accepted by all Roman Catholic 
countries, but was rejected by the Protestant and the Greek Church countries 
(e.g., the Balkan States and Russia). The Protestant countries accepted the 
Gregorian calendar within about 200 years, but Russia had Julian calendar 
till 1918, when the Soviets substituted the Gregorian calendar. 

What is the reason for the present mess in the Julio-Gregorian calendar ? 
The Romans took the Egyptian year, but retained their own months. The 
Roman year started with March 1 and ran for ten months — March, April, 
May, June, Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November and December, 
total 304 days, some months being major ones of 31 days, others being minor 
of 30 days. The first four months were dedicated to Mars and other gods, 
Quintilis was the fifth, Sextilis sixth, etc. December was, as the name 
indicates, the tenth month. At the end of the tenth month, two months were 
interpolated, ^first of which was dedicated to the god Janus, and February 
was not dedicated to any god. About 135 B.C,, the starting point of the 
year was brought down to January 1, for some reason not clearly known. 

. When Julius Caesar reformed the calendar, the servile senate decreed 
that the month Quintilis should be renamed * July* in his honour and further 



90 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


it should be a major month of 31 days. His successor Augustus persuaded 
the senate to rename the sixth month Sixtilis in his favour, and not to be 
outdone by his predecessor, ordained that it should be a major month of 31 days. 
To find out these two extra days, February, which does not appear to have 
been under the protection of any god, was clinched of two days. As a critic 
says, it was not a * Reformation ’ but a ‘Deformation’ of the calendar to satisfy 
the whims of two Roman despots. 

Even Pope Gregory’s reformation was rather incomplete. He ought 
to have brought down the Christmas day from Dec. 25 to Dec. 21, but Dec. 25 
had got into the people’s head as the day following the night of Christ’s birth 
and even Christ’s viceregent on the earth did not dare to disturb the public 
equanimity. The reforms fell far short of the achievements of Omar 
Khayyam, the astronomer poet and free-thinking philosopher <tf Persia who 
at the bidding of Sultan Melik Shah introduced in 1079 a solar calendar (the* 
Jalali calendar), based on the first day of the Vernal Equinox, as the first day 
of the year. 

The Month 

The third great natural division of time besides the day and the year is 
the month. This had originally a lunar affiliation. In fact, the month is 
really the ‘Moonth’, the time taken by the moon from one conjunction with 
the sun to another. The moon really traverses the sky, i.e. return from one 
fixed point of the sky, say the star Regulus, to the same in about 27J days 
(Sidereal period of the moon), but since the sun moves in the same direction, 
it takes a little longer time to reach the sun (29*5305881 days (Newcomb), length 
of a lunar month). 

In most ancient countries, amongst most nations the first day of the 
month was reckoned from the evening of appearance of the thin crescent of 
the moon in the western horizon after a new moon, and successive days were 

known as the second, third day of the moon. It was very much like the 

practice still followed by the Islamic countries. The system of reckoning 
days by the moon was almost universally in vogue amongst all ancient nations, 
Babylonians, Hindus, Greeks and Romans, and is the basis of the Hindu 
system of ‘Tithi’ which was originally nothing but a ‘Lunar Day’, and this, 
in a modified form, is still used for religious purposes to fix up festival days. 
The Hindus further divided the month into a bright (waxing) half ending in a 
full moon in the midst of the month, and a dark (waning) half ending in a 
new moon. The lunar zodiac was divided into 27 (or earlier 28) parts, called 
Nakshatras or Lunar Mansions and named according to conspicuous star 
groups marking the moon’s path. A day would be distinguished as the 
eighth day of the moon in the bright half, with the moon in Nakshatra 
Regulus for example. This custom of fixing the position of £he moon was 
also prevalent amongst the Babylonians and Chinese, and it is difficult to 
trace its origin. * 

The empirical nature of reckoning the days of the moon is corroborated 
from references in old classics like the Mahabharata, where it is mentioned 



CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


91 


that the full moon sometimes fell on the thirteenth lunar day. The full moon 
evidently cannot fall on the thirteenth day after the new moon, probably the 
observers occasionally used to miss the first day of appearance of the thin 
orescent after fulljnoon, due to the moon’s nearness to the sun or some other 
reason. When the full moon was found to fall on the thirteenth day, it was 
surmised that some great calamity would befall the country or the potentates 
who ruled the country. The moon is generally invisible for two or three 
nights round about new moons, and this was probably the origin of the wide- 
spread custom of observing mourning for three nights. 

Most, but not all, religious ceremonies had a lunar as well as a solar 
affiliation, as in Babylon, somewhat as in finding out the date of the Passover 
with the Jews, e.g. the Spring festival should be celebrated on the full moon 
day during ‘the lunar month of Chaitra in the spring season. Thus custom 
led to the necessity of correlating lunar months with the solar seasons. The 
week day was unknown in ancient time, and even to this day the week day 
plays no part in most of the Hindu festivals, particularly the more important 
ones. 

Solar Months 

The idea that the year should be divided into 12 months must have 
arisen from the observation that 12 lunar months nearly cover the year. 
But 12 lunar months is 354-36706 days, and falls short of the year by 10-875 
days. How to adjust this ? There was grave reason why this adjustment 
should have been considered extremely necessary. In the life of early nations, 
religious festival played an extremely important part. Let us suppose that a 
certain incident, say, the worship of a god, was to be celebrated in the season 
of autumn at full moon. Now, suppose in a certain year, the festival falls 
on the last day of autumn, next year we shall lose 10-875 days; the event will 
have to be celebrated 1 1 days earlier than the end of autumn. Two years later, 
it is to be celebrated 22 days earlier. In 6 years, the retardation will be 
very nearly two months and the event will fall not in the season of autumn 
at all but in the rains. So adjustment is necessary unless we disoard the 
connection with the season entirely as the Mahomedans have done. This 
the ancients were not prepared to do ; they made the adjustment by bringing 
the event forward by calling two months in 5 years as unclean or useless 
months and prohibiting the celebration of the festival within these two months. 
By this artifice at the end of 5 years, the event will again fall at the end 
of autumn. Amongst certain nations instead of putting such intercalary or 
useless months, also called the thirteenth month, at the end of every 5 years, 
one intercalary month is put at the end of every 2J years and sometimes 
some other equivalent arrangement is made. 

But the inconsistency of the sun and the moon cannot be so easily settled. 
It is a much more difficult problem and, as a matter of fact, the ingenuity of 
the anoient nations had to be taxed to the breaking point to bring about 
consistency between the month and the year. Some, like the Mahomedans, 
discarded the sun altogether, others like the Egyptians discarded the moon. 



92 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Those like the Hindus and the Babylonians, who wanted to keep both, fell 
into such complications that as arbiter of the days of religious festivals, much 
power passed into the hands of priests. 

Attempts at Calendar Reform by Hindus 

A very determined effort to reform the Hindu oalendar is traceable from 
the third or the fourth century A.D., when the Hindu scientific treatises on 
astronomy began to take definite shape. According to the Suryya-Siddhanta, 
the standard Hindu astronomical treatise which had its beginnings about 
these times, the solar year is to begin with the vernal equinox, which was 
then (ca. 505 A.D.) near the star J-Piscium. The first month of the solar year 
would be the second month of the spring (according to the Hindu method of 
calculation but the first month of the spring according to the European method 
of calculation) . The month was knofrn under the lunar appellation of Vaisakh . 
The solar appellations given in column 2 of Table 1 are indicative of seasons, 
but they never came into use. The lunar year was to begin with the previous 
month of Chaitra, i.e. within a month before the sun’s passage through vernal 
equinox, on the first day after the new moon (according to some systems on the 
first day after the full moon). This system is to be compared to the older 
Babylonian system of starting the year with the month of Nisannu, which had 
to start on the first day following the new moon, but not earlier or later than 
a month of the vernal equinox. The comparison between the Hindu and 
the Babylonian systems is shown in Table 1 on the next page. 

Though the Hindus started (or rather reformed) their calendar on a 
quite scientific basis about 500 A.D., with the V.E. day as the first day of the 
year, and with an elaborate series of rules for adjustment between solar and 
lunar reckoning, the intended stabilization of the calendar has been spoilt 
by the mistake they committed in taking the length of the year to be 365*25875 
days. This is nearly *0165 longer than the tropical year. So after 1,400 years, 
the last day of the year now no longer falls on the day of passage of the sun 
through the vernal equinoctial point, but nearly 23 days earlier. But in 
terms of the Hindu calendar, the equinox is a fixed point, near {-Piscium 
which was the position of the equinox about 500 A.D. 

This error is to be traced to the fact that though the phenomenon of the 
precession of the equinoxes appears to have been known to the Hindu astro- 
nomers of this period, they were under the impression that the movement of the 
equinoctial points was oscillatory in character, and after some time the points 
would retrace their paths, so it was unnecessary to use the tropical year. 
The year was therefore taken to be sidereal 1 (Nirayan) without caring for the 
motion of equinoxes. There was a similar idea about the motion of equinoxes 
in Europe too (theory of trepidation) but the theory lost its fest adherent, 
after Newton explained planetary motion with the aid of the theories of 
gravitation. As is well known, precession is a dynamical effect, and is due 


***• Hftva. TKa Hinriu lirlarnal 


ii *0024 dav longer. 


CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


93 


Table 1. 



Hindu 

Babylonian 

Macedonian 

French 

Revolutionary 

1 Solar 

Lunar 

V.E. 

April 

Madhava 

Vaisakh 

Nisannu 

Artemesios 

Germinal 

(Buds). 

May 

Sukra 

Jyaistha 

Airu 

S 

Daisios 

Floreal 

(Flower). 

June 

Suchi 

Ashadha 

Sivannu 

Panemos 

Praireal 

(Meadows). 

S.S. 

July 

• 

Nabhas 

Sravan 

Duzu 

Loios 

Messidor 

(Harvest). 

August . . 

Nabhasya 

Bhadra 

Abu 

Gorpiaios 

Thermidor 

(Heat). 

September 

Isha 

As win 

Ululu 

Hyerberetios 

Fructidor 

(Fruits). 

A.E. 

October. . 

Urjas 

Kartik 

Tasritu 

Dios 

Vendemaire 

(Vintage). 

November 

Sahas 

Agrahayan 

Arrah Samnah 

Appelaios 

Brumaire 

(Fog). 

December 

Sahasya 

Pous 

Kisilibu 

Audynaios 

Frimaire 

(Frost). 

W.S. 

January 

Tapas 

Magha 

Dhabitu 

Peritios 

Nivose 

(Snow). 

February 

Tapasya 

Falgun 

Subuddu 

Dystros 

Pluviose 

(Rain). 

March . . 

Madhu 

Chaitra 

Addami 

Xanthicos 

Ventose 

(Wind). 


N.B . — Accor ding to the Hindu method of calculation, the spring season extends for two 
months on either side of the vernal equinox, and so in respect of the autumnal equinox for the 
autumn season. The European method is to count as Spring the period of three months 
following sun’s passage through vernal equinox. The Hindu names of the solar months (given 
in column 2) fell into disuse, and the names of the lunar months survived, and were later used 
to denote the solar months as well. The Macedonian months were current in India up to the 
Kushan regime. The Babylonian months are still used by orthodox Jews, but the spellings 
have undergone slight changes. 

The French Revolutionary year started on the day of the autumnal equinox, Sept. 22, 1792. 
Each month (shown in column 6) had 30 days, each divided into 3 weeks each of 10 days. 
They had 5 extra year-end days (Sept. 17 to Sept. 21) like the ancient Egyptians and these 
were days of national festivities dedicated to VIRTUE, GENIUS, LABOUR, OPINION, 
REWARDS. The Jews and the Macedonian Greeks started their year on the day of autumnal 
equinox like th% French Revolutionaries later. The first column shows the months as they 
would be arranged if the proposals made in this essay were accepted. 

to the foot that the earth is not exactly spherical. The value of the speed 
of processional motion has been calculated from dynamics, and is proportional 









94 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to the difference between the moments of inertia of the earth round equatorial 
and polar axes, and it is unidirectional. 

But all this science has not yet reached the Hindu astrologers who still 
carry on the task of calendar-making according to the old Suryya-Siddhanta, 
or other systems. The passage of the sun through the vernal equinox 
is 23 days behind the date given in the Hindu almanac and the corre- 
spondence with seasons, which is a necessary requisite for proper deter- 
mination of times of religious festivals, has been lost. The whole system of 
calculation is therefore vitiated and should be given up. The calendar should 
be retarded by 23 days, for Nature will not oblige the Hindu almanac-makers 
by stopping the inexorable operation of the Law of Universal Gravitation to 
save accumulated Hindu superstitions. Several attempts at Hindu calendar 
reform have been made by several enlightened public men, notably by the 
late Mr. B. G. Tilak, but the attempts failed because there was no political or 
religious authority behind their attempts. So the vendors of superstition are 
able to carry on their trades as profitably as ever, and prepare from year to 
year an Encyclopaedia of Superstitions for the use of hundreds of millions of 
people, based on wrong calculations and obsolete theories. 


The Cycle of Weeks 

The seven-day week, unlike the Year or the Month, is an entirely artificial 
cycle, unconnected with any natural phenomenon. It is approximately 
a quarter lunation, and its use probably arose from the psychological need 
for having a day of rest after protracted work. In early stages, we can traoe 
‘a lunar week’ which was half the period between new and full moon, but as 
the number of days were variable due to the erratic behaviour of the moon, 
the need for a period having a fixed number of days arose. 

The ancient Vedic Aryans had a Shadaha, a cycle of six days; the 
Babylonians, with whom the week arose, had at first a week of five days (J of 
a lunation), which was later increased to seven which is approximately J of a 
lunation. Each day was named according to a planetary god. This was 
certainly to give sanctity to the system, a familiar ancient-time practice. As 
the myth of the sanctity of seven-day week has played a great part in calendar- 
making and growth of astronomical superstitions, its evolution is explained 
at some detail: The Babylonians put the planets (not used in modem sense, 
but used in the old sense of a vxnvlering heavenly body) as follows in the 
order of their apparent distance from the earth, and identified them with their 
chief gods, who held the portfolios mentioned under their names : 


Planet 

. . Saturn 

Jupiter 

Mars 

Sun 

Venus 

Meroury 

Moon 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

«*) 

(6) 

(7) 

Babylonian ] 

i , Ninib 

Mardult 

Nergal 

Shamash 

Ishtar 

Nabu 

Sin 

God J 

[ (Pestilence) 

(King) 

(War) 

(Justice) 

(Love) 

(Writing) 

(Agrieul- 

ture). 



CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


96 


Further the day was divided into 24 hours, and each of the seven gods 
was supposed to keep watch on mankind over each hour of the day in rotation. 
The day was named after the god who kept watch at the first hour. Thus 
on Saturday, the watching god for the first hour was Ninib or Saturn and the 
day was named after him. The succeeding hours of Saturday were presided 
over as follows : 

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
123456 7 1234567 1234 

The table shows the picture for Saturday. On this day, Saturn keeps 
watch at the first hour, so the day is named after him. The second hour is 

watched over by Jupiter (3), third by Mars (4) and so on. Saturn is 

thus seen to .preside at the 8th, 15th and 22nd hours of Saturday. Then 
for 23rd, 24th, 25th come in succession Jupiter (2), Mars (3), Sun (4). The 
25th hour is the first hour of the next day, which was accordingly named 
after the presiding planet No. 4. We thus get Sunday following Saturday. 
If we now repeat the process, we get the names of the week days following 
each other, as follows : 

Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday & Friday. 
With the Babylonians, Saturday was an evil day, dedicated to the God of 
Pestilence, and they avoided work on that day for fear of offending that deity. 

The child which was bom at any hour of the day was supposed to be 
under the special influence of the god presiding for that hour. The practice 
of casting horoscopes also can be traced to these times. 

The great propagandists for the seven-day week have been the Jews who 
derived their civilization partly from Egyptians, but mostly from Babylon 
and Assyria, adopted the seven-day week, and conferred on it a new sanctity 
by inventing the Creation-myth which one can read in the opening chapter 
of the Bible. They converted the seventh day, which with the Babylonians 
was an ‘evil day’, to the day of rest for Jehovah after his labours of Creation 
(Sabbath day). So great has been the sanctity attached to the ‘ Sabbath day ’ 
that Jews all the world over would not work on the Sabbath day, and it is on 
record that Romans took advantage of this to make an assault on Jerusalem 
on a Sabbath day, and carried the city almost without a fight, because the 
Jews led by their priests would not do such profane things as giving battle 
on a Sabbath day, and expeoted Jehovah to bring punishment on the Romans 
for the sacrilege. 

The seven-day week was introduced into the Roman World by 
Constantine after 323 A.D. and as the Christians would not have the same 
Lord’s day as the Jews, the next day ‘Sunday’ was fixed as the Lord’s day. 
This had a most unfortunate oonsequence. The Bishops decided that the 
. Easter, viz. the day of Resurreotion of Christ should take place on Sunday 
following the first full moon after the vernal equinox. The Jewish festival of 
Passover, on whioh day Christ is alleged to have been crucified, took plaoe on 
the first full moon after vernal equinox, and it had no reference to week days. 


Hours ..1 2 3 4 6 6 7 
God 

watching 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 



96 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


But the Christians must have the Resurrection on the ‘Lord’s day’, so the 
difficulties were multiplied. The result is that Easter can fall on any date 
between March 22 and April 25, with an amplitude of 35 days. As 
mentioned before, this is a pivotal holiday and carries many other important 
holidays with it as follows : — 


Easter day (day of Resurrection of Jesus) 

Good Friday ( — 2) . . Low Sunday ( + 7) 

Palm Sunday ( — 7) . . Rogation ( + 35) 

Qudragesima Sunday (-42) .. Ascension ( + 39) 

Ash Wednesday ( — 46) . . Whitsunday ( + 49) 

Trinity ( + 56) 

Quinquegesima Sunday ( — 49) . . Corpus Christi ( + 60) 

etc. * 


Minus means before Easter, plus means after. Thus Good Friday (day of 
Crucifixion of Jesus) takes place 2 days before Easter, Ascension 39 days 
after Easter day. 

One of the greatest mathematicians of all times, Gauss, took upon himself 
the task of finding out an easy empirical rule for finding out the date of the 
Easter in any year, but had not much success. 

The enlightened Christian nations stigmatize other nations as super- 
stitious, but their system of fixing dates for religious festivals has to satisfy 
the triple godhead of the sun (vernal equinox), moon (full moon) and the 
Babylonian seven-planet hierarchy (seven-day week) while the Hindus have 
only to satisfy the sun and the moon for religious purpose. The accusation is 
therefore quite gratuitous, and the Christians should first get rid of their own 
accumulated superstitions before they accuse others of continuing theirs. 

Babylonian ingenuity, combined with a superstitious belief that planets 
stand for gods who rule human destiny according to mathematical plan, were 
thus responsible for the introduction of the seven-day week, and this let in a 
mighty flood of astrological superstitions which about the first century A.D. 
quickly swept the civilized world from China and India in the East to Roman 
Empire in the West. The Bible, the Hindu Pauranic literature, the Laotzian 
school of Chinese philosophers built on this basis a vast maze of superstitious 
practices which, as in the case of the Christian festivals, still dominate a 
large section of the human population. Even the Arabs, otherwise iconoclastic, 
appeared to have had implicit faith in astrology. 

Let us examine the effect on Hindu religious life. Before the introduction 
of the seven-day week, the Hindus like all ancient nations had a system of 
reckoning for auspicious and inauspicious days, but this was based on com- 
bination of moon’s phase with the lunar mansions, thus a day of full moon 
in the lunar mansion of Pushya (a-Cancri) would be considered particularly 
auspicious, and feeding of Brahmins and Sramans on that day would bring, 
as Emperor Asoka hints in his inscription, many times greater merit than 
feeding such holy men on an ordinary day. There is no mention of Week 



CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


97 


days in Asoka’s inscriptions, or in older Sanskrit literature like the Maha- 
bharata. When a hero’s birth is .mentioned, only the moon’s phase, the 
particular lunar mansion (stars on the ecliptic) which the moon occupies, 
and sometimes the season are referred to. The first authentic record of ‘week 
day’ is found in the Eran inscription of the time of Emperor Buddhagupta 
bearing the date of 484 A.D. The seven-day week must have been introduced 
some time prior to this date, but probably after 200 A.D., for the Kushan 
inscription of these times makes no mention of week days. 

In the hands of Indian astrologers, the seven-day week became a very 
potent tool for inventing new myths, and enchaining the Indian mind with an 
amazing cobweb of superstitions. The major religious festivals which from 
time immemorial had lunar dating could not be touched, but they continued 
to be adjusted to season by the use of intercalary months. But by a com- 
bination of week days with lunar phases, a system of calculating auspicious 
and inauspicious days regulating all phases of human activity and occupation 
were devised. Only some days and hours are suitable for marriage ceremonies, 
others for starting on a journey, others for entering a new house and so forth. 
A baby’s career would be determined by the planetary god presiding at his 
birth, and the relative position of other planets. A king would not ascend 
the throne or attack an enemy except on an auspicious day fixed up by 
astrologers. Indian history records several national misfortunes consequent 
on astrologers’ advice, similar to the occupation of Jerusalem by the Romans 
or murder of Wallenstein by the hired assassins of the holy Roman Emperor. 

Superstitions will continue in spite of science, but at several epochs of 
great historical events, determined efforts have been made to get rid of the 
seven-day week and the superstitions grown round it. The makers ofithe 
French Revolution introduced a ten-day week (decade) like the Egyptians 
three thousand years earlier. The Bolsheviks experimented with a five-day, 
a six-day week and ultimately returned to the seven-day week. The ancient 
Iranians had no week days, but the days of the month were named after a 
god or a principle, e.g. day of Ahura Mazdah, day of Mithra, etc. Later they 
adopted seven-day week. 

The perpetual calendar retains the seven-day week, but according to some 
Jewish Rabbis the introduction of an extra day at the end of each year or two 
extra days during each leap year, which will belong to no week, is a sacrilege. 

It is clear from what has been said before that the planners of a Universal 
Calendar should never be under the illusion that they can plan a calendar 
which will satisfy all the religious communities of the world. Their task should 
be to frame an ‘ Economic Calendar ’ based on sound facts of astronomy. The 
seven-day week should be retained, chiefly because a day of rest after six 
days of work appear to be a psychological necessity, but there should be no 
background of religious thought behind the planning, for 1 religions are many , 
reason it one ’ as one wise Chinese saying has it. 
t 



98 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Requisites of a Perfect Calendar 

The above review shows that a perfect calendar should satisfy the following 
demands: — 

(а) The calendar must follow ‘astronomical data accurately as far as 
possible \ 

Regarded from this point of view, the Gregorian adjustment by leap 
years is inferior to the Persian method introduced by Omar Khayyam in 
1079 A.D.; the Gregorian method has 97 leap years in 400 years, giving an 
average year-length of 365*2425 days, which will introduce an error of 1 day in 
3,300 years. If we have 31 leap years in 128 years, giving an average year- 
length of 365*24219 days, we shall have an error of 1 day in 100,000 years, 
and this is much to be preferred. 

(б) The beginning of the year should fall on a well-defined astronomical 
point, viz. either the vernal equinox, the winter solstice, the summer solstice* 
or the autumnal solstice. 

The vernal equinox day is the beginning of the Persian New Year day 
(Nowroja). This, of all New Year's days, is the most scientific. 

The Christian New Year day, January 1, has absolutely no scientific 
basis, and is reminiscent of Roman imperialism 1 which started its year on the 
day of God Janus. This should be given up, as God Janus has been long 
dead. 

The other cardinal points of the year, particularly the winter solstice 
day (henceforth called W.S. day), formed sometimes the New Year's day 
and a very important national festival amongst all nations inhabiting the 
northern hemisphere. The reason is not far to seek. All residents of the 
north temperate zone, which contains the cradles of early civilization, have to 
suffer from the rigours of winter. During these days, they found the sun 
rising every day farther to the south, and the winter intensifying. On the 
W.S. day, the sun, after reaching the farthest south, begins to turn north, 
and this heralded to the ancients the impending passing away of unpleasant 
winter and was made the occasion for many festivities. The following may 
be noted: 

The Vedic Indians looked eagerly for the turning to the north of the sun 
(Uttarayana) and as soon as they were able to detect the phenomenon, they 
started their yearly sacrifices. (The festival is still celebrated by the Hindus 
under the name of Pous-Parvan, but the connection with W.S. is gone due to 
unrectified mistakes in the length of the year, committed by early calendar- 
maters,) Later, about 500 A.D., the V.E, was taken as the beginning of the 
solar year, but for the lunar year, there were various systems. 

The ancient Persians celebrated on the W.S. day the birthday ceremony 
of Mithra, their God of Light (probably an anthropomorphic form of the sun). 

In China, Huang-Ti, the Yellow Emperor, who is said to haVe established 
the national calendar about 2300 B.C., ordained that on the W.S. day the 

* The Roman yew originally started with March 1, but in 135 B.C. it was brought down 
to January 1, 

7® 




CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


Sun of Heaven (i.e. the Emperor) should offer homage on behalf of the people 
to the ancestors of the nation. China retained this festival up to Manchu 
times in spite of all subsequent movements — Confucianism, Buddhism and 
Taoism. 

The primitive Teutonic races of North Europe celebrated the W.S. day 
under different forms (e.g. Yule). 

At present the night before the 25th of Dec. iB celebrated all over the 
Christian World as the Night of Nativity of Christ. Twenty-fifth of December 
was the winter solstice day about the beginning of the first century B.C. 

But the truth is that the W.S. day stands on its own merit, and had 
originally nothing to do with Christ. Probably it will surprise many of our 
readers to know that ‘ Christmas was not among the earliest festivals of the 
Church, and ‘before the fifth century A.D. there was no consensus of opinion 
•as to when it should come on the calendar' (Encyclopaedia Britannica , 14th 
edition, see article on Christmas). In other words, early Christians had no 
knowledge of the date and year of birth of Jesus, and the custom of celebrating 
the birth of Christ on the winter solstice night of the first century B.C. is a 
later concoction. 

The reason is not far to seek. None of the gospels mentions anything 
about the date and year of the birth of Christ, and the earliest and most reliable 
of them with respect to the incidents of Christ’s life, viz. the gospel of Mark, 
tells us that He was the son of a poor carpenter of the village of Nazareth in 
the province of Galilee (Mark 6, 3), and at the age of 30 He began to preach 
His Gospel (Mark 1, 9). The total period covered by His preachings pro- 
bably did not cover more than 17 months; these preachings gave offence to 
the orthodox Jews, and He was arrested by the orders of the High Priest 
two days before the Jewish festival of Passover, 1 which Jesus had come to 
oelebrate along with his disciples in Jerusalem. The High Priest handed Him 
over to the Roman governor, by whose orders He was crucified the next day, 
and His body was interred in a cave through the intercession of a rich sym- 
pathizer of His teachings. When His disciples went to visit the Sepulchre 
on the first day of the week , they found that the body had disappeared. The 
mention of the Passover festival gives us a point d’ appui regarding the date 
and season of His Crucifixion, and Christians have from the earliest times 
oelebrated these incidents in the festivals of Good Friday (day of Crucifixion), 
and Easter day (Sunday following) as the day of Resurrection, though there 
are strong reasons to believe that the Jewish week, mentioned in the gospels* 
is not the present seven-day week but the original lunar week, and the Passover 
took place on the fourteenth day after the new moon. The seven-day week 
was then not yet in vogue, and no mystical importance had then been attached 
to the so-called Lord’s day (Sunday). This was due to astrological influences 
. on the growth of Christianity. 

When Christianity became the State religion of the Roman Empire in 
' 323 AJD., the Christian Fathers felt the necessity of co-ordinating the then 

1 This festival is supposed to oommemorete the exodus of the Jews from Egypt, 



100 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


prevalent pagan festivals— some of which in spite of Christianity were very 
popular — with the incidents of Christ’s life. It was a olever move, for it killed 
two birds with one stone. 

It is now well known that when Imperial Rome began to get weary of 
her pagan gods, she oscillated for a long time between the cults of Mithra 
and of Christ. The Mithra oult with its rich ritualism made a strong appeal 
to the military Roman mind. On the winter solstice day it was supposed 
on one version that Mithra, God of Light and Righteousness, was bom, fully 
clad and armed as a young warrior, chased a bull (symbolic of ignorance and 
lust), slaughtered it with a flashing knife, indicating the triumph of Light 
and Righteousness over Darkness and Lust. The festival was celebrated 
not only in Persia, but also all over the Roman Empire and was extremely 
popular. 

About 323 A.D. the cult of Christ found favour with the State, because 
the Emperor Constantine was under the impression that the god of Christians 
had given him victory over his rivals. The support of the State gave the 
Christian Fathers a great advantage over their rivals, the exponents of 
Mithraism. They began further to improve their position by absorbing the 
rich rituals of Mithraism, including the birthday festival of Mithra, which 
became henceforth the Feast of Nativity of Christ. In the Julian calendar 
Dec. 25 or Dec. 24 formed the W.S. day about the second century B.C., but 
though about 355 A.D., when we get first mention of Christmas, the W.S. day 
had fallen to Dec. 21, the earlier date, Dec. 25, was retained as the Christmas 
day. 

We thus see the W.S. day, the most prominent cardinal point of the year, 
has provided dates for most important festivities of all nations. The other 
cardinal points of the year have also been utilized for this purpose by Hindus, 
early Christians and other nations. The following gives a summary view : 


Cardinal days 
of the year 

Christian 

Indian (Vedic) 

Chinese 

Persian 

Jewish 

Winter Solstice 
(Dec. 25) 

Nativity of 
Christ. 

Commence- 
ment of 
yearly sacri- 
fices. 

Emperor 

worships 

ancestors. 

Mithra’s 

Birthday. 


Vernal Equinox 
(March 25) 

Conception of 
Christ. 



Persian 
Nowroja 
(New Year's 
day). 


Summer Solstice 
(June 24) 

Birth of John 
the Baptist. 

Hari shayan, 
Traditional 
beginning of 
monsoons. 

.... 


.... 

Autumnal 
Equinox 
(Sept. 24) 

Conception of 
John the 
Baptist. 



• 

Original 
Jewish New 
Year day. 


The dates are according to the Julian calendar about first century A.D. 
In 356 A.D. the dates had receded by 4 days but the earlier days were kept.' 






















CALENDAR THROUGH AGES AND ITS REFORM 


101 


The early Christians thus draw up a parallel between the sun’s motion, 
and the lives of John the Baptist and Jesus Christ. John represents the sun 
during his motion in the southern half of the ecliptic, he is supposed to have 
been conceived on September 24, the day of autumnal equinox, and is bom 
272 days later, on the day of summer solstice. Christ represents the sun in 
his motion in the northern half of the ecliptic, he is taken to have been con- 
ceived on March 24, and is bom on the winter solstice day, 275 days later. 

Beginning of the Era 

The question of the starting point of an world era is also an important 
item to which some attention should be given but it has been entirely ignored 
by the framers of the perpetual calendar, because they believe that the Christian 
era should be acceptable to all nations of the world. As we shall see 
•presently, the Christian era has neither universal acceptance, nor has any 
distinguishing merit to recommend itself as a world era. 

The requisites of the world era should be that it should be connected 
with an easily definable astronomical event, and should have no affiliation 
with any religion, country, or personality. Let us see how many eras, in use 
now or in earlier times, satisfy this criterion. 

The orthodox Jews use an era which they call era of Creation. It starts 
on Oct. 7, 3761 B.C., for this is the date, according to Jewish Rabbis, when 
Jehovah started creating the world as narrated in the Bible. No further 
notice need be taken of this era. 

The Christian Era 

The Christian nations begin the era with the presumed year of Christ’s 
birth. This is another myth invented by the Christian Fathers, and came 
into vogue about 500 A.D. due to the exertions of Bishop Dionysius Exiguus. 
Before that nobody knew the year of Christ’s birth, and the era used in the 
Roman Empire prior to 500 A.D. was reckoned from the date of the supposed 
foundation of Rome (753 B.C.). This was, like the Christian era, an artificial 
invention. 

Some years ago, a Roman inscription was discovered at Ankarah, which 
said that king Herod, who is alleged in the Bible to have attempted to take the 
life of Baby Jesus, was dead by 4 B.C. So Christ must have been bom at 
least 4 years, and most probably 6 or 8 years, before the year invented for his 
birth. There is, therefore, no scientific reason in a modem world to stick to the 
fiction of the year of Christ’s birth as the beginning of an era for a modem 
world. 

The other eras of the world, the Olympian era of the ancient Greeks, the 
era of foundation of Rome (these two eras appear to have been based on the 
era of Nabonassar, the Babylonian king), the Nirvana era of the Buddhists, the 
Sambat and Saka eras of the Hindus, the Kali Yuga era invented by Aryabhata, 
are all artificial eras, whose beginnings are shrouded in mystery. Some of the 
now defunct eras, viz. the Gupta era (started in 319 A.D.) or the Seleuoidean 



102 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME' 

ttat the reckoning of .n ere oommemoreting or suppored to oom reomorete 
great inoidont in the history of » group of people cannot oommand 
universal homage, and should be replaced by a more scientific starting point. 

When the makers of the glorious French Revolution started to cut the 
world adrift from agelong superstitious practices, particularly Christian 
superstitions, they turned to the French Academy for finding out a convenient 
starting point for a new era for the Republic. The great astronomer Laplace 
was consulted, and he recommended to the Republique 1250 A.D. as the 
starting point of the new era. The proposal did not commend itself to the 
leaders of the Revolution, who started their era from Sept. 22, 1792, because 
it was the day of proclamation of the republic, and in this year (leap year) 
Sept. 22 was the day of the autumnal equinox. 

The era of the French Revolution has gone the way of other eras, and 
a modem world should be guided by less sentimental and more scientific 
■reasoning. The question should be thoroughly discussed amongst astronomers. 
The Julian era, invented by Joseph Scaliger (1540-1609), satisfies some of the 
requirements of a universal era and is used by astronomers for continuous day 
reckoning, but its starting point, Jan. 1, 4713 B.C. ( — 4712 A.D.) is too far 
back in time. 

Conclusions 


Let us now make our final suggestions regarding calendar reform : — 

(1) The Universal Calendar should not aim to interfere with the religious 
• life of the various communities, but should be strictly a calendar 

for economic and scientific purpose for the whole world. 

(2) The different communities would be free to insert in them their 

particular religious or national calendars as best as they can, 
but persuasion should be brought upon them to reform these 
calendars on a rational basis. 

(3) The Universal Calendar should start at some point of time which is 

astronomically well defined, e.g. the starting point used by 
Julius Scaliger or 1250 A.D. as proposed by Laplace. The 
Christian era, or the Nirvana era, or eras associated with some 
notable personality or some great event in a nation’s life should 
be given up. 

(4) The Universal Calendar should have months, and weeks, and the 

first day of the year should fall on the day of the winter solstice. 
The year would then end with the Christmas Eve; in other words, 
Christmas and New Year’s day would be one and^the same day. 
The corresponding festivals of the Persians, the Jews, the 
Hindus and the Chinese would fall on the same day. The old 
Roman names for months should be discarded for a rational 
terminology, e.g. Spring 1, 2, 3; Summer 1, 2, 3; Autumn 1, 1,’S; 



AKBAR’S TOMB AT 8IKANDABA AKD ITS HISTOBIOAL BSXH080X50X8 103 

Winter 1, 2, 3. We may continue to call them by the Roman 
names January, February, etc., but the new January should 
start from winter solstice day in the Christian countries, and 
other countries may have their own names (e.g. Hindus may 
be allowed to use M&gh in place of January, Jews Dhabitu, etc.). 

(5) For the rest, the principles underlying the 12-month perpetual 
calendar may be adopted- 

If these views are adopted, the year would begin on the W.S. day which 
would be a Sunday, in the month of W 2 (first winter month) or January or 
M&gh in India. Then V.E. would fall on the 28th day of W s (March — Chaitra), 
two days earlier than the end of the month, but at the beginning of spring. 
This is because the interval between W.S. and V.E. passage is 89 d £ h . The 
S.S. would fall on the 30th of S 8 (third summer month, June — Ash&dha), 
and the A.E. on the 1st day of A x (first month of autumn, October — K&rtik). 
The religious festivals of different nations, which were originally fixed on these 
days, may again be brought back to these days with a little persuasion. The 
other festivals would continue to follow the sun and the moon according to 
whims or tradition of religious bodies. 

The festivals which are associated with certain dates, e.g. July 4 with the 
Declaration of Independence by the United States of America, July 14 with 
the storming of Bastille in France, Oct. 5 with the shooting of Father Gapon 
and his associate by the Czarist troops may retain these dates unaltered. 
There would be only one year of confusion, but we would have a convenient 
calendar, based on science, and tending to the final unity of mankind. 

I wish to express my indebtedness to Prof. P. C. Sengupta for useful help 
and discussion. 


AKBAR’S TOMB AT SIKANDARA AND ITS HISTORICAL 
REMINISCENCES 

By 

Dr. S. K. Banerji, Reader, Lucknow University 

One of the moBt important monuments of Jahangir’s reign is the mauso- 
leum raised on his father’s tomb. Fuhrer, 1 believing the statements of Finoh 
and Hawkins,* has assigned its foundation to Akbar. The former of the two 
travellers writing in 1611 considered the work in progress for ten years and 
noted its incomplete condition and the latter writing in 1612 stated that it 
had already taken fourteen years in building and would take another seven 
years. Thus according to the former its foundations were laid in 1601 and 
to the latter hx 1699. The two travellers had arrived in India in Jahangir’s 
reign and were not present at the time of its foundation. Though some 

. l Fuhrer* The Ancient Monuments in the NiW,P. t Vol. Q, 77, 

' * See Foster* Early Travel s t 120 and 186, 
t 



104 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Muslim rulers had erected their tombs in their lifetime, there is no such record 
for Babur, Humayun or Akbar. We also know that in the last years of his 
reign, Akbar had not built any costly building except the Baland darwaza 
the addition of which proclaimed his hold over North India and the new 
conquests in the south. We also know that he had not constructed any costly 
mausoleums after the death of his dearest friend, Abul Fazl, his two sons, 
Murad and Danyal, or his mother, Mariam Makani. So we may a pnort 
conclude that he had not spent any large sum of money over his own tomb even. 
There are also positive evidences that the building — at least the greater 
part of it — was constructed in Jahangir’s reign. Let us first of all quote 
Jahangir’s own words. He says, 1 ‘I had wished that my father’s tomb should 
be without a parallel in the world. While the constructions were going on, 
Khusrau’s rebellion took me to Lahore and the architects had built in their 
own way, so that a fairly large sum had been spent in the last three or four * 
years. Now (i.e. on the 28th of October, 1608), I ordered that the masons 
after consulting the wise men should reconstruct some portions of it and by 
degrees a lofty building came into existence.’ It is clear from this quotation 
that the work had been going on for at least three years and the mention of 
the fourth year is made as the third year of his reign had been completed at 
the time of his writing 2 * : it was his ambition to raise an unparalleled building 
and he regretted the interruption due to Khusrau’s rebellion. 

Many eminent writers have maintained that the foundation of the mauso- 
leum were laid by Akbar himself. We have already mentioned Fuhrer to be 
one: the others were Fergusson, 8 Havell, 4 * Latif. 6 Vincent Smith 8 and 
Professor Talukdar 7 are in favour of Jahangir being its builder. P. Brown 
is undecided between the claims of the father and the son. 8 The considera- 
tions that weighed with the former writers were : 

(1) that the rulers themselves built their tombs and spent large sums 
on them and any negligence on their part to do so was niggardly 
made up by their successors, and for illustration have quoted 
the fates of Shah Jahan, Salim Shah Sur, Abul Hasan, the last 
ruler of Golconda, and Sikandar Adil Shah, the last ruler of 
Bijapur. The statement is not wholly true, for Jahangir’s 
mausoleum built after his death is a oostly edifice and the same 
might be said with regard to Tughluq Shah, Firuz Tughluq, 
Sayyid Muhammad Shah, Buhlul Lodi, Sikandar Lodi and 
Humayun the Mughal. If Babur had no such costly tomb it was 


1 Seethe Tuzuk-i-J ahangiri, Vol. I, 152. 

• He had amended the throne on the 24th of October, 1605. 

• History of Indian and Eastern Architecture , Vol. H, 298. 

4 Indian Architecture, 176. Agra, 168. 

• History of Wine AH in India and Ceylon , 180. 

7 See his article on ‘the builder of Akbar’e tomb * in the Journal of the U.P. Historical Society, 

January, 1984. 

• See the Cambridge History of India, IV, 549. 


AKBAR’S TOMB AT 8IKANDARA AND ITS HISTORICAL REMINISCENCES 105 

because there was no available space to raise a large edifice on 
the slopes of the hill called the Shah-i-Kabul or the Sher 
darwaza, 1 where Babur had desired to be buried after death 
and Aurangzib was also denied the same honour because of his 
own instructions to his children. In the case of Akbar his 
successor, Jahangir, was eager to perpetuate his father’s 
memory by an unparalleled edifice; 

(2) the peculiar pyramidal shape of the mausoleum, the only other 
building of its type being the Panch mahal. The writers are 
unable to associate any other king but Akbar with such buildings 
of unusual type. 

Actually it is odo of Jahangir’s works, who had commenced it immediately 
after accession, spent a large sum of money before he discovered in October 
*1608 that it was not built in accordance with his plan. So he ordered some 
portions to be pulled down and then in another five years completed it. The 
garden itself had existed from Akbar’s time as is evident from the construction 
of the walls in two stages. 

Against Jahangir’s own statement, it is not wise to assume that Akbar 
had planned the building and laid its foundations. In his last years, various 
events had saddened Akbar and he was leading a lonely and morose life and 
felt little interest in tombs. The person who with all his might and glory 
was fairly humble in oharacter 2 * * and who had raised no large edifice on the 
tombs of any of his relations or friends, may not be expected to take interest 
in his own. 

Let us describe the mausoleum. It lies in the Sikandara village some six 
miles north-west of Agra in the midst of a garden 3J furlongs square. The 
garden walls are 24 ' high and battlemented at the top ; at each angle there is 
an octagonal battered bastion 43' high, surmounted by a small domical kiosk 
and between the bastions there were other towers. The chief entrance is 
through a high gateway in the middle of the south wall and there were other 
smaller entrances through the east and west walls. The arched edifice on 
the north corresponding to the south gate or those in the middle of the east 
and the west sides are false gates. Edmund Smith 8 draws our attention 
to the fact that the surrounding walls were built in two stages and mentions 
that the lower stage, 12' 9' in height, was built by Akbar and that the upper 
stage was built by Jahangir when it Was discovered that the passers-by, 
mounted on elephants, could notioe what was going on inside the enclosure. 
From the south entrance gateway a raised causeway, 75' wide, leads to the 
mausoleum, situated in the middle of the garden and there are 
causeways leading to the three other blind gates. In the centre and at its end 
the causeway ^broadens to contain tanks and fountains. 

1 Babur's tomb is on the 14th terraoe of hill. 

• As some of his sayings on pp. 386, 387, 388, 394, 395, 398 and 399 of the Ain+Abbari 

proye. They are too many to be quoted. 

8 In his monograph on Akbar’s tomb, 7. 



106 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The mausoleum itself measures 339' square standing on a platform 496' 
square and has five storeys, each successive storey gradually lessening so that 
the whole looks pyramidal in form. There are numerous kiosks on each 
terrace and the alcoved entrance to the building is raised higher than the first 
storey and corresponding constructions have been made on the other sides. 

The mortuary chamber lies below the ground, measuring 40' square, and 
is covered by a dome 60' in height. Originally the ohamber was adorned 
with paintings in colour but now the whole has been whitewashed and looks 
severely plain. Subdued light is admitted by small openings high up the wall 
and the entrance to the chamber is by a dark passage, 105' in length, the walls 
of which ‘are finished in polished stucco \ 

The entrance archway to the building is of considerable height and reaches 
the fourth floor. Its noble pendentive and architrave in black and white 
marble, the abutments in mosaic panels and the marble kiosks with decorations * 
in the Maltese crosses make it an impressive adjunct. 

The mortuary chamber is surrounded on the ground floor by cloisters 
which are provided with an octagonal tower at each angle. Adjoining the 
southern entrance on the two sides are the cloister bays which have been en- 
closed to contain the tombs of some Akbar’s daughters and of Sulaiman Shikoh, 
Shah Alam II ’s son, and his wife. The excellent marble, its arabesque tracery, 
the beautifully carved Quranic texts, the rosettes and the floral ornamentations 
of the upper tiers of the plinths of the tomb, attract the attention of a visitor. 

Each storey lessens in area, e.g. the ground floor occupies 339', the first 
floor 182' 7', the second 109' 8*, the third 88' and the top floor 87' 7', in each 
case the corridors surrounding the floors being included. The last has an open 
terrace and a raised platform 38' square evidently meant for a domed kiosk 
over the cenotaph. Both Fergusson and Smith think that the b uilding 
without the dome looks truncated, as here the four oorner towers overlook 
the central terrace and we know that according to the Muslim artists the 
centre of a building should be its highest point. 

The southern vestibule on the ground is cruciform in shape and elaborately 
decorated; the ceiling is groined and in its centre is an exquisite medallion 
with a sunflower in its centre surrounded by a gilded arabesque scroll on deep 
blue ground, the outer edge being in red. The lower portions of the walls 
are covered with geometrical dados. There are other ornaments, illuminated 
Quranic verses and representations of plants on the two sides of the vestibule. 
Altogether the vestibule and its entrance with its jail work are gorgeous 
examples of Mughal ornamentation where every decoration is in order and 
eloquently proclaim the taste of its founder, Jahangir. 

Not only are the Maltese crosses noticeable on the north pavilions at the 
top of the entrance archway but there are other kiosks with Hindu domes 
on the lower terraces. Even the profuse decoration is in accordance with the 
Hindu spirit of architecture. 

The sarcophagus of the emperor in an underground crypt measures IS' 8' 
and is comparatively plain. It was desecrated by the unruly Jats in the 



AKBAR’S TOMB AT 8IKAHDARA ABB ITS HISTORICAL REMINISCENCES 107 


eighteenth century who scattered the bones of the dead emperor and it is 
possible that the original stones were as gorgeously decorated as the rest of the 
building and the present tomb is only a poor substitute set up by his indigent 
descendants of the eighteenth century. 

The glory of the mausoleum lies in its top floor. In contrast to the red 
sandstone of the lower terraces, the topmost one and the two staircases leading 
to it are of marble. The open floor, 70' square, made up of a variety of stones 
contains in the middle an exquisite cenotaph, 6' 10' X 2' V x 3' 3' inscribed with 
ninety-nine names of AUdh and at the head and foot are carved the words 
AUaho-AJcbar , ‘God is Great’ and Jalla-Jalaluhu , ‘exalted be his glory’, sur- 
rounded by the most delicate floral ornamentation. Edmund Smith points 
out that among the flowers the lily, the almond and the dahlia are notioeable 
and concludes from the cloud -forms on the panels that the artists were the 
•Chinese. As these flowers and cloud-forms are also noticed in the decorations 
of some of the buildings at Fatehpur, 1 it is possible that the artists were the 
same or descendants of those that had worked there. 2 * Even the qaUmddn or 
pen-box at the top of the cenotaph is splendidly chiselled in arabesque patterns. 
The butterflies and insects noticed flitting from flower to flower in the north 
and south panels give a realistic touch to the decorations. At the head of 
the cenotaph is a pedestal which used to hold a chirdgh or the incense burnt 
in honour of the dead. Altogether the cenotaph attests to the skill and 
ingenuity of the Mughal artists and maintains the reputation of Jahangir 
as a connoisseur of art. 

The topmost courtyard is surrounded by cloisters closed on the outside 
by beautiful marble open screens. Their trellis work is marvellous and 
patterns are numerous in design. As mentioned above, the central area, 38' 
square, of the open floor is raised probably to be covered with a dome. The 
intention was never carried out because on second thought Jahangir probably 
found the open area more suited to an assembly of mourners in honour of the 
dead 8 and the iron rings on the surrounding walls were provided for the 
awnings to protect the mourning audience from the sun, rain, dew or oold. 
The open space was also more in accordance with the active life led by the 
Mughal chiefs in their original home in Central Asia. 4 Jahangir must also 
have remembered Akbar’s veneration for the sun and his statement when 
Birbal’s corpse could not be discovered that it was well that sun itself purified 
the Baja’s bones. 5 * It is not possible to uphold the view that the absenoe 
of the dome was due to Jahangir’s neglect after his marriage with Nur Jahan 
for more than one reason : 


1 e.g. in the Turki Sultana’s house. 

8 There is an interval of 80 to 40 year* in the date* of construction of the two set* of buildings. 

8 The absedoe of the central dome in the Diwan-i-khas at Fatehpur-Sikri is similarly 
explained. 

4 This point been over*empha*ised by some of the historians. More t han a hundred 

years had passed since Babur left 0. Asia for Kabul in 1604. 

•’ 4 See the Badauni, It, 362. 



108 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


1, Jahangir must have completed this mausoleum before undertaking 
the construction of the south gateway and the other blind gateways and 
sinoe the former entrance has two inscribed dates corresponding to 1612 and 
1613, it is clear that the construction had continued after his marriage in 
1611 and that the mausoleum had been completed according to Jahangir’s 
plan. 

2. Nut Jahan was a talented lady who, in the years following her marriage 
with Jahangir, was a great help to her husband in the development of art and 
some of the artistic productions of this reign were due to the joint efforts of 
the two. 1 Such a lady would never have allowed her husband to leave such a 
unique representation in stone as Akbar’s mausoleum in a state of inoompletion. 

There are four sets of distiches inscribed all round the courtyard, the first 
one on the west cloisters praises God and the sense of justice that He bestows 
on the kings. One couplet is 

‘And whilst choosing the path of justice, they might look upon strangers 
as upon themselves.’ 

On the south and east cloisters are the praises of Akbar who is wrongly put 
down ascending the throne in 962 instead of 963 A.H. 2 * 4 * Some of the verses are : 

(1) ‘He (Akbar) adorned the world with his justice and equity.’ 

(2) ‘At the foot of his throne had gathered eminent men of all nations.’ 

(3) ‘He took kingdoms in war on the first attack and in the twinkling 

of an eye again gave them away to feasts.’ 8 

(4) ‘Whoever took refuge under this throne rose 1 

(6) ‘His fame filled entirely the world and he ruled for fifty-two years 
with glory.’ 

The verses on the north cloisters regret the faithlessness of the fate and of the 
world : 

‘Although the age through the justice of Shah Akbar became like the 
highest paradise and although the world was happy in his time 
and earth yielded to his rule, unfeeling fate led (him) to eternal life.’ 
Incidently Akbar’s love for Shaikh Sadi’s poems is mentioned. 

Next to the mausoleum, the noticeable work is the southern gateway 
with its four marble minors* It is built in two storeys, is 76' in height, 
137' across and 100' deep and has an open platform in front. There is a small 
arched stone gate, 8' V wide, in the middle of the south side of the platform 
Which is the only remnant of the railings that surrounded the platform. The 
alooved archway is 61' high and 44' wide, the spandrels of the bigger arch in 
front and the smaller arch at the back are adorned with rich arabesque scrolls 


1 As for example the construction of the Itim&duddaula of Agra or the Shilpnftr of Kashmir. 

• It is strange that J aha n gir made a mistake about the date of acoemion of his own father. 

» After his conquests Akbar either returned them to the foe as in Kajputana or distributed 
them among his munsabdirs. 

4 They had been broken by the J&te in the eighteenth century but ware restored in 1905 

by lord Curzon’s order. 



akbar’s tomb at sikandara and its historical reminiscences 109 

in white and black marble mosaio. The panels of geometrical figures with 
their inlaid borders on the two abutments are other illustrations of the superb 
mosaio work. 7 

It has several inscriptions, while a few others have been lost. They are 
either too long and verbose in language or mere poetical effusions. It will 
suffice for us to notice the following points about them : 

1. The south facade was completed in 1612 and the north a year later, 
both being the work of the famous calligraphist, Abdul Haqq bin Qasim 
Shirazi. 

2. Sikandara was called Bihistabad 1 probably after the death of Akbar 
who was entitled Arsh Ashianl. 

3. All sorts of compliments and titles have been bestowed on him 
among which the title of Sahibqiran was one. As at the time of his birth 
.there was an unusual constellation of stars, he deserved the title even better 
than Timur or the later Shah Jahan. 

4. Akbar died on the twelfth of Jumdda II, 1014 A.H. (17th October, 
1606). 

5. ‘His empire was safe from ruin because the emperor had no ties with 
the perishable world signifying that his spiritual zeal and not mere worldly 
ambition had strengthened his hold on his subjects. 

6. ‘He was by long descent a Padshah, had established the regulations 
of pomp and government and under his shelter God’s creatures are at rest.’ 

7. All kinds of hyperbolic praise have been bestowed on Jahangir, e.g. 
‘he has the grandeur of Darius, the triumphs of Alexander, the justice of 
Naushirwan, the pomp of Sulaiman, the power of the fate, the strength of the 

destiny, the height of Saturn ; he possesses the world ; he is 

a lord of the happy conjunction who with regal splendour has carried the 
banner of conquest beyond the heights of Simak’. 2 How fulsome the praises 
were will be realized by those who know the defects in Jahangir’s character. 

8. Akbar ’e love for the sun and moon was inherited by his son, Jahangir, 2 
also, and this was expressed by the verse 

‘May his (Akbar’s) soul shine like the rays of the sun and moon in the 
light of God.’ 

To oonclude : 

(а) Akbar’s tomb is another illustration of the garden-tombs of the 

Mughal rulers and the massive gateway with its four minors, 
the noble mausoleum, the broad causeway and the extensive 
garden produce a spatial effect eminently suited to the environ- 
ment; 

(б) there are five storeys to the building, a sarcophagus and two oeno- 

fophs, one on the third floor and the other on the top floor; 

l See also the Tu*uk-i-Jah&ngM, I, 249. • The name of two • tan. 

, 2 Jahangir writes in the Tutu*, 1, 61 : 'Honour the luminaries (the sun, moon, etc.) whioh 
are the mantfesteri of God's light * 



no 


B. 0 . LAW VOLUME 


(c) the mortuary ohamber rises up to the second floor where openings 

have been made in the sloping galleries to allow light to reach 
the ohamber; hence the central area of the ground floor and the 
next two floors are hollow and not approachable; the third and 
the fourth floors which are approachable have oenotaphs in the 
centre; 

(d) the numerous kiosks, arcades and balconies have made the building 

look somewhat light and to that extent it has lost its mourning 
outlook. P. Brown, while calling it unsurpassed in delioaoy 
and finish, considers it disappointing as it lacks the mass effeot 
and the quality of coherence ; 

(e) while the same writer is not sure whether Akbar or Jahangir was 

responsible for the design of the structure, he thinks that the 
latter interposed to introduce modifications in his father’s plan 
more suited to a summer palace than to a royal mausoleum; 
the statement that Akbar had made a plan of the building 
and built some portion is a mere surmise and rests on no solid 
foundation except that the garden existed in the great emperor’s 
time; 

(/) the building has many peculiar features : 

(1) no approach to the centre of each terrace for the three 
lower storeys, (2) the two cenotaphs instead of one, (3) the 
four marble mindrs which are attached not to the central 
mausoleum but to the south , gateway, adorned by superb 
mosaic work, (4) the three blind gateways and the small 
openings on the east and west walls, (5) the construction of the 
lower portion of the mausoleum in red sandstone and the 
upper in marble, (6) profuse use of the various colours which 
have been so skilfully combined that whereas one of them 
alone would have offended the eye, their combination pleases 
it, e.g. the medallion in the centre of the ceiling of the 
vestibule on the ground floor in gold or blue background 
with a red border, (7) the numerous geometrical patterns 
in the trellis work of the topmost floor, (8) the inscriptions 
which are more or less meaningless, (9) the beautiful traceries 
on the central and other cenotaphs, (10) the three false 
gates have decorations including representations of the Persian 
jugs and Indian birds and plants. 

(g) One may be permitted to remark that the parsimonious Akbar 
would have been loth to so lavishly spend on his mausoleum. 
Not only would the plans have been different to make it look 
more substantial but the marble decorations would have been 
mostly avoided. Jahangir, the connoisseur of the lighter arts, 
made the building look original and suited to his taste but 



KALA-AZAR AND ITS CONQUEST 


111 


aooording to the artists of today, it looks frivolous, a grave 
defect for such a oostly and solemn work . 1 It is possible that 
in the construction of the tomb he was imitating his father’s 
Panch mahal. But what suited a pleasure resort for the royal 
ladies did not look appropriate to a mausoleum. Jahangir 
fails as an architect though in other branches of art, e.g. painting, 
he was eminently successful. 

(h) Sayyid Muhammad Latif has stated that Akbar was buried with 
his head towards the west* We do not know his authority 
for the statement ; if it be Badauni, then the author has made a 
slight mistake. What the contemporary historian writes is 
that Akbar’s orders were for burial of a corpse with his head 
towards the east and feet to the west. Actually at Sikandara 
the head lies towards the north and feet to the south and face 
probably turned to the west, for Jahangir would not deviate 
from the established practice of the Muslims at the time of 
his accession when Prince Khusrau was making a bid for the 
throne. Of course, after the desecration of the tomb by the 
Jats, the sarcophagus did not contain any remains of the great 
emperor. 


KALA-AZAR AND ITS CONQUEST 

By 

Sir Upendranath Brahmachari, M.A., M.D., Ph.D., F.N.I., F.R.A.S.B., 

F.I.A.S., Professor of Tropical Medicine, Carmichael Medical College, 

Calcutta 

Kala-azar was once one of the most terrible of tropical diseases. It is 
due to an infection by a kind of parasites which are allied to those of a peculiar 
boil met with in Delhi and western parts of Asia. It occurs in children and 
adults and is characterized by a high death rate in cases not treated with 
antimony. The disease may last for a few months to two or three years, or 
rarely more. 

It is accompanied by irregular fever and enlargement of spleen and 
frequently also of liver, a gradual downhill course, with progressive emaciation, 
diminution of white and red oells of the blood, and tendency to bleeding in 
different parts of the body. It is usually terminated by extensive destructive 
ulceration of the cheeks and gums or some other disease, such as, dysentery, 
pneumonia or tuberculosis. The disease was confounded with malaria for 
upwards of onj hundred years. Eight years ago, I discovered certain akin 

i Jahangir mentions that he had spent fifteen laos of rupees from the royal treasury. See 
he Timk-WakanQirii 1, 151 
ft See Latif s Agra, p. 170. 



112 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


manifestations due to the parasites of this disease, which may have a very 
important bearing on the problem of its transmission. 

The first epidemic manifestation of the disease in Bengal could probably 
be traced to a peculiar type of fever occurring in Jessore in 1824 or 1825, 
oalled ‘Jwar-Vikar’, which, Elliot considered, was very similar to ‘Burdwan 
Fever * in 1 882. Clarke pointed out that there was a disease occurring in Assam 
known as kala-azar or black sickness, from the darkened colour which the skin 
assumed in chronic cases, the ravages of which decimated and in some instances 
depopulated numerous districts in the Garo Hills as far back as 1869. 

The disease occurs extensively in the eastern parts of India, especially in 
the districts through which the rivers Ganges and Brahmaputra pass. The 
provinces of ‘Assam, Bengal, parts of Madras, especially the city, Bihar and 
Orissa, and the eastern parts of the United Provinces are the chief endemic 
areas. Outside India there are endemic areas in certain parts of China, Asiatic 
Russia, Russian Turkestan, Arabia and Mesopotamia. 

It is endemic in parts of Europe bordering on the Mediterranean, e.g. 
the southern parts of Italy and in Sicily. It occurs in Greece, chiefly in the 
islands of Spetsa and Hydra. Isolated cases of the disease have been reported 
from southern Spain and Portugal and from southern France. Cases have also 
been described in Moscow as well as in Vienna and Riga. 

It is endemic in almost the whole of the Mediterranean coast of Afrioa, 
and recently the disease has been discovered in Kenya Colony. 

In India epidemics of kala-azar once acquired a home in Assam, but suoh 
epidemics are unknown in Assam in more recent times due to intensive mass 
treatment of the disease. 

Among the various theories advanced for the propagation of the disease 
are the two following: (1) infection by bites of infected insects, and (2) infec- 
tion by contaminated food. 

Among the possible carriers of the disease by biting insects may be 
mentioned the flea, the bed bug and the sandfly. In the case of fleas it was 
onoe suggested that the dog flea may be infected by biting infected dogs, and 
in the case of the bed bug or the sandfly by biting an infected person. The 
flea and bug theories have now been exploded, though they were once regarded 
as most plausible ones, the dog flea being held responsible for infantile kala-azar 
in the Mediterranean basin. More recently, a certain variety of sandfly has 
been regarded to be the carrier of the disease. This theory is based upon 
certain observations that the parasites undergo some forms of development in 
the stomach of the sandfly. 

For some time there was no other experimental evidence in favour of the 
possibility of the infection taking place through bites of infected sandflies. 
Thus Shortt, Director of the Kala-azar Commission, found that experi- 
mental an i m a ls , subjected, in thousands of experiments, to biles of sandflies 
known to be infected with parasites of kala-azar, in no oase contracted 
the disease. In his earlier experiments he found that no single human 
volunteer could be infected by the bites of even heavily infected sand&es. 



KALA-AZAR AND ITS CONQUEST 


113 


More reoently, however, hamsters and a few human volunteers have been 
infected by means of infected sandflies. On the other hand, some new 
experiments of Shortt leave no option but to reopen the possibilities of food 
infection which was once discarded. Certain experiments on mice also led to 
the same conclusion. It is known that the parasites of kala-azar escape in 
the urine in living form and it is most probable that they also escape in the 
faeces. The obvious line of future experimentation, therefore, is to determine 
the avenues from which living forms of the parasite may leave an infected 
person and how far these forms will exist in various food materials, snob as 
milk. 

Clinically I observed years ago that double infection of kala-azar and 
typhoid or paratyphoid is not uncommon. These observations also lead to the 
conclusion that infection with the virus of kala-azar may take place through the 
intestinal tract by means of food . I throw out the suggestion that an individual 
who has had typhoid or other forms of ulcers in his intestines may be infected 
with the parasites of kala-azar through these ulcers by contaminated food. 

There are, therefore, two lines of investigations for the future : (1) Does 
infection take place through food ? or (2) Does it take place through bites of 
an infected insect, say the sandfly ? The recent consensus of opinion is that 
the disease is propagated by the bites of some kind of sandflies. 

The recent discoveries in the treatment of the disease constitute one of the 
greatest advances in tropical medicine. They have revolutionized our ideas 
about its mortality which has been reduoed from 95 % to 5 % or even less. 
It was doubtless a very great advance in the treatment of the disease 
from massive doses of quinine to that of tartar emetic which was the first 
antimony compound introduced for the treatment of kala-azar by Rogers in 
India, by Castellani in Ceylon, and by Cristina and Caronia in Italy. Soon 
after its introduction, I conceived the idea of using sodium antimonyl tartrate, 
sometimes called Plimmer’s salt, and the original bottle containing the first 
sample of this compound used by me more than 25 years ago is still preserved. 
Tartar emetic was soon replaced by this compound. 

The next method of treatment introduced by me was the intravenous 
administration of metallio antimony in a state of very fine subdivision, which 
was attended with remarkable benefit. I have pointed out in a paper 
that I read in the Calcutta Medical Club that when injected intravenously the 
particles of antimony are picked up by the same cells in the spleen as those 
that harbour the parasites of kala-azar and thus the two contending agents 
come in olosest contact with each other in these tissue cells, and the fight ends 
most remarkably in the complete destruction of the parasites in the speediest 
way. 

The next further advance in the treatment of kala-azar was the introduction 
of certain orgdhic compounds of antimony. The use of these compounds in 
kala-azar infection has been the subject of my research for many years. In 
1920, soon after I had been financed by the Indiap Research Fund Association, 
some of these compounds were prepared for the first time in India in my 
a . 



114 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


laboratory in the Caloutta Campbell Hospital, and I immediately brought to 
the notioe of the Governments of Bengal and India and the Governing Body 
of the Indian Research Fund Association the potentialities of these com- 
pounds in the treatment of Indian kala-azar. 

Early in 1921, in the course of my research, I discovered an urea antimony 
compound for the treatment of kala-azar. Its introduction and my other 
researches on antimonial compounds opened up a new vista in the treatment 
of the disease in India, by means of therapeutic organic antimonials. This 
urea compound I named ‘Urea stibamine’. 

I shall not detain you here with the romance of urea stibamine, however 
interesting it may be. But' I recall with delight that memorable night in the 
Calcutta Campbell Hospital at Sealdah when after a very hard day’s work at, 
about 10 p.m. in a little room with a smoky, dimly-bnming kerosene lamp, 
but with Heaven’s light as my guide, I found that my experiments in the. 
preparation of this compound were up to my expectations. But I did not 
know that night that God had put into my hands a wondrous thing and that 
this little thing would save the lives of millions of my fellow-men. 

I soon found its toxicity to be low. I gave my first injection to my 
patient with a dubious mind. The results were remarkable and surpassed all 
my expectations. Feelings of hope, however, alternated in my mind with 
those of depression, as it was a matter of extreme difficulty to prepare the 
compound in its purest state and sometimes I despaired of success. My 
assistants always stood by me in my moments of despair and with youthful 
hopes strengthened my mind. I carried on my observations incessantly at 
great personal sacrifice and not without much inconvenience to the practice of 
my profession as a physician. My first series of cases treated with this com- 
pound were published early in 1922; soon after this, most remarkable results 
were obtained with it by Major Shortt in Shillong to whom I sent the com- 
pound for trial at the request of Col. Greig, Director of Medical Research in 
India. 

The Governing Body of the Indian Research Fund Association quickly 
recognized its value from the reports of my cases in Calcutta as well as of 
those obtained from Shortt and other Directors of the Pasteur Institute, 
Shillong, from Christophers, Director of the Kala-azar Commission, from 
medical officers of tea estates in Assam, and from the Government of Assam. 
In Calcutta its value was quickly recognized. Its reputation quickly spread 
all over Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, and to more distant places in India, 
such as Madras, Sana war, Simla Hills and other places too numerous to 
mention, and every observer who used the drug was convinced of the great 
advance made by its discovery in the treatment of kala-azar. 

It was introduced, soon after its discovery and after a preliminary experi- 
mental trial, by the Government of Sir John Kerr, as a preventive measure 
against the disease in Assam. 

While discussing with the Director of the Calcutta School of Tropical 

M&dicine the therapeutic value of this compound, soon after its discover^, I 

Sa 



KALA-AZAB AND ITS CONQUEST 


115 


pointed out and suggested to him the possibility of obtaining therapeutic 
aromatic antimonials from the Chemische Fabrik von Heyden, the only com- 
pound of that nature then available in England being s tibenyl, and this 
suggestion of mine was followed by the introduction of von Heyden’s prepara- 
tions into this institution for the treatment of kala-azar. 

Today urea stibamine stands pre-eminent in the treatment of kala-azar in 
India and as a powerful prophylactic against the disease, and I have now the 
supreme satisfaction in my mind that the treatment that has been evolved out 
of my research has saved the lives of millions of sufferers in my country. A 
disease which for centuries was considered incurable, destroyed millions of 
human lives, ruined families, decimated villages and retarded prosperity in the 
affected parts of India, has now lost its terrors and the sufferings of the 
afflicted have been mitigated. Epidemics of the disease have been forgotten 
and the places formerly affected are becoming healthy localities. 

The following extract from the speech of His Excellency Sir John Kerr, 
while bidding farewell to the Legislative Council in Assam in 1926, shows the 
value of the campaign against kala-azar by mass treatment of the disease. 
His Excellency remarked : ‘ We may now say that victory, if not in sight, is 
assured. The progress in the campaign against kala-azar in Assam has been 
phenomenally rapid, and if it continues at the present rate, there is an excellent 
prospect of the dread scourge being brought under complete control in a few 
years.’ 

The last word about the treatment of kala-azar has not, however, yet 
been said, though we are nearer to it than in the case of any other tropical 
disease. I hope that an antimony compound will be discovered which it 
will be possible to administer with benefit by the mouth, thanks to the progress 
of synthetic chemistry. 

The economic effect of the discovery of the cure of kala-azar must be very 
great in the provinces of Assam and Bengal, and in other parts of India and 
abroad where the disease occurs. 

This disease in its epidemic manifestation constituted, according to Rogers, 
the old ‘ Burdwan Fever 9 which raged in Bengal in the ’sixties and ’seventies, 
and converted many parts of Bengal into a ‘valley of the shadow of death’. 
Its terrible nature is well described in the following words of a contemporary 
writer : ‘ The devastation of the epidemic has a very sad tale to tell. Countries 
that onoe smiled with peace, health, and prosperity, have been turned into 
hot-beds of disease, misery and death. Villages that once rang with the 
cheerful, merry tunes of healthful infants, now resound with loud wailings and 
lamentations. Huts which offered too little spaoe for their occupants, are 
left without a tenant. The skulls of human beings now strew the fields at 
every few yards’ distance. The fell disease has mocked every human effort 
and absorbed in its powerful grasp, day by day and inch by inch, every 
blessed spot which onoe used to be prized for its salubrity.’ 

General Gorges, speaking in 1914 on yellow fever oontrol, stated that its 
eradication would command the attention and the gratitude of the world and 



116 


B. 0. LAW VOLUMB 


th. tune odd bo do». Today y*w fevor » in fell k ,*> > 

The same will one day be said of kala-azar, and it may be hoped that belore 
long the disease will be completely banished from India and other parts of the 
world where it occurs. The signs of its retreat in Assam are already within 
sight, thanks to intensive mass treatment with urea stibamine which, at the 
present day, is the most effective prophylaotic against the disease. 

That day will be the happiest and proudest day of my life, if it falls to 
my lot to see it. I shall never forget that little room where urea stibamine 
was discovered, the room where I had to labour for months without a gas point 
or a water tap, and where I had to remain contented with my old kerosene 
hurricane lamp for my work at night. The room still remains but the signs of 
a laboratory in it have completely disappeared. To me it will ever remain 
as a place of pilgrimage, where the first light of urea stibamine dawned upon 
my mind. Let me tell you that this light did not emanate from inside 
marbled halls with crystal doors; and other lights may emanate for the 
well-being of mankind from still more insignificant and unfrequented comers 
of the boundless atmosphere of scientific research, where there is pride and 
pleasure to work in the midst of difficulties. 


BUDDHISM IN GUJARATI LITERATURE 

By 

DrwAN Bahadur Krishnalal M. Jhaveri, M.A., LL.B., J.P. 

Asoka chose the rook at Gimar as one of the places for his propaganda. 
Buddhists selected places like Kanheri, Jogeshwarl and Elephanta near 
Bombay, for their cave residences. Gimar is in Kathiawad, i.e. Saur&shtra, 
the other places are in the ancient Lata province. Modem Gujarat and 
Kftthiaw§4, therefore, had not wholly been ignored by the followers of Buddha. 
However, Brahmin and Jaina influence was so powerful on this side of India 
that the religion of Buddha could not eradicate it effectively. For this reason, 
Bu ddhism is hardly referred to in old or even mediaeval Gujarati literature, 
excepting where Avatars (Incarnations) are mentioned. The Brahmins had 
very shrewdly incorporated Buddha in their list of Avatars, as an Avat&r, 
and along with other Avatars, he too is mentioned as one of them by the 
poets. But it was left to the present times to study and bring forward the 
good points of one of the greatest religions of the world and its propounder. 
It began with the late Mr. Narayan Hemchandra, a voluminous writer who 
flourished half a century ago, and who was a devotee of JJaharahi Devendra 
Nath Tagore and a companion of Keshav Chandra Sen. Eh knew Bengali 
well From Bengali sources he gave us details of the life of Buddha 
{Biuldhadeva chdritra), A few years thereafter, another Gujarati writer, a 
deep student of different religions, Mr. Monilal N. Doshi, fe.A., prepared a 



BUDDHISM IN GUJABATI UT1BATUB1 


117 


Life of Buddha (A.D. 1901) and his Upadesha (AD. 1912) from various 
sources, and the same were published by the late Bhikshu Akbandinand, who 
spent his whole life in the cause of making literature as cheap as possible . 
This was the first systematic attempt of spreading knowledge about Buddha 
and Buddhism in Gujarat. Later, the work was taken up by the Oujarot 
Puratattva Mandir of Ahmedabad, which owed its existence to the inspiration 
of Mahatma Gandhi, when he was residing at Sabarmati. Dharmanand 
Kosambi, who is a student of Buddhism and a scholar of international fame, 
has contributed the largest number of books bearing on this subject. In 
1924 were published the Dhammapada translation from the original with 
notes, in collaboration with Prof. R. V. Pathak, and the Buddha Lila Bar - 
sangraha } and Abhidhammattha sangaho. This was followed by the Samddhi - 
marga and Bauddhasanghno Parichaya (1925). H.H. The Maharaja Gaekwad of 
.Baroda had invited Prof. Dharmanand Kosambi to deliver a series of lectures 
on Buddha in A.D. 1910. Based on the subject matter of that series and on 
other materials he gave to Gujarat his Buddha Charitra in A.D. 1937, a book 
which till now is the final work on the subject. The Jain Sahitya Prak&ahak 
Samiti of Ahmedabad published this book. In between Gujarati poets were 
trying their best at versifying the salient incidents in the life of Buddha. The 
late Kavi Botadkar had in simple but pathetic lines versified the Return 
Home (Grihagamana) of Buddha, and the late Mr. Narsmha Rao Divalia, 
one of the best lyric poets of Gujarat, had begun to turn his attention to this 
fascinating topic. 

On 18th May, A.D. 1924, Buddha Jayanti was celebrated on the Sea-Shore 
at Juhu, a suburb of Bombay, where Gandhiji was staying at the time. He 
took part in the proceedings and verses composed for that occasion were 
sung by little girls giving an outline of the life and preachings of Buddha. 
They were written by Narsinha Rao. Later, the Light of Asia by Sir Edwin 
Arnold attracted him and he selected about seven prominent events of his 
life, like the parting from Yashodhara, incidents with Kisa Gotami and Sujata, 
and versified them in lines, which, due to their pathos and sentiment, have 
found an abiding place in Gujarati literature. He has published the collection 
in book-form — Buddhachafit — with coloured illustrations and copious notes 
(A.D. 1934). Another celebrated poet of Gujarat, Kavi N&nalal, has absorbed 
the spirit of his life, and still younger writers, who are rising and coming into 
light and fame like Sundaram and Uma Shanker Joshi, have taken to the 
subject as full of possibilities for the exercise of their imagination and pen 
and have been writing on it. On the whole, modern Gujarati literature has 
dealt with the life of Buddha and his teachings (Upadesha) and there is no 
likelihood of its being neglected in the future. 


1 Thii work Had passed through three editions by A.D. 1980 and it has proved very popular. 
It was originaUy written in M&rfyhl (A.D. 19U) and translated into Gujarati by Nilkantha 
Mashruvala. 



A BASIC TENDENCY OF PRAKRIT LANGUAGES 

By 

A. M. Ghatage, M.A., Ph.D. 

Compared to Sanskrit, the Prakrit languages show a bewildering variety 
of changes in their phonology, morphology and syntax, and produce an 
impression of artificiality by the extent and regularity of such changes. On 
the other hand, we find them used for a vast literary activity with the avowed 
purpose of coming closer to the speeches of the populace. The way to reconcile 
these two positions can only be found in an attempt to trace some fundamental 
principle of linguistic change at the basis of all changes introduced in the 
Prakrits, which would render them more intelligible. 

One such principle we may hope to find in the phonology of the Prakrits 
which would make us understand how such changes have occurred and are 
made possible. In the whole range of the bewildering changes of sounds, 
both vowels and consonants, which one meets in the Prakrits, there appears 
to be one thing which remains constant and guides all these changes. This 
principle can be briefly formulated as the tendency to preserve the syllabic quantity 
of a word. We may now examine the working of this tendency in Prakrit 
phonology to appreciate the full extent of its operation and effectiveness. 

The best illustration of this tendency may be found in the changes of the 
conjunct consonants. Thus whether the assimilation observable in them is 
progressive or regressive, the syllabic nature of the word remains in tact. So 
Sanskrit tapta becomes tatta and yatna may change into jatta , but the syllabic 
values of the words are in no way affected. They continue to have a long 
syllable followed by a short one. In fact, a change involved in tapta becoming 
tatta can only be explained by a consideration of the following kind. The 
usual explanation that the first consonant -p-, being purely implosive, was less 
audible than the explosive second consonant - 1 - and so it had a better chance 
of surviving as it actually does and assimilates the first, is not the whole truth. 
We find not only the loss of the first mute but also the gemination of the 
second and say that it has assimilated the first. But what exactly do we mean 
by this assimilation ? Obviously it is not that the mind of the speaker regards 
the first stop as a -t- by mistaken identity, nor does his anticipatory movement 
of 4r satisfies him for the sound of -p-, though this is the starting point of the 
change. If the speaker had known that his inability to pronounce the sound 
~p m were harmful to the nature of the word, it would have remained a mere 
mistake and would have been duly corrected. What appears to happen 
actually is that the mind of the speaker has identified the essence of the word 
not so much with the acoustic effects of the individual sounds up the 

word, a feeling for -p- and that for -t- following a short vowel but more with 
the sequence of two syllables, a short vowel sound follows ^*by a group of 
consonants so as to render it heavy by position. This essential nature of the 
word impresses the mind to such an extent that it forms the focus of attention 
at the tim6 of uttering the word leaving all other constituents vague and 



A BASIO TENDENCY 07 PRAKRIT LANGUAGES 


119 


unimportant. In other words the syllabic structure of a word is for the speaker 
a distinctive variant while all others are non -distinctive. Once these others 
are freed from the essential nature of the word they have less chance of survival 
and drop out to the extent that they in no way affect the essential nature 
of the word. Thus after uttering the first syllable which is by nature short , 
the speaker has a vivid consciousness that it must be followed by a group of 
consonants or more accurately by a long consonant so as to give it its required 
syllabic value of length by position. When the stop is uttered, the choice 
falls naturally on the explosive 4- as clearer of the two and the tendency is to 
lengthen it to satisfy the demands of the preceding syllable and when once 
it is satisfied the speaker has no further inclination of reproducing the other 

• elements of the original word. 

The same principle appears to explain more accurately the cases of assimi- 

• lation where the original conjunct is made up of a mute and a fricative, a liquid 
or a semi-vowel. When a Sanskrit word like putra becomes putta, or a word 
like tatra becomes tattha , or even a word like satya becomes sacca we are 
accustomed to call the changes as ordinary cases of assimilation and we say 
that the mute assimilates to itself the other sound. But the actual fact is 
more complex. In the first place the Sanskrit orthography does not appear 
to represent the actual sounds of the Sanskrit words in their totality and is to 
some extent responsible for the usual view of regarding them as cases of 
assimilation. It is easy to see that a conjunct like -tr- or ty- is not strictly 
of the same type as - kt - or 4p - where two mutes are involved. While in the 
latter type of groups there will be a syllabic division in the body of the conjunct 
consonant separating the two sounds into two syllables marked by the plosion 
between the two, no such syllabic division is possible in the earlier type. In 
fact -tr- is nothing but the sound 4- the explosion of which takes the form of 
the sound -r- and a conjunct like -pi- has the explosion of the mute -p- in the 
form of a lateral sound, ty- would normally be a palatal 4- sound. In all 
these cases the sound would not be such as can be strictly called a conjunct 
which can be split into two parts the first of which attaches itself to the pre- 
ceding syllable and makes it a close one. In other words, if the sounds are 
exactly what they are written, they would not make position and make the 
preceding syllable long. That some of the Sanskrit groups were and are of 
this type is evident from the fact that groups like £r-, pi - can begin a word in 
the language as in trdyasva , plavate or tydga. But when such groups occur 
in the body of a word they necessarily make position and are always so treated. 
This can only be possible on the supposition that in actual pronunciation they 
were real conjunct consonants and involved a long consonant as the first 
member. In ordinary orthography they were as good as *pu#ra, *8aitya t 
*vipplava and so on. Such a sound of these words can also be inferred from 
the fact that* there was no difference of sound in the groups of words like 
mttra and putra though, following etymology, we write sat-tra (from sad- 
and tra) but pu4ra (from pu- and tra). In view of the rules of doubling given 
by the Sanskrit phoneticians, which pertain more to sounds than to writing, 



120 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


it cannot be imagined that the long consonant in sattra was shortened, and 
we are led to that the simple 4- in words like putra was geminated. 
And this is in full agreement with the actual sounds. Once this thing is clear 
we can see that the change of these groups into Prakrit -pp- or -cc- does 
not involve a case of assimilation but only that of simplification. The double 
consonant is found sufficient for keeping the syllabic structure of the word and 
the following peculiar type of explosion is superfluous for that purpose, with 
v. the result that it gives place to the normal type of explosion. In short, it 
disappears leaving behind a long consonant. Such a supposition alone can 
explain the change of ty- to cc- where the consonant itself is palatalized. 

This principle is best verified on a limited type of change like the develop- 
ment of a glide of a sound like -b- in words of the nature of Sanskrit tdmra 
dmra becoming Prakrit tamba , dmba, etc. That in a group like mr-, ml- a 
glide sound like -6- is prone to arise is obvious from the physiological point of- 
view. It is the natural result of the lack of a very fine adjustment of the 
vocal organs ; where the soft palate goes up a moment too soon and gives rise 
to the glide. This same glide is observable in the change of Anglo-Saxon 
8lumerian into English slumber and Latin numerum into French nombre. 
Though the two cases are quite parallel as regards the development of the 
glide the change illustrated by English and French shows a vital difference 
from the change in Prakrit. In both the European languages the two members 
of the group (for we must assume an intermediate step where the groups arose) 
are kept along with the glide in the words slumber and nombre , but the Prakrit 
words drop one of the members of the original groups. The preservation was 
possible in the earlier case because the English word has developed a new 
syllabic sound (e) while in French the nasal sound has only nasalized the 
preceding vowel. On the contrary in the absence of both these possibilities, 
in the Prakrits the group of two consonants was all that was needed to preserve 
the syllabic nature of the word and quite naturally the additional sound of 
-r- or -l- was lost. From this it is but an obvious deduction that such a con- 
ception of the essential nature of a word would not allow a group of three 
consonants, which is actually the case in Prakrit. Similarly a conjunct at the 
beginning of a word served no useful purpose for the syllabic structure of the 
word and was uniformly lost. 

This very principle would explain that striking change of dropping most 
of the intervocalic consonants which gives these languages their distinctive 
appearanoe. As in other languages, notably in French, the intervocalic 
consonants became voiced, turned into spirants, and as spirants were rare in 
Indo- Aryan, were finally lost. But their loss was in no way detrimental to the 
conception of the word as viewed by the speakers who stressed above all the 
number and sequence of the syllables whioh were kept in tact in spite of the 
loss of the consonants. As compared to the vast number of words where the 
syllables are preserved, the cases showing the loss of syllables are quite negligible 
and most of them are simple cases of contraction. It is only when the Middle 
Indo-Aryan period is over and the New Indo-Aryan period has begun that we 



A BASIC TENDENCY OF PRlKBIT LANGUAGES 


121 


find a change in the idea of the nature of the word and the consequent loss of 
syllables accompanied by other changes. 

Most of the vowel changes follow the same principle. It is obvious that 
the diphthongs -ai- and ~au- and the long vowels -e- and -o- are not different 
in their metrical length and following a primitive Sanskrit tendency the former 
are reduced to the latter in Prakrits. But more interesting is the creation of 
two new sounds, the short -l- and -0- under the pressure of the same tendency. 
In Sanskrit the long -e- and -0- when followed by groups of consonants preserved 
their long quantity. Thus in a word like ve§tana or ostha the vowels of the 
first syllables were necessarily long and were so pronounced. But these words 
were in no way different as regards quantity from words with the vowels -i- 
.and -u- with a following group of consonants as in mitra or ustra. The qualities 
of the vowels were no doubt different but the metrical value of the words was 
. the same in spite of the difference of quantity of the vowels in the first syllables. 
Now the difference between the two can only be about the length of the following 
conjunct consonant. If -e- and -o- were pronounced long in the first two 
words and -i- and -u- were pronounced short in the other two and yet the words 
had the same metrical scheme, it follows that in the first group the first member 
of the group was of a shorter duration than in the second set of words. This 
was possible because the first member of the group in Sanskrit was able to 
show some amount of variation in its length to preserve the quantity of the 
preceding vowels distinct. With the assimilation of the groups in the Prakrit 
stage no such possibility existed and the natural result was that the preceding 
long vowels were shortened. They, however, preserved their distinctive quality 
and resulted in short -8- and -0-. 

A host of other changes will be found to confirm this principle. Thus 
cases of anaptyxis like irl — siri , sukpm — suhuma, gemination of con- 
sonants like taila = tella, khata = khatta , dukula = dugulla , simplification of 
groups like var§a = vdsa, gatra = gaya and most of the Sandhi rules can be 
taken to illustrate this principle. 

One such change based on this principle is of greater importance in the 
explanation of the morphology and syntax of the Prakrit languages. It is 
the regular altemance between a long vowel and a short vowel with an anusv&ra 
after it. Both have the same metrical value and both appear to alternate 
with each other as a purely phonetic variant. Cases of spontaneous nasaliza- 
tion like vayasya = vayamsa , aim = amsu and changes like vimiati = visa, 
simha = s%ha fall under this altemance. 

This altemance would explain a number of individual words which are 
otherwise obscure. So in Pali akamsu for akar$uh , bddh- in the sense of bandh- 
‘to bind*, siyam for siyd as potential third person singular of os-, sirmeapa 
for sorisfpo, niramkatvd for *nirdkrtva, the proper name vamgisa which may 
be the same as vdglia, the form carhkl probably Sanskrit cakrl, khalumka from 
Sanskrit khalok$a-> bhimanakam for bhl§anaka } sanamtano for sandtano and in 
Ardha-M&gadhI vikanthayai for vikatthate, aambali for ialmali , ghim&u for 
Qrtfm, mhfaa for wthdamia and a number of other words. 



122 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


More interesting is the fact that this type of altemance makes a number 
of anomalous constructions in the Prakrit syntax quite understandable and 
regular. Thus chama for the regular chamarh of the Acc. sing, would explain 
Pali sentences like tattheva nipatim chama | ‘she fell there on the ground’. 
kijani pavaparii chama, | ‘sowing seeds in the ground pasadatale chama patitam, | 
‘fallen on the ground on the floor of the palace’ which is comparable to a 
sentence occurring soon after disvana chamarh, nisinne | which would make the 
equation of chama and chamam quite apparent. Similarly often a form of the 
Acc. appears to be replaced by the form of the Nom. because of this altemanoe. 
So Pali: imd gird abbhudiresum I ‘they uttered these words’, Ardha-Magadhi: 
itthi pumarh pavvaiyam gihim va | . On the other hand the long vowel of the 
Nom. is replaced by the short vowel with an anusvara which produces a. 
semblance of a form of Acc. Thus Pali: tarn bhumirh ramaneyyakam I for 
8d bhumi, etc. Ardha-Magadhi : ndsanti appdna param ca natthd | or tdranti. 
appdna param ca tinnd | . 

Two very frequent constructions are best explained by this alternance. 
Thus the use of sakka as a predicate when the subject is Neuter or an Infinitive 


is only a phonetic variant for the regular form sakkam. So in Pali : na sakka 
balimuddhatturh | dubbacanam kirn sakka kdtuye | na ca sakka aghatamanena | or 
AMg. sakka saheum asai kantagd | . Equally frequent is the use of atthd for 
attham in AMg. to express the purpose of an act. Thus we read appanatthd 
paratthd va | or annassa atthd ihamagao mi | . This is probably the real explana- 
tion of the apparent use of the Acc. where we should expect an Abl. which 
ends in -a. Thus Pali : kdlam kdlaih bhava bhavarh | akatarh dukkatam seyyo | 
or AMg. jai param maranarh siya | . 


A further investigation would reveal many such facts both in the mor- 
phology and syntax of the Prakrit languages which would find their explanation 
in such phonetic altemances based on the fundamental principle of syllabic 
quantity. That this principle would also shed some light on the problem of 
derivation can be seen in the explanation of the plural forms of the Neuter 
nouns like phaldi or mahui which correspond to Sanskrit phaldni and madhuni 
The equation is often denied on the phonetic ground that a loss of a nasal 
should nasalize the preceding vowel and not the following one as it does in 
these cases. One can compare the development of the French nasal vowels 
m cases like chanter from Latin cantare or vent from Latin ventus. That as 
in the present case the nasal can nasalize the following vowel can be explained 
on the ground that it was always kept in its own syllable, and the persistence 
of all the three syllables and their separateness may explain the nasalization 
of the final syllable and not the preceding one. In the parallel cases from 
French, can see that the nasal nasalizes the preceding vowel only when 
it is followed by another consonant and thus properly belongs to the preceding 
syUable. In other cases we find that Latin amare gives rise to PVench aimer. 

The investigation of this one principle underlying a number of phonetic 
dmjges would suggest that in the apparent welter of linguistic changes of the 
ft&knts there does run as an undercurrent some well-marked principle which 



THU EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPT OF &EQA 


123 


oannot be possible in a group of artificial changes produced by grammarians 
N and literary men. On the contrary it suggests strongly that it was the result 
of the unconscious tendency of the speaker to value the syllabic structure of 
the word more than anything else. This is probably the strongest proof in 
favour of regarding the Prakrit languages as having a natural origin. Bpcause 
they have been preserved to us only in literary documents they are bound 
to show some deviations from the actual spoken forms on which they are 
based. 


THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPT OF 6b$A 
By 

Dr. K. C. Varadachari, M.A., Ph.D. 

In the Philosophy of 6ri Bamanuja we find that he calls his system 
Vteistadvaita, and further that he considers the nature of the souls and matter 
to be one of body to the Supreme Divine Being, and also that he prefers to 
call the soul as Sesa or dasa. 

Tracing the history of the word Sesa we find that it has been derived from 
the root &is: Sisyate : that is left or that which is progeny, since it is this 
that is left over after the parent perishes: (Nirukta, III. 2). Though the 
Nirukta of Yaska explains &esa as offspring (III. 2), 1 in deriving the word 
&ivam in X. 17 it traces it to the root 'sis, meaning obviously that it is happi- 
ness, and therefore mangalam, auspicious and Sivam. 

The Brhad-devatA (VIII. 50) explains Sesa as that which remains or the 
remainder, not in the sense of the Nirukta but generally all that is left over 
(cf. VII. 37) * 

The abovo clearly shows that whatever may have been the general root 
from which this word of technical importance has been derived, it later signified 
that which is left after or produced. The BrhadIranyaka Upanisad 8 clearly 
uses this word ‘Se$a ’ as that which remains not in the sense of progeny but as 
that which is left over: 

Purnasya purmmdddya purmmevdvaSi^yate | 

To say that the individuals are the remains or those which have been left 
over is to affirm that Se$a has not a root that would play the fundamental rdle 
which has been granted to it by later philosophical schools (darbms). 

Thus we have to drop the meaning normally given to Sesa as almost 
identical with avaSt$a* and seek to give it a meaning that is traceable in the 
philosophical usage to which it has been put by Jaimini and Ramanuja. 

1 The relationship thus expressed leads to the enunciation of the creator-creature relation- 
ship as ground aijd consequent, as cause and effect. means a creature, an effect, or attribute 
or mode or part of the Cause, Creator, Substance, or Whole. Cf. Whitney: Roots, Verb -forms 
and Primary Debit ati vks. pp. 173-4. 

• 8 B^haddevatI, VIII. 50: Trdyantdm vaitvadevyfk (u ieputvabdaivatah parah | 

. 8 fenti mantra of the VIjasaneyopani^ad (ISIvIsyopani^ad). 

4 Cf. pariHfyaU'. Katha Up., IV. 3 and V. 4 and oMifyaiei Calx. Up., VIII. 4. 5. 



124 


B. 0. LAW VOLtTMK 


The evolutions of the concept of ‘iesa' at the hands of Jaimini is that 
it is considered to be the subordinate or auxiliary to the main or the prodhoM^ 
&e$a means an <m£a, a part of the whole rite, and the several parts are inter- 
changeably parts or mains according to the different kinds of rites. Just 
this kind of relationship is what is realized in our life. It is not always that 
a man remains the main or leader in respect of a function or station in society. 
It happens that under different conditions or circumstances a man may have 
to be just a part of a bigger situation, in which another person plays the 
rdle of the Chief of Leader, however much he may be eminent in his own 
sphere. It is usually said that an egotistic person is one who would like to 
be in the limelight all the time, even as a wit remarked, ‘In the marriage a 
bridegroom and in the funeral the corpse 5 . Such is the tragedy of fixing up. 
the part 6e§a as part at all times or the ie$i the main as main at all times 
and circumstances. The Bradleyean view of Ethics as the definition of a man’s • 
station and duties, no less than his master Hegel’s, is to be refuted because 
they fix the individual into a static scheme of the Absolute, and the dynamic 
is not taken into consideration, not merely because the main or the ie§i is the 
Absolute. 

The dynamic concept of fcesa-iesi relationship is capable of a wide and 
interesting application even in respect of constantly changing situations which 
is the characteristic of the evolving Society. The main-subsidiary relationship 
is thus a valuable development that departs from the Theory of Remainder or 
Progeny or Creatureliness. But it is sought sometimes to explain this by saying 
that the root 4is could somehow be made to explain this angangl-bhava since 
the aiiga is other than the angrt; thus ie$a is that which is other than the 
ie$i which alone focusses our attention in any dynamic context. We know 
that in the example 6f firing of a revolver or gun we always consider the last 
term or rather the last overt cause, the pulling of the trigger, as the cause of the 
firing of the revolver, whilst in fact a host of other co-operating circumstances 
have gone towards bringing about the effect. Do we say, however, that the 
last link in the chain of causes is the main and the others subordinate or sub- 
servient to this ? 

Yet this is precisely the meaning implied in the definition of Jaimini 
(PPbv amImXm sA, III. i. 2): &esah pardrthatvat — 6e§a because dependent on or 
existing for another. Ramanuja when explaining the relation between the 
individual soul and God goes to the extent of interpreting the para in the above 
sfitra as God, the Transcendent, the true Other of the individual. In the 
VbdIbtha Samgbaha, Ramanuja writes: Paragatdtihyddhdnecchayd upadeya- 
tvameva yasya svarUpam sa ie^dk pwrah&eji: The definition of the principal and 
the subsidiary or the subordinate which is said to exist for or do action for the 
sake of that principal or in some way assist it, is not quite clear in Pubva- 
Mli£l6sl and hence what is needed is that we should be able to define the words 
k$a and $e$i in such a manner that there cannot and should not occur the 
reciprocality in the relationship between the Divine and the human, that is to 
say, the Divine should never be made an instrument or subordinate or kfa t 



THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPT OF 8TBQA 


126 


so far as the human goes, for that is to make God less than the individual, 
sQne thing has become clear in the course of our above discussion, namely , that 
ie$a means that which serves or subserves another, and is toJbe considered to 
be always dependent upon or existing for and in that Other, and this should 
certainly not be in respect of other individuals but only to the total. This, of 
course, is very difficult since considered from the point of society and nature, 
this individual and unique loyalty to the Other, the Divine, may have to be and 
indeed is forced to be via the other individuals in the succession of hierarchy 
of causes and uses. This will show that spiritual philosophy demands the 
unique direct loyalty to the One Supreme Divine, whilst it may symbolically 
or exteriorly or objectively be expressed in the indirect way through the other 

• individuals placed to the comprehension of the individual in his spiritual 
experience as the terms in the hierarchy of temporal manifestation, higher or 

• lower as the case may be. There is thus a supreme demand to understand the 
truth that the Hegelian system has in objectifying Reason or the Absolute in 
the State lost grip with the foundational reality of the individuars spiritual 
nature as demanding the unique revelation of the Divine relationship within 
itself. This is the true spirituality or living in the Spirit, the Divine, the Life 
Divine. 

The next step has been taken by some writers that ie$ a must be interpreted 
as viAe§ana, particular attribute of a substance and not merely as Ae# a — a 
dependent or subsidiary. It would mean that vi-Ae$a-na is that which is not 
the dravya or substance as such, but only its invariable and indispensable 
attribute through which alone we can know the substance but which is not the 
substance itself. This relation will represent the aprthaksiddha-sambaridha 
between the particular parts and the Whole or Organism. The usage above 
stated is possible according to some because they hold that affixes, though 
they alter the meaning of the roots to which they are affixed, can in some cases 
be dropped in respect of meaning whilst the root itself will shoulder the meaning 
of the elided affixes. Thus we have pointed out the word Ae$a in Vedic usage 
really expresses the meaning of avaAem, whilst in the Sutra-period it denoted 
the meaning of the subordinate or auxiliary and anga or part, integral with 
the whole or the principal or the main. 

The next development shows that the meaning of the word underwent a 
further orientation in so far as it was made to stand for or express the relation- 
ship of creature, effect, attribute, mode, and servant or slave all in one complex 
structure. There seems to have resulted even a oonfusion due to the root Aa$: 
to control and ordain, and both the meanings were incorporated in the concept 
ofiefa. 

Thus we find that in the conoept of k$a there has occurred a gradual 
importation of more than one meaning , 1 till finally we have the conoept of the 

1 One more importation into this term has to be mentioned. This is the meaning that is 
’derived from the root Hi to lie, which is used to denote that the Hfa is that which is lying; 
Indian mythology oalls the 8upreme Divine as and also the Adikfa is the eerpent-oouoh 
of the Divine: RV., 1. 174, 4: kfdn nn to mdra sound* yondu; VIE. 60. 16; AV., XVHL 2. 10, 



126 * 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Organism versus its Self. It is the soul or puru$a that endows the individual's 
body with growth, adaptation and mutational possibilities, whose ‘why^ 
has not been answered by any theory of Nature or outer evolution ‘or 
law or chance. Nor is there any possibility of determining the ‘wherefore' 
of these growths and manifestations or mutations arriving at any end, if the 
end is something of which these organisms and organs are not aware of uncon- 
sciously or subconsciously or superconsciously. The theory of the Unconscious 
is fertile only to a limited extent as in the case of perpetuation and self- 
preservation through the structural memory ; but it is incapable of leading to 
the assertion of human evolution into the vaster and wider consciousness of 
the integral whole, even if indeed this Unconscious be, as Von Hartmann and 
C. G. Jung held it to be, universal. It is the universal lower rather than the • 
universal higher. As to the doctrine of subconscious awareness, it is only a 
feeling again of the presentiment of the future, anticipation of the future • 
organized on the principle of biological memory even like the Unconscious, and 
it cannot help very much except in so far as it might happen to be the field in 
which the superconsciousness erects itself in some measure. But it is rather 
a thin field for such a vigorous manifestation as the Superconscious. The 
true and divine ends of man are beyond his present apprehension and yet he 
has femt gleams of the great future-his goal or end through it in his most 
mtelhgent moments of anticipation ; there is at the back of his consciousness 
ano her light that guides him to his own superb destiny, his true self his 
supraconscious existence, of which this waking life of his is but a remainder 

14 aPPear com P arativel y speaking. That does not lose 
m the appearance of the unconsciousness, so as to become an automatic 
process which is precisely what we should call the remainder in a consciously 
executed act. Comparing for the sake of clarity the expressions of Bergson 
in this context we may say that matter is that which is left behind by the 
process of change, is that which is registering its uniform beat of fugitive 

STT 68 ’ 18 Z hlCh d0eS Permit the fuI1 “^stations of the Spirit 
having become an obstructive medium through which it has to pierce through 

Equally the individuals are remainders in a sense caught up as diverse focfof 

^“T’ T d6 / U f ive “ -tter as possible forces, "when so mqZ 

selveTwithT 8 S 6 ° Pen ° f thG Su P ermind > or manifest them- 
selves with the mcreased power and light that belong to it. Then when 

R^^esses the identity of viiesa^a and Seta (iarira), where the vUe£ma 

ontefhJT^ ^ meanmg of the or g anic conception becomes clear. Not 
only that ^ becomes a general concept which embraces both the inconscient 
matter and conscient soul, though the name ‘«W becomes more appropriate 


etc. Of. Vxdic Concordance, Bloomfield, p 935. „ 

Dkrtvativrs, Whitney, p. 174. P ‘ “ d RooT8 ’ Vbbb.vow^ and Primary 

Of. Notts on the Kafhopanisad: Anan da tr n 
p. 47, note 3. He write,: ‘We have eho^Tetowhere^LTr’T’ ^ ***"*' Vo1 l ' 

im Anasua are designations both of the World serrJLt'lnJ * Ccident * lly that * 

“ Angefand Titan ”, JA08 55 lflss «* t i d * ser P«nt and of the Brahman. See my 
-JAUB., 56, 1835 and Janaka and Yftjfia valley. IHR yttt X 



AMBAffHA, AMBA^^hI AND *MBA$?HA 


12 ? 


in the owe of the oonacient soul, according to Sri Venkatan&tha. 1 Thus the 
^ord itfa becomes essentially a technical term denoting the body that cannot 
exht apart from the Self or the Divine, who is the ultimate Self of all souls 
and bodies. 


AMBASTHA, AMBASTHA AND AMBASTHA 


Dr. Surya Kanta, M.A., D.Litt., D.Phil. (Oxon), 

Panjab University, Lahore 

I 

Bhagavata-Purana X. 43. 2, 4 read: — 

(а) apasyat kuvalayapidam krsno’mbasthapracoditam | 

(б) ambasth ambastha no dehy apakrama ma ciram |j 

Sudar^ana explains ‘ ambasthapracoditam ’ as ‘ hastipakaprocoditam ’ and 
Vallabha * ambasthena samkarodbhavena jatihlnena \ On (6) Vallabha 
writes :~— 

nindayam vipsa j pratilomajo mbastha iti tasya sahajadosakirtanenaiva 
tiraskaro bhavati || 

They do not attempt a derivation of the word. The word occurs in 
Panini 8. 3. 97 and is left unexplained by all the commentators except 
Jayanta, who adds in his Padamanjari 2 ‘ambe tisthaty ambasthab’. He, 
however, does not explain ‘amba’ and hence is of no help in the elucidation 
of the word. Ambastha occurs, in its feminine form, in Amara (II. 4. 72f.) 
as a synonym of certain plants and is explained by Ksirasvamin as ‘ambe 
sabde tisthaty ambastha’. Since the plant ( Jasminum auriculatum) does 
no more live in word than any other plant, the derivation seems void of point. 
A prima facie derivation would be ‘ambayam matari tisthatity ambasthah’ 
and the same is adopted by ^abdakalpadruma fof ambastha and by Bha- 
nujidik$ita for ambastha in Amara. But both the ambastha man and 
ambasthS plant do no more reside in mother than any other man or plant and 
hence do not, in particular, deserve that name. The real explanation of 
the word may therefore be sought somewhere else. 


1 Cf. my article 'SH Ramanuja's Philosophy of Society' ( Veddnta Kesari, May 1943), where 
1 have pointed out that there are nine names by which the soul is designated in the Philosophy 
of Sri R&ra&nuja — -namely, amba, prakdra , vidtsaiia, barira, btsa, ddsa, kaustubha , bakti, bhdgavata. 
Sefatva is the abiding quality of the conscient and the inoonscient; the consciousness of the 
individual soul is befa-bh&yiffha — be^atve sati jUdtjivam rNrlYASiDDHlffjANAM (mem ed., p. 113) 
disposed as it is towards the Divine the S'efi. But it is of atomic dimensions also. But this 
jMfftoa is increased to the fullest limit of omniscience when the individual soul becomes attuned 
to the Divine through devotion or love that is the fulfilment of its knowledge of His besitva (of. 
My article on * Spinoza and Rdmdnuja~& comparative study ’). 

f ambe ti^haty amba^hal? | supi stha iti kapratyayab | fiy&por iti hrasvatvam | ambaftha 
iti safijfleyarp janapadavifefasya (| On KUikA, 8. 3. 9. 




128 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Brugmann, 1 while discussing the words for service and servant in the 
IE. languages, cites, among others, upa-s-ti (./as ‘ be ’), abhi-§-ti (./as ‘ be 
pari-c&r-a and es-ai^a for service and ceta (*cesta?), ves-A, du-tA, pari-katf-a, 
t pari-car-A, pari-car-a-ka, abhi-car-a (Gk. amphi-polo-s, Lat. an-cul-us) for 
servant. 

To this list may be added Cymr. amaeth, ammaeth (*ambaeth), Celt. 
amb(i)aktos meaning ‘husbandman, tiller of the ground’, a cognate of Latin 
ambactus/a servant’, specially one who is sent on a message, applied by 
Caesar to the vassals or retainers of the Gallic chiefs and found in OHG. as 
ambaht, ampaht ‘a servant’, Goth, andbahts ‘a servant’, AS. ambeht, ombihit 
* a servant’, ON. ambott, Ice. ambatt ‘a bondwoman, a handmaid’. Walde 
explains ambaktos 2 as ambi (= abhi) actus = axtos ppl. of ,/ag (= ,/aj). 

It is possible that the Celtic word ambaeth travelled to India as it did to 
other countries and was Sanskritized in the form of ambastha; of this we have, 
a striking example in the Sanskrit suranga, which is admittedly the Gk. 
syrinx. 8 The Celtic ambaeth meant ‘ a servant’ and in the same meaning 
it was applied, in India, to an elephant-driver, a retainer of the samanta. 

There is another possibility. The Hindi word ‘mahavat’ means an 
‘elephant-driver’. It is derived from Sanskrit ‘mahamatra’ 4 which means 
‘great in measure’ and is applied to — 

(а) an elephant-driver or keeper; 

(б) a man of high rank, a samanta, the mcmartai 6 of the Greeks. 

Now, an elephant-driver is not essentially a man of ‘great measure’ and the 
epithet seems to be a transferred one: from the elephant, 6 ‘who is invariably 
of large measure ’, to — 

(а) an elephant-driver, a keeper; 

(б) the possessor of elephant, a samanta, a man of fortune. 

In this it may be compared with ibha ‘elephant’ and ibh-ya ‘deserving or 
possessing an elephant’. And although ‘mahamatra’ occurs in both these 
meanings, the word is not quotable in its primary sense, i.e. an elephant ; and 
this is important. 


* Indogermanische Forschungen, 1906, pp. 377-91. 

* Vergl. Worterbuch under \/&g° ; so Brugmann, Grundriss, 3. 7 ; Whitley Stokes, Urkeltis* 
char Sprachschatz., p. 34; Mac bain, Etymol. Diet, of the Gaelic Lang, under amhas; Morris Jones, 
A Welsh Grammar, p. 3; John Murray, Etymol. Diet, of Mod. Eng., 1921. According to Oxford 
Diet, (under ambassador) a compound of Goth, prefix and-, anda- and the Sb. bahts ‘a 
servant*. The prefix answers to OHG. ant- (later ent-), Lat. ante, Gk. anti, Skt. anti 'over, 
against*, bahts 'devoted’ = bhakta v/bhaj. Details; Uhlenbeck, Got. et. Wtb., 13f. 

* Sanskritization of P&li and Fkt. forms: Morris, Ac., 1892, 30 July, 94-95. 

4 K&masutra, I. 3. 12: santy api khalu tfetraprahatabuddhayo ga$ik& r&japutryo mah&- 
m&traduhitaral oa ii Yatodhara on it: mah&m&treti, mahatl m&trft yeQ&zn iti s&mantA mah& » 
simantft v& haeti&kg&yftip v& tallak$anam anusartavyam )| * 

6 Lttders, Bine indisc he Glosse dee Mesychios KZ., 38. 433ft. 

4 Cp. AV. HI. 22. 6: haetl mjgii^aip su^ddam ati^Wt vSn babhAva hi | 

Whitney: 'possessing superiority either of strength or of position*; superiority pf rise is 
more probable. 




AMBA9THA, AMBAI^THi AND IMBA^THA 


129 


Amba§tha (= ambhas 1 * * +stha) is an exact parallel to ‘ mah&matra ’ 
^inasmuch as the word ‘ambhas’ (— of large measure = mah&matra) is not 
quotable in the sense of ‘elephant’ and yet its compound ‘ ambastha ’ means 
‘an elephant-driver’, a samanta, a Ksatriya, a mighty fighter. 

That ‘ambhas’ means ‘of large measure’ is implied in the following. 
EV. I. 133. 5 reads: — 

pi^&ngabhrstim ambhtn&m piSScim indra sam mrna | 
sdrvam r4k§o ni barhaya || 

Sayana explains ambhrnd : 

atibhayamkaram ^abdayamanam | bhran sabde | yad va mahantam 
atipravrddham ity arthab I ambhrna iti mahannama | ambhrnab 
• mahinab (Ni. III. 3. 16) iti tatra pathat || 

Sayana seizes the vital point. Vedic ambhTnd, Pkt. ambhana equate with Gk. 
•ombrimos, 8 obrimos ‘massive’, Goth, abrs ‘strong’, and may be derived from 
ambh-, ombh- or abh-, obh-. The same ambhas (*-bhos) occurs in Latin 
triumpus, 8 Gk. thriamphos (*tri-) meaning ‘across (or thrice?) the massive’, 
the prefix tri, Ved. tir&s, (?) Lat. trans, Goth, thairh-f- upus (= ambhos, -bhas) 
meaning ‘massive’, being an epithet of Bacchus, Dionysos, Mars or the 
victorious general in whose honour the dance or procession was organized; 
and with this we incidentally settle the much-debated etymology of the 
English word triumph 4 (= tri+umphus, tri+ambhos, -bhas). 

The same base should now explain Latin omnis from *ombhni- or 
obhni-, the development of meaning ‘all, every’ being exactly like Gk. pas 
‘all’, IE. *kua-nt = Ved. sva ‘swell’. Connection may exist between 
ambhas 5 and amba-ra ‘sky’, abh-ra ‘cloud’, Pahl. namb-nam ‘moist’, nambi- 
tan ‘moisture’, Lat. nimbus ‘cloud’. 

And just as it is customary to divide Gk. ampho, amphi (— Ved. abhi) 
‘around* into am+phi (= Goth, bi ‘around, about ’), so we may analyze Gk. 
obrimos into o+bri-mos, om-bri-mos, the second element being met with in 
brime ‘anger’, brimos, brimio, brimaino, brimoomai, brimosis; and this at 
onoe explains the Vedic bhr-piyate, bhr-pa-ti (Ni. II. 12) in the meaning ‘to be 
angry’ and bhf-uifc, ghr-jjifc and bhr-^ifc. 

Connection between ambhas, Hindi arhb&r ‘a large heap’, Pali ambho 
‘a stone’ and Santali ambao ‘stout, full’, is patent. 

The above discussion yields ambha in the sense of elephant: ambastha 
(= ambhas+stha) would mean ‘one sitting on the elephant’, i.e. a driver* 
a keeper or a s&manta, a Ksatriya. 

The following paragraphs develop amba$$ha in the meaning of a Ksatriya. 
R&jafokharasflri 6 * in his Prabandhakofe assigns prominent place to hastividyft 


1 Disaspiration by dissimilation. Cp. vid&tha, \/vidh : Waokernagel, Altind. Qr. I, p. 129. 

8 Details: Ferdinand Johanson, Indogermanisohe Forsohungen, 1894, 2890. 

1 Details: von Grienberger, op. cti, f 1906, 165fl. 

• 4 Variety of derivation: Oxford Diet. ; Wyld, Univ. Eng. Diet. 

• Details: Ostbofl, IF. 4, 189fl., 27611. 

1 Blnghl Jainagranthamlft, VI, p. 28. 

9 



130 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


in the list of seventy-two talas, indispensable for an accomplished K§atriya- 
kumara. He reads: — / 

tvam grharia kalab I kas tab ? likhitam, ganitam, gltam, nytyam, ptffhi- 
tam, vadyam, vyakaratnam, chandah, jyotisam, 6ik§a, niruktam, katyayanam, 
nigha^itub, patrachedyam, nakhachedyam, ratnaparlksa, ayudhabhyasab 
gajarohanam, turagarohan am, tayob siksa, mantravadab, yantravadab, 
rasavadab, khanyavadab, rasayanam, vijnanam, tarkavadab, siddh&ntab, 
visavadab, garudam, 6akunam, vaidyakam, acaryavidya, agamab, prasfida- 
laksanam, samudrikam, smrtib, puranam, itihasab, vedab, vidhib> vidya- 
nuvadab, darganasamskarab, khecarikala, amarikala, indrajalam, p&talasid- 
dhib, dhnrtaSabalam, gandhavadab, vrksacikitsa, krtrirnamanikarma, sarva- 
karani, vaSyakarma, panakarma, citrakarma, kasthaghatanam, pasanakarma, 
lepakarma, carmakarma, yantrakarasavatl, kavyam, alamkarab, hasitam, 
samskrtam, prakrtam, paisacikam, apabhram6ab> kapatam, deSabhasa, 
dhatukarma, prayogopayab, kevalividhib etab sakalab kalab siksitavan || 
Accomplishment in the art of driving elephants may bestow the title 
‘ambastha’ on a Ksatriya, who is indicated to have received this appellation 
for other reasons in the following statements. 

Dighanikaya (Samannaphalasutta 14, PTS. I, p. 51) enumerates the 
chief occupations as follows: — 

yatha so imani bhante puthusippayatanani seyyathidam hattharoha, 
assaroha, rathika, dhanuggaha, celaka, calaka, pindadavika, ugga, rajaputtfi, 
pakkhandino, mahanaga, sura, cammayodhino, dasakaputta, alarika, kappaka, 
nahapaka, suda, malakara, rajaka, pesakara, nalakara, kumbhakara, ga$aka, 
muddika yani va pan annani pi evamgatani puthusippayatanani || 

The occupations up to * cammayodhinab * are doubtless those of the K§a- 
triyas and Celaka of the list has been rendered by Franke 1 as Fahnentrager, 
i.e. bannerbearers. That the bannerbearers were a class of the Ksatriyas is 
shown below. 

Vinayavijayagagi, 2 describing ‘ diksamaha writes: — 
prathamam mangalany astau sampurnab kala^as tatab I 
bhrmgaracamarachatravaijayantyas tatab kramat || 
padaplthanvite ratnasvarnsimhasane tatab I 
tatab prthak sasta^atam anarohebhavajinam || 
rathanam astrapurnanam dhvajaghantavallsprsam | 
pradhanapuru^anam ca pratyekam Satam astayuk || 
gajWvarathapadatyasainyani ca tatas tatab I 
sahasrayojanotturigo dhvajo dhvajasahasrayuk || 
kha^gagrShab kuntapithaphalakagrahinas tatab I 
hfisyadikarak&b kamdarpikaS ca sajayaravab II 
ugr& bhogW ca rajanyab k^atriySdyas tatab kram&t I 
saip caranti tato deva devyaS ca svaminab purab || 

— 1 — — r 

* DSghamkftya ubersefczt, pp. 52-53. 

2 Lok»prakft4e KAlalokapraka4ab , p. 436. 


AMBA§THA, AMBA§THl AND IMBA^THA 


131 


The raising of Indradhvaja, decked out with thousands of small banners, was 
% an important feature of the battle in ancient times ; so much so that its raising 
was*enjoined on kings by the author of Samaranganasiitradhara, 1 who says: — 
surapam arthasiddhyartham vadhaya ca suradruham | 
yatha ^akradhvajotthanam praha brahma tathooyate || 111 II 
******* 
ittham fakradhvajotthanam krtam rajno jayavaham I 
paurajanapadanam ca ksemarogyasubhiksakrt || 147 || 

The above authorities imply the raising or carrying of dhvaja by a parti- 
cular class of people, presumably the Ksatriyas; the Vaikhanasagrhya 2 defines 
the carrying of dhvaja as one of the occupations of the Ambasthas (X. 12): — 
ambasthab kaksyajivy agneyanartako dhvajavisravi ceti || 

A slight change of v into y (-vl — yi) explains the difficult word -viiravi 
and enables us to postulate that the Ambasthas were Ksatriyas and their 
chief occupation was the carrying of banner in certain ceremonies and in the 
battlefield, preferably on the back of an elephant. 

The statement of Manu (X. 43-44) that Paundras, Audras* Dra vidas, 
Kambojas, Yavanas, iSakas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Clnas, Kir&tas, Daradas, 
and Khavas were originally Ksatriyas, who, later on, became &udras, owing to 
non-observance of Vedic sacrifice is an historical truism and may, with equal 
force, apply to those other tribes who, being situated on north-western frontier, 
could not properly perform the prescribed Brahmanical ritual. 8 To the 
mid-Indian Aryans these were Aryans only in name. Among such jati-aryas, 4 
taken in a slightly different sense, the Jaina Upanga 5 mentions Ambasthas: — 
se kim tarn jatiariya ? chavviha pannatta | tam 
Ambattha ya kalimda videha vedamaiya | 

Hariya vamcuna ceva cha eya ibbha jatito | se jatiariya || 

It was probably this type of tribes, about whom Kautalya says in Arthasastra 
(XI. 1): — 

kamboja saura§tra ksatriyas renyad&yo vartasast ropa j Ivinab (licchivika- 
vtjika mallaka madraka kukurakurupaficaladayo raja6abdopajivinab) It 
These jatiaryan Amba§^has were ever associated with warfare and are 
explicitly stated to be Ksatriyas by Nagesa on Patafijali+P&nini (II. 4. 62): — 
Pat. amba^thyab striyab I sauviryab striyab II 
Kaiya(;a : ambasthyapatyani bahvyab striya iti vrddhetkosalajadan- 

fiafi II * 

l King Bhojadeva, Vol. I, Oh. 7, 9-147. 

8 ‘dhvaj&bhfto dAeayonib ’. Maekari on Gautamadharmasutra 20. 4. 

8 Vr&tya oommunitiee, called White Indiana. Details: my Introduction to K&thaka* 
Sarpkalana, pp. fl. 

4 Cp. Pat. 1I.4. 6: 361, V. 1. 116. 22: 

tapab trutaxp ca yonil ca etad br&hmapak&rakam I 
# tapabtrut&bhy&xp yo hlno j&tibr&hmana eya sab U 

Vasifthasmfti HL 7 : avrat&n&m amantr&u&xp j&tim&tropajlvin&m, etc. Cp. also Vyisa- 
imrtl 4. 32-44. For the traditional interpretation of jAtiArya cp. Jaoobi, ZDMG. 60. 816. 

\ See Weber, Ind. Stud., XVI, p. 399. 




132 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


HU,., amb^hBeyeti I .to * 

^ vrddhatvam I ambasthasyeti p&the tu samyag eva || 

To sum up: Ambastias were Ksatriyas; they lived on warfare, pr- 
ably as ‘gajarohas’ and bannerbearers. 

Till now we have based our discussion on ‘ambhaa’ meaning 'massive’ 
(= elephant) and have taken ambastha to mean ‘one sitting on elephant , 
i.e. a driver, a Ksatriya. But ambhas in its cognates also means strength, 
power’; taking ambhas in this sense, we may analyze ambastha as ‘ambhas 
tifthaty asminn iti’, i.e. ‘one in whom strength resides’, i.e. a Ksatriya, 
a fighter. 

In the latter analysis ambastha may be compared with ugra : — 
ambastha u g ra 

(1) ambhas = power, strength; (1) terrible, an epithet of Indra in the 

(2) amba§tha = a Ksatriya, a fighter ; Veda and of tejas, etc. in Pali ; 

(3) a mixed caste. (2) a Ksatriya, a 6renl, a samgha ; 

l mi ypH 




Pick 2 has detailed the confusion and conflict regarding the origin of ugra, 
a mixed caste; no less confused and conflicting are the statements regarding 
the origin of ‘ambastha’. This is typified in: — 

(a) brahmanad vaisyakanayam ambastho nama jayate (Manu X. 8). 

(b) vipran murdhabhisiktas tu ksatriyayam ajayata | 
vaiiyayam tu tath&mbastho nisadab 6udraya tatha || 

( V rddhaharitasmrti VII. 151.) 

(c) viprad vai^yayam ambasthab kaksyajivy agneyanartako dhvaja- 

vi^ravi galyacikitsi (Vaikhanasagrhya X. 12). 

This is accepted by Amara, Sabdaratnasamanvaya (Gaekwad Series 
7. 12), KalpadrukoSa (202. 5) and Trikapda6esa, etc. 

Against these cp. : — 

anulomab anantaraikantaradvyantarasu jatab savar^ambasthogra- 
nisadadausyantapara^avab II 

( = Gautamadharmasfitra IV. 10 = Yajfiavalkya I. 91-95, 
quoted by Bhattoji (Manorama) on Pagini IV. 1. 120.) 


Maskari writes on it: — 


k$atriyenanantarayam jatab amba§thab vai^yenanantar&y&m j&tab 
ugrab II 

As in the case of Ambafthas and Ugras* so in the case of Yavanas® and other 
mixed castes the authorities greatly differed. This shows that the real origin 
of these castes had long been forgotten, and their systematization into caste 
system * by Manu and others was an attempt at assimilation of these castes 

* Already in Jaina works: ‘dem Gteechlachte nach die Ikfv&kut, Videha*,JEUrii, Ambffrha*, 
JfiAte*, Kxmd, Vmpvun&laA, Ugra*, Bhoga*, ft&janya*, und end ere*. Jacobi, ZDMG. SO. SIS. 

* Festschrift M. Winternite, pp. 279-286. 

2 Op. Menu X. 48*44 with Oautamadharmaeutra. 4. 21, 

Sfidrsty dee. On this Maskari writes: kjatriyfic chudr&yftzp j&to yevanefc. 

4 Details: Oldenberg, Zur Geechiohte des indiechen Kastenwesens. ZDMG. SI. 277fl. 




133 


AMBAfpHA, AMBAyjHl AHD iMBA^^HA 

into Hindu fold, the nature their origin being chiefly concocted in the light 

• of the position they held in society at that time and the occupation they 
happened to follow in that period of flux and reflux. 

Manu assigns a low status to the Varnasamkaras and, accordingly, they 
are placed in &ildravarga by Amara and others. 

Manu records the following occupations for the Varnasamkaras (X. 47 ff. ) : — 
sfit&nam a^vasarathyam ambasthan&m cikitsanam | 
vaidehakSnSm strikaryam magadhanam vanikpathab II 
matsyaghato nisadanam tvastis tv ayogavasya ca | 
med&ndhracuficumadgunam aranyapa^uhimsanam || 

Now, occupations like driving horses and service in the woman’s apart- 
ments may be contemptuous, and it was probably on that account that these 
were assigned to the Varnasamkaras, but the occupation of medicine was not 

* so. It was, on the contrary, a profession of honour, so much so that admission 
into it was restricted to the first ^hree varnas in the words of Su^ruta (II. 1*2) : 

athatab sisyopanayaniyam adhyayam vyakhyasyamab | brahmana- 

ksatriyavai^yanam anyatamam 6isyam upanayet | ato 

viparlta-gunam nopanayet || 

This is confirmed by Caraka (Sutrasthana XXX. 17): 
tasyayurvedasyangany astau | tad yatha | kayacikitsagalakyam Salya- 
hartrkam visagaravainedhikapra^amanam bhutavidya kaumara- 
bhrtykam rasayanani vajikaranam iti | sa cadhyetavyo brahmana- 
ksatriyavaisyaib II 

Thus, the calling of medicine was reserved for the first three varnas, while 
Manu assigns it to the Ambasthas, a mixed caste, and this contradiction 
demands explanation. 

In Khuddakacatuspada Caraka divides medicine into four divisions: 
bhisag dravyany upasthata rogi padacatustayam || 

Medicine (like a cow; so metre) has four feet: doctor, medicines, nurse and 
patient. It is possible that the glorious office of doctor was reserved for the 
first three varnas, while the duties of a nurse were assigned to the Ambasthas. 

There is another possibility : the science of medicine consists of medicine 
and surgery. Among present-day Hindus the first is virtually reserved for the 
first three varnas, while the latter is practised by the people of low castes. 1 
It may have been so even in Manu’s time, as it was definitely in the time of 
Vaikh&nasa, who puts down surgery as an oooupation of the Ambasthas. 

Raja6ekharasuri * places hastividy& along with a6vavidy&, and so the 
two are coupled by other authorities. Manu (X. 47ff.) assigns a^vas&rathya 
to the gfltas, but leaves hastisarathya unassigned, while Bhagavata (X. 43. 2, 

4) puts it down as an occupation of the Ambasthas. 

1 Op. also vSsarthMmfti III. 4: 

ninfg br&hma^o bhavati na va^ft na kutilavah I 
na ffidrapropa^axp kurvan na steno na oikitaakab H 
. Hen cikitei. m definitely put down as eomething detectable. 

1 Cp. the lift of 72 kattc referred to above. 


134 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Such an omission in Manu may be serious and I would explain it by 
the original reading of Manu (X. 47) to have been: 
sutanam a£vasarathyam ambasthanam ca hastinam || 

A change of ‘ca hastinam ’ into ‘ cikitsanam ’ 1 is conceivable and the motive 
for such a change is not far to seek. The Ambasthas of Bengal, called Amba- 
§tha Vaidyas, have a leaning towards medicine ; they have materially advanoed 
t hr ough medicine and agriculture. Now, the occupation of elephant-driving 
set by Manu for the Ambasthas may not be liked by them after their material 
advancement, and it is feasible that they turned this profession of contempt 
into one of status by effecting a change of ‘ ca hastinam’ into ‘ cikitsanam’. 

II 

The interesting history of ambhas +ambastha continues in the following, 
paragraphs: — 

Amara enumerates the synonyms of yuthika (Jasminum auricvlcUum) 
as follows: — 

. (a) ganika yuthikambastha sa pita hemapuspika [| 

(6) Coming to patha (Stephania hemandifolia) he says: 
pathambastha viddhakarni sthapanl sreyasl rasa | 
ekasthlla papaceli praclna vanatiktika || 

(c) On cangerl (Auxalis cariculata) he reads : 

cangeri cukrika danta^athambasthamlalonika || 

No commentator has offered any explanation worth the name of the word 
ambastha and the word invites discussion. 

To start with : we may analyze the word as ambhas+stha and not amba+ 
stha as proposed by some commentators, ‘ambhas’ means water, but the 
three, plants in question have no more to do with water than many other 
plants and so the derivation from ambhas in the sense of ‘water’ may be void 
of point. 

Kslrasvamin, the commentator on Amara, quotes a truism in the begin- 
ning of Vanausadhivarga: — 

rasavlryavipakebhyo mulat puspat phalad dalat | 
akarad deifokalader vanausadhyartham unnayet [| 

It means that the names of plants are based on the particularities of their 
juice, strength, maturity, root, flower, leaves, size, locality and time; and 
these are exactly the things on which modern philologists are basing their 
explanation of the Greek and Latin plant-names* 


1 For a simi la r change in the Veda cp. RV. X. 18. 7 = AV. XII. 2. 31, XVIII. 8. 57 1 — 
imA nirlr avidhav&b anip&tnlr 4hjanena sarpi$& ijip vi&antu | * 

anafcAvo anamlvtb suritni & rohantu j4nayo ydnim 4gre fl 
The PawJita a changed *gre into agnefc in order to justify the system of sat!. 

• Typified in Thiialton-DyerV ‘On Some Ancient Plant-namee \ Journal of Philolpgy, 
XXXIII, 195<f.; XXXIV, 78-96, 290ff. 



AMBASTHA, AMBAjITHJ AND IMBA$THA 


m 


Taking our clue from the above we note that the chief characteristic 

• of the plants in question is the sharpness or bitterness either of their smell 
or juice and if we could trace the word ambhas in the sense of sharp or bitter 
we shall have arrived at the correct etymology of the word ambastha (= con- 
taining sharp smell or bitter juice). 

We have already seen that ambhas means ‘massive’ strong, and that it 
is cognate of the Gk. obrimos, ombrimos, Goth, abrs ‘strong’. The idea of 
strength could be well evolved in abstract things like smell and juice; and 
this we actually find to have been the case in German ampfer, 1 OHG. ampfero, 
AS. ompre, all meaning sharp, bitter, unripe ; Swed. amper ‘sour, sharp, bitter’ 
all alike going back to ambh, ombh. 

• This clears the etymology of the word amba^tha as ambhas-f stha meaning 
‘having sharp smell or bitter juice’. 

III. Ambastha 

Before venturing an explanation of the word ambastha we may straight- 
away state that ambastha is not a derivative of ambastha or ambastha and that 
according to Panini the two words are basically different. 

P&nini 8. 3. 97 reads : 

ambambagobhumisavyapadvitriku6eku6arikvangumanjipufijiparame- 
barhirdivyagnibhyah sthafc II 

The sutra prescribes that -stha becomes -stha, when preceded, among 
others, by amba and amba. Now, if Panini considered ambastha to be a 
derivative of ambastha he ought not to have included amba in the sutra as 
the change of -stha into -stha in such a derivative would have been implied 
by that in its base ambastha. The distinct inclusion of both amba and amba 
in the sutra therefore shows that in Panini’s opinion the word ambastha was 
fundamentally different from ambastha. 

The basic distinction between the two words was forgotten in post-Pani- 
nean period and the two words got contaminated thus causing a uniformly 
persistent confusion among scholars, both Indian as well as European. The 
following paragraphs may clear this confusion. 

While discussing the word ambastha we have referred to the principle, laid 
down by Ksirasv&min, which connects plant-names, among other things, with 
the names of localities wherein they grow. Of this the striking examples are: 
haimavati — himavati jata = haritaki, Terminalia chebula . 
haimavat! = himavati jata = vaca, a kind of aromatic root good for voice, 
haimavati = himavati jata = sarvaksiri, Hindi Mako. 
dr&vi^akab = dravidade£e jataft = karcurakafc, Curcuma zerumbet, 
magadhi = magadhadete jata = ytithika, Jasminum auriculatum. 
odrapu$pa =* ocjrade^odbhavam = jap&, Hibiscus Rosa sinensis . 
iaikharikafc = 6ikhare jatab = ap&m&rgab, Achyranthes Aspera. 
vaidehl = videhadefe jata = pippall, long pepper. 


1 Different derivation ^ Walde, WTB. under ♦omo, *6mo. 



136 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


udicyam = udloi jatam = ke6ambu. 

6aileyam — £ilayam jatam = a&napuspa, benzoin, 
kamboji = kambojade^e jata = masaparni, Glycine Debilis. 
k&6mlram = ka6mirade6e jatam = puskaram. 

Thisalton-Dyer 1 has shown that the Greek Ozainitis is a plant-appellative 
based on UjjayinI, the modern Ujjain; that Persia 2 meant the Persian tree 
which the Persians brought to Egypt (Indian dhaturah, Arabic tatourah) 
and that siktia 2 (bottlegourd) derived its name from. Sicyon, an industrial 
city, where a minor industry of the products of bottlegourd was in vogue. 

Conversely many place-names derive from plant-names; and Murr 4 * has 
studied in detail a lafge number of Greek place-names based on plant-names. 
Among English place-names derived from plant-names 6 may be cited Derwent, • 
Darwen (Dema = Oak), Lean (OE. limene ‘wa’), Lymn, etc. perhaps Levon 
(from a word meaning elm, cp. Welsh Llwyf, Ir. leamh), Corse (cp. MBret. 
cors ‘rushes’, Welsh cors ‘bog’, corsen ‘reed’) and Willonghby (OE. welig 
‘willow’). 

In India the process was typified in Amravarta ‘name of a mountain’ 
(Ramayana IV. 44. 23), Amravatl ‘a town’ (Ram. IV. 41. 14), Barhi^mut! 
‘a town’ (Bhagavata III. 22, 29) and Amrakuta ‘a mountain’ (Meghadtita 17). 

Buddhists took fancy to amra and they derive the following place-names 
from it: — 

Ambatthala 2 a ‘ plateau in the Missaka mountain in Ceylon Ambadugga- 
mah&v&pi 7 ‘a tank in Ceylon’, Ambagama 8 * ‘a village between Vesali and 
Bhojanagara Ambagana 8 *a locality in Ceylon’, Ambalala 10 ‘a place in 
Ceylon *, Ambavana ‘a common place-name ’ (for example, a Padhanaghara 11 
in Ceylon built by King Kassapa III), Ambavapi 12 ‘a tank in Ceylon’, and 
Ambasauda 12 ‘a Brahmin village east of Rajagaha ’. 

Mention may also be made of Ambala (= amralaya, a district in the 
Punjab) and Amethi (= Amra+sthI, a town in Oudh). 

This should indicate the derivation of Ambastha: it is a place-name; it is 
based on the plant-name amba. That Ambastha is the name of a janapada 
is fixed by Jayanta 14 on Pacini ; that it is derived from amba is attempted 
below. 

&mba grass is known to the Kathaka-samhita (XV. 5) : 
somaya vanaspataye 6ySm&ka6 carur brhaspataye v&caspataye naivi- 
tbA carur aindr&ya jyesthaya hayanan&m ekMa6akap&lo mitrftya 
satyasya pataya ambdndm carur varuii&ya dharma^aspataye 
yavamayo daiakap&lafr || 


4 Journal of Philology, XXXIV, 78-79. * Op. oU. t 876. 

2 Op, 2976, * Reported by Thisalton-Dyer Jn op. eit., p. SOS. 

2 Details: Eikrt EkwaU in Introduction to the Survey of Wn gliah place-names, I, p. 24. 

s fiamantapie&dik& I. 73. 21. ? Mah&vazpsa XXXIX. 33. 

* Dlghanik&ya n. 123. 20-2 2. • Samant&pfts&dikft I. 101. 15/ 

44 Mab&vaipsa LXXTV. 58. n Mah&vajpsa XLVm. 25. 

42 Mab*. XL VI. 20. 44 Dlgha. II. 263. 3. “ JayanU on KMikA-f P&pini 8. 3. 9. 




AMBA 9 THA, AMBASTHl AHD JMBA$THA 


137 


This corresponds to Taittirlya-samhitft I. 8. 10. 1 : 

1 mitraya satyfiy&mb&n&m carum varup&ya dharmapataye yavamayam 
x carum | etc. 

S&yapa explains Smbab with ‘dh&nyavi6e§&b 
Patafijali 1 explains amba on Papini 6. 1. 9 and 8. 2. 25: 
tad yathS tubhyedam agne, tubhyam idam agnaya iti prapte | 
Smb&nam carum, nambanam carum iti prapte | a vySdhinir uganab, 
sugana iti prSpte | iskartaram adhvarasya, niskartaram adhvarasyeti 
prapte | Siva udrasya bhesaji, Siva rudrasya bhesajlti prapte || 

I have connected ambhas with *nambh (*nmbh) and have drawn Pahl. 
namb, nam, MPers. nem, Pahl. nambitan, Lat. nimbus to *ambh *embh. 
^Patafijali 1 equates amba with namba 2 and so it occurs in the corresponding 
passages in Maitr&yani and &atapatha : 

(a) mitraya satyasya pataye nambanam carum varunaya dharmasya 

pataye yavamayam carum (MS. II. 6. 67. 9). 

(b) atha mitraya satyaya nambanam carum nirvapati tad evam mitra 

eva satyo brahmane suvaty atha yan nambanam bhavati 
varunya va eta osadhayo yah krate jayante ’thaite maitra yan 
nambas tasman nambanam bhavati || (datapaths V. 3. 3. 8.) 
Harisvamin, the commentator, writes on namba: 
namba nama akrstapacyab svayamjata vrihayab I krstaksetrotpannfi 
osadhayab varupyab kar^nadilaksanahimsasambandhad varupfi- 
rhab I akrstapacyas tu tadvirahan maitrab II 
Namba is adopted by KatyayanaSrautasutra (XV. 4. 12): 
nambo mitraya satyaya || 

Karka explains namba by ‘svayam jata vrihayo n&mbab’ and Vidy&- 
dhara by ‘akrstapacya vrihayo nambab 

Thus the equation of amba with namba (*pmba) is established in the 
Samhitfis and a janapada could very well derive its name from amba meaning 
'abounding in amba grass’. 

This solves the puzzle : Papini considers Amba§tha and Ambastha as two 
basically different words: amba§tha primarily a place-name, ambaftha 'an 
elephant-driver, a Ksatriya, a mixed caste \ 

The Ambaftha janapada is located in the north-west by : 

(а) Bfirhaspatya Artha&stra (III. 103): 

k§4mirahta&mba$thasindhavab Satam&triuS catura6r§4 ca || 

(б) Vi$pupurfipa (II, Ch. Ill, 14-17): 

&8&zp nadyupanadyaS ca santy any&S ca sahasrasab I 
t&sv i me kurupafic&l& madhyade&dayo jan&b II 
pfirvade4&dikii oaiva k&marfipanivfiainab I 
pupdr&b kalifigfi magadhft d&k§ipfity&5 ca sarvafeb II 

1 Noted M e peering reference by Weber, Ind. Stud. 13. 436-37; 9. 269. 

* Op. ft-gftim: Ok. ftgor* *u-g6ro: uftgara: Kftrl F. Johenevon, Indogenn. Foreoh. VUI. 
174fl. 


138 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


tath&par&ntab saurastrab 6ur& vIrSe tatharbud&b J 
karusa malava6 oaiva paripatraniv&sinab (I 
Sauvlrab Saindhava hunab 6alvab S&kalav&sinab I 
madrardmds tathambasthdji parasikddayas tatha |) 

(e) Mahabharata 1 II. 62. 13-16: 

kairata darada darvab sura vai yamak&s tath& | 
audumbara durvibhagab p&rada bablikaib aaha || 
ka^mirai ca kumaras ca ghoraka hamsakayan&b I 
6ibitrigartayaudheyab rajanya bhadrakekayab II 
ambafthab kaukuras tarksya vastrap&b pahlavaib saha | 
vaiatalas ca mauleyab saha ksudrakam&lavaib II 
paundrikab kukkura^ caiva sak&£ oaiva vi&im pate | 
anga vahgai ca pundrai ca 6anavaty& gaySs tathft || 

(d) Usinara was a northwestemer : his posterity is given by: 
(1) Brahmandapurana (74. 18-21): 

Usinarasya patnyas tu panca rajarsivam&ajab I 
Nrga Krmi Nava Darva pancami ca Dr§advati J 
Usinarasya putras tu panca tasu kulodvahab II 
tapasyatab sumahato jata vrddhasya dharmikab I 
Nrgayas tu Nrgab putro Navaya Nava eva tu || 

6iveb 6ivapuram khyatam Yaudheyam tu Nrgasya ca | 
Navasya Navarastram tu Krmes tu Krmila purl || 
Suvratasya tathambastha .... 

(2) Matsyapurana (48. 16-21): 

Usinarasya patnyas tu pafica rajarsisambhavab | 

Bhr6a Krsa Nava DarSa va ca dev! Drsadvat! || 

6ives tu 6ibayab putra^ catvaro lokavi^rutab I 
Prthudarbhab Suvira6 ca Kekayo Madrakas tathS || 
te§am janapada-b sphitab Kekaya Madrakaa tath& | 
SauviraS caiva Paura6 ca Nrgasya Kekayas tatha || 
Suvratasya tathambasthd I 


«L P ‘ ^ ^ ^ 

k&lavy& darada darvyaA 6urA haimakayfa tathA j 

audumbara durvibhag&}) pauravab saha bahlikaib II (II. 52. 128.) 

ktfmlr*i) kundamAnfiA ca gaurakA haipsakAs tathA j 

laibyte trigarta yaudheyA rAjanyA madrakaifc aaha || 129 

vaeAiayafc fjamauleyAfo aaha k$udrakamAlavaib | • 

AaumJikAA oodargA caiva sAlvfiA caiva viAani pate fl 180 


&> IS? * hnwB th “ r “ 1 of ** *-**>*»« 

m aarly times, ao much so that the very names greatly differed: no wonder thus if 

in place of the oomct dmbaffiiAb in Northern raeeneioii. ^ 



AMBA9THA, AMBA^THl AND iMBA^THA 


139 


(3) Vftyupura^a (JI. 37. 19-22): 

U§inarasya putr&s tu pafica tftsu kulodvah&b | 

Mrg&yas (Nr-) tu Mrgafc (Nr-) putro Navaya Nava eva tu | 
Krmyab Krmis tu Darvayafc 6uvrato nama dharmikab II 
Drsadvatisuta^ capi fslibir Auslnaro dvijafc I 
6ibeb ^ivapuram kbyatam Yaudheyam tu Mrgasya (Nr-) ca | 
Navasya Navaraatram tu Krmes tu Krmila purl || 

Suvratasya tathd vrstd (tathambastha?) II 

(e) Brbatsamhita: Kurmavibhaga : 

nairrtyam di£i degafc pallavakambhojasindbusauvirab I 
Vadavamukharavdw^a^kapila narimukhavartab II 

In all these passages ambastha is preceded by a word ending in -a and 
‘the analysis of Samdhi should be -a+a- and not -a+a- as has till now 
been proposed. Ambastha is the name of a janapada; its inhabitants will, 
of course, be Amba^thas (and not Ambasthas like Paficalab from Paiicala), 
and the epithet will apply to all the varnas alike, while the term Ambastha 
has already been shown to mean the people of military class, i.e. the Ksa- 
triyas. This basic distinction was aptly typified by Panini by including 
both amba and amba in 8 . 3 . 97 ; it was observed, in the main, by Pali 
works, which use Ambattha alike for Brahmins, 1 Ksatriyas and Valyas, with 
only this difference that while Sanskrit preserves both Ambastha and Ambastha 
as two basically distinct words, Pali phonetically reduces both to Ambattha ; 
and it may be mentioned here that it was chiefly from Pali that the Greeks 2 
borrowed the Indian names. The contamination of Ambastha with Ambastha 
has led scholars, both European and Indian, to a uniformly persistent confusion 
and they have, accordingly, read Ambastha in all those passages, where gram- 
mar and history explicitly demand Ambastha. 

With this definition of the distinction between the two words I would 
oommend to scholars the material indexed by Raichaudhuri 8 and others* 
under Ambastha. 

One word more: the equation of Ptolemy’s Ambastai with Arrian’s Abas- 
tanoi is telling. The latter stands for ambasth&na, which, in turn, equates 
with Amba^ha and not Ambastha. This settles that by Ambastai the Greeks 
meant Amba^has and not Amba§thas. 

1 Ambafth* — a Brahmin: cp. Ambatthasutta (in Dighanik&ya) running down the tradi- 
tional caete system. According to Jataka IV. 363 there were also Amba^has (not am-) who 
were not Brahmins by birth, but farmero, op. Dafcbr&hmatya J&taka (Fausbdll IV. 363, 366): 

sam& ambafthavessehi tepi vucoanti brihmani | 
akkh&t& te mah&r&ja t&dise nipat&mase tl 
kasizp v&pijjazp k&renti posayanti ajejake | 

‘kum&riyo pavechanti viv&hant ftvahanti ca fl 

2 Details : 0. Franks, Besiehungen der Inder sum Weeten, ZDMG. 47. 595ff. 

2 Political Hist, of Anc. India, p. 157. 

• * Surendranath Majumdar, Notes on Anc. Geogr. by Cunningham, p. 669; MoCrindle: 

Invasion of India, 155, N. 2, corrected by R. G. Bhaadarkar: Ind. Antiquary, I, p. 23; Wilaon 
on Vif^u Purity*, H, Ch. in, note on 14-17. 




140 


B. 0. UV VOLUME 


There is a hitoh in the location of the imbaffchas; Sanskrit texts, in no 
way infallible in such matters, locate them in the north-west. By the Greeks, 
Alexander is said to have come in contact with Abastanoi at the confluence 
of the Punjab rivers ; according to some they were settled on the lower Akeaines. 
But no trace of the name Ambaftha has, as yet, been detected by any in any 
part of these regions. 

I would hazard a suggestion. There is an ancient town, named Ambdhafi 
in the Nakur tahasil of Saharanpur district. It is not touched by any railway 
line and has been fast deteriorating like many other ancient towns round 
about. It presents an exceptionally old look and can still boast of several 
ancient Brahmin families, families which have sent out worthy representa- 
tives to such far off places as Lahore and Kashmir. I incline to identify this* 
Ambahafd with the Ambastha and would fix it to have once been the seat of 
the Ambastha power. Centralized in Ambahatd , the Ambaftba power oould* 
have very well operated up to the middle of the Punjab and even beyond that. 
It may be added that Ambahata is about 40 miles east of Kuruk$etra, the seat 
of so many kingdoms one after another. 


ELEMENTS OF HINDU ICONOGRAPHY AND ITS SOURCES 


G. H. Khabe, Curator, B.I.S. Mandala, Poona 

Since the time that the late Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao published the two 
volumes of his voluminous and monumental work ‘ Elements of Hindu Icono- 
graphy ’ (EHI) in 1914 and 1916 respectively, it is ever being held and praised as 
a standard work on that subject and the same will continue to be supposed and 
praised that way so long as no rival work is brought out by somebody else. 
The extracts from many an old Sanskrit work on sculpture, architecture, etc., 
which describe the several icons from the Hindu pantheon and which are given 
by him at the end of each volume of his work (Appendices C and B respectively), 
are especially valuable to researchers in the field of iconography as they are 
quoted in extenso and as they supply practically a bibliography of Sanskrit 
works on the subject. 

He has given about 700 extracts from about 150 different works describing 
about 325 icons, which numbers inspire an awe about the gigantic work done 
by the late Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao and one becomes rather disappointed when 
he comes to believe that a majority of those works are in MSS. form and 
consequently cannot get the chance of having an access to many of them. 

But when a student goes a step further and tries to verify some of the 
extracts given in the work, a doubt at once rises in his mind as to whether the 
late Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao actually ever went through all those works from 
which he has quoted. Some of the works he must have indeed gone through. 



‘ WLNMENT8 OF HINDU ICONOGRAPHY AND ITS SOURCES 


141 


For instance, the Agama works suoh as Uttarakflmifcigama, PforvaktonSgama, 
Vaifch&nas&gama, Suprabhed&gama and others, he must have read in the 
original as the extracts from those were never culled together according to 
the subject-matter before his time so far as I know. But many others, I 
assure, he did not have a look at eVen. He might not have even known 
whether they were available in either MSS. or printed form. For those he 
solely depended on Caturvargacintamaoi 1 (CC) and Sritatvanidhi * (STN) 
from which he extracted profusely; but instead of mentioning the debt to 
these two works, he has tried to give the references of original works which 
they have cited and consequently an impression is created that he had gone 
through all those works. But somehow or other he committed errors while 
doing this and this defect of his is at once exposed. 

In Appendix C to the first volume of his work he gives a variety of 
♦iconographic descriptions of GanSsa among which there is one which he has 
taken from CC and not from Visnudharmottara 8 (VD), the original source of 
CC. Accordingly he has noted that way at the end of the extract ( 
fa HUN© ). With respect to a description each of Saras vati and Lakfmi 
which he has extracted from CC and which originally belonged to VD, he has 
followed the same method, viz. he has cited his source as 
faun® ). But after these three descriptions, for reasons unknown to me, 
he left this rather laborious but praiseworthy method and began to cite the 
original work of reference without mentioning CC or STN. 

In the case of STN the descriptions with their references to the original 
sources are printed in such a way that there is very little possibility of mistaking 
the source of one description for that of another. The late Mr. T. A. 
Gopinathrao could not, therefore, commit any error when he extracted from 
STN in reality but cited the original source referred to by STN at the end of 
each such extract as his own source. 

But the case is quite a different one with regard to the extracts from CC. 
In it the source from which an extract is taken is generally noted at the 
beginning, then comes the extract proper apd it is followed by the name of 
the deity which it describes. If this method is borne in mind there is no 
chanoe of committing an error. Unfortunately this was not well heeded to 
by the late Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao and his defect was easily detected. For 
instance, the quotation describing Br&hml and other mothers that occurs in CC 
is evidently taken from V i4 vakarma^astra (VKS) as the name precedes the 
extract. The late Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao, however, overlooking the 
above method, thought from the reference to VD following the description 
that it was taken from VD instead of VKS. He, therefore, cited the 
referenoe that way. But we have got VD in a printed form in which 
the description is not to be traoed. On the contrary VD only tells us in 

i By Hem&dri, Bibliotheca Indica Series, Vol. II, Part 1, fNWUr, 1878. 

* • VeAkatetvara Press, Bombay, 6aka 1828. 

i VeAkatetvara Press, Bombay, and an English translation of a part of it by Stella 
Kramrisch, Calcutta University Press, 1028. 



142 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


general terms that the iconography of the mothers should very closely follow 
their male counterparts. The quotation, therefore, oannot be from VD 
Thus he has overlooked the real sources with respect to the description! 
Nos. 4, 7-21, 31, 32, 34-36, 38, 66, 109, 117, 120-122, 128 also from the following 
table. Similarly in the case of the descriptions of Nos. 4, 7-20, 32, 34, 69, 60, 
109, 117, 118, 120-122 and 128 from the following table the sources shown 
by him are evidently wrong and the extracts are borrowed from CC as the 
same are not to be traced in the sources indicated by him and are to be found 
in CC. With regard to the descriptions of Nos. 5, 30, 35-38, 65, 66, 94-104 
and 108, he must have borrowed from CC as the sources shown by him are 
not available in either MSS. or printed form, as far as I know, and the extracts 
are to be found in CC with the indication of sources as shown by me in the 
table. With respect to the descriptions of Nos. 21-29, 31, 39-56 and 58, the 
sources are available ; but as the references given to the sources by the late 
Mr. T. A. Gopinathrao are defective ones, it is not possible to verify them. 
But I very much doubt whether he has actually gone through those sources. 
He must have borrowed from CC though his sources in a place or two seem 
to be different ones apparently. But the simple fact that the sources of the 
descriptions of Nos. 1-3, 5, 6, 21-29, 33, 39-55, 57, 61-65, 67-108, 110-116, 
119, 123-127, 129-143 and 145-147 indicated in EHI are identical with those 
in CC and STN is alone sufficient to prove that the late Mr. T. A. Gopinath- 
rao must have borrowed from the two works on a very large scale. 

I now tabulate below all the descriptions which the late Mr. T. A. 
Gopinathrao has really borrowed from CC and STN but to which he has tried 
to give references of the original sources cited in the two works. 


No. 

Name of the deity 

Re- 

ference 
in EHI, 
vol. and 
page 

Source cited 
in EHI 

Re- 
ference 
in CC or 
STN, 
vol. and 
page 

Source given in 
CC or STN 


(M = Matsya ; MK = Markai?$eya ; P = 

Pur&na). 


1 

Gane6a 

1/5 

VD 

11/76 

VD 

2 

Sarasvatl 

1/37 

„ 

11/77 

,, 

3 

Lakfml 

1/134 

,, 

„ 

Pa(Ma )yasahgraha 

4 

6r! 

1/136 

99 

11/78 






I (VK8). 

5 

MahalaksmI 

„ 

VKS 

„ 

VKS (VD) 

6 

Bhadrakall 

1/116 

VD 

n/79 

VD(VKS) 

7 

CapqUkft 

1/112 


99 

VKS 

8 

Durg& 

1/106 

•» 

n/so 

»» 

9 

Nandft . . 

1/116 

*» 

99 

99 

10 

AmbS . . 

1/117 

99 

H/81 

99 

11 

SarvaraangalA 

1/118 


»» 

99 

12 

K&lar&tri 

1/119 

99 

,, 

99 

13 

Lalitft 

„ 

99 

tf 


14 

JTyeathA . . 

1/159 

99 

>> 

• 

99 


1 The name of a work in the parentheses in the last column denotes the source mentioned 
below the particular extract. It has, however, no connection whatsoever with the extract. • It 
is generally connected with the extract that follows it. 


ELEMENTS OF HINDU ICONOGRAPHY AND ITS SOURCES 


143 




Re- 


Re- 

ference 


No.* 

Name of the deity 

ferenoe 
in EHI, 
vol. and 

Source cited 
in EHI 

in CC or 
STN, 
vol. and 

Source given in 
CC or STN 



page 


page 


15 

Nllajye^ha 

1/159 

VD 

11/81 

VKS 

16 

Gaurl 

1/119 


99 

,, 

17 

BhutamatS 

1/121 


11/82 


18 

Surabhi . . 

1/130 



,, 

id 

Yoganidra 

1/122 

ff 

„ 

„ 

20 

Brahml and other 





mothers 

1/145 


,, 

,, 

21 

Nine Durgas 

1/114 

Bhavi^ya Purana 

99 9 9 

n/84 

Same as in EHI 

22 

Vama 

1/122 

11/85 

„ 

23 

Jyei^ha . . 


99 99 

,, 

„ 

24 

Raudrl . . 



,, 

,, 

25 

Kali 

1/123 

99 99 

,, 

„ 

26 

Kalavikaml 


11/86 

,, 

27 

Balavikarnika 



,, 

28 

Balapramathani 


»> ,, 

,, 

,, 

29 

Sarvabhutadamani . . 


” VKS 

ft ! 

,, 

30 

ManonmanI 

1/124 

,, 

„ (VKS) 

31 

Kr§na 

1/130 

Markandeya P. 

„ 

VKS (MKP) 

32 

Mahakall 

1/117 

VD 

11/87 

MKP (VD) 

33 

VarunI Camuiujla 

1/124 



VD 

34 

^ivadutl 

1/125 

Matsya P. 

11/88 

VD (Matsya P.) 

35 

Katyayani 

1/110 

Mayadipika 

11/89 

Matsya P. 
(Mayadipika). 

36 

Ambika . . 

1/117 

Laksanaaam uccaya 

” 

Mayadipika 
( laksanasamuccaya) . 

37 

YogeSvari 

1/125 

VKS 

,, 

Laksanasamuccaya 

38 

Bhairavl 

1/126 

,, 

„ (VKS) 
Devi Purana 

39 

6iva 

Devi Purana 
‘ 

11/90 

40 

Siddhi . . 

1/127 


41 

Rddhi . . 


,, 


42 

K^ama 

,, 


„ 

„ 

43 

Dipti 

,, 

,, 

11/91 

„ 

44 

Rati 




f| 

45 

6vetft 

1/128 

♦» j 



46 

Bhadrft . . 

»» 

,, 

VI 

47 

Mahgali 

1/118 


,, 

IV 

48 

Jayavijayft 

1/128 

„ 

„ 

>1 

49 

K&ll 




99 

50 

Ghap^&kaml 


»» 

n /92 


51 

JayantI 

f , 

„ 

,1 

IV 

52 

Diti 

1/129 

„ 

„ 

99 

53 

Arundhatl 

„ 

„ 

,, 

II 

54 

55 

Apar&jiti 
Kaumftr! . . 

1/148 • 

” 

” 

„ (Maya- 

56 

Brahma . . 

11/245 

Vi§nu Purina 

11/103 

dlpikA). 

VD (Aditya P.) 

57 

Prajapati 

Aditya Purina 


Aditya Purina 

58 

Dharma . . 

1/61 

99 

n/io4 

„ (VKS) 

59 

Vi^nu 

1/70 

Rupamarujlana 

H/110 

VD 

60 

„ (Lokap&Ia) 

1/71 

»» 

n/ui 

,» 

61 

Visudeva 

1/66 

VD 

»» 

ii 

62 

Sahlmr^a^a 

1/68 

„ 

n /112 

„ 

63 

Pradyumna 

„ 

„ 

»» i 

»» 

64 

Aniruddha 

M 

ft 

U/113 

„ (VKS) 

65 

Lakgmln&r&yana 

1/57 

VK8 

ft 

VKS 

66 

Yogeivara 

1/60 

Siddh&rthaaamhiti 


VKS (Siddhirtha- 





samhiti). 

67 

Var&ha 

1/31 

VD 

n/ii5 

VD 

68 

Narasimha 

1/35 

»» 

n/iie 


69 

V&mana . . 

1/37 

„ 

n/ii7 

♦» 

• 70 

Trivikrama 

1/39 

M 

»» 

»* 

71 

Paralurftma 

1/40 

»» 

*» 

»» 

72* 

Rkna, etc. 

1/41 

*» 

n/iis 

t * 



c. LAW VOLTTMJC 


Name of the deity 


Re- 

ferenoe 
in EHI» 
vol. and 




Source cited 
in EHI 

Re- 
ference 
in CC or 
8TN, 
vol. and 
page 

Source given in 
CCorSTN 

VD 

H/118 

VD 

99 

99 

99 

H/119 

99 

99 


99 

11/120 

•• 


11/121 


99 

99 

11/122 


** 

11/124 

” 

„ 

11/126 

” 

,, 

11/126 

•• 

” 

” 

(vks) 

vks 


VKS 

99 

11/127 

” 


11/128 

ft 

ft 

»» 

ft 

11/129 


” 

ft 

" (VD) 

vb 

ft 

VD 


11/130 

” 

vks 

11/131 

vks 


11/132 

Vi^vakarman (VD) 

VD 

11/141 


n/144 

VD 


11/146 

99 

99 

M 

11/146 

99 

99 

** 

11/147 

VD (Matey* P.) 

Matsya P. 

11/148 

VD 

11/149 

Mateya P. (MP) 

Matsya P. 

„ 

„ ft 

VD 

H/150 

m (VD) 

VD (Mateya P.) 

Matsya P. 

VD 

Mateya P. (VD) 

ft 

ft 

VD 

99 

99 

99 

„ 


n/i6i 

ft 

* tf 

vks 

*♦ 

.. (VKB) 

In EHI the eame ai 
in 8TN 

Tulatfm&h&tmya 

p. 22 

Mah&lakgmI- 

latn&kara. 

p. 21 

tf 


145 


"1 

No.* 

1 

Name of the deity 

Re- 
ference 
in EHI, 
vol. and 
page 

Souroe cited 
in E HI 

Re- 

ferenoe 
in OC or 

sm, 

vol. and 
page 

1 Source given in 
CC or STN 

131 

BhuvaneSvarl 

1/132 

Mah&lak$ml- 

ratn&kara. 

p. 19 

In EHI the same as 
in STN 

132 

B&lft 

- 

Tripurasundarl 

Ealpa. 

” 

» 

133 

Kajamatarigl 

,, 

Raj am&taAgf kalpa 

,, 


134 j 

MahalakamI (1) 

1/136 

VKS 

p. 25 

,, 

135 

•» (2) . . 

Can^Ikalpa 

p. 3 


136 

Rudr&m&tdurgfi. 

1/107 

Karanagama 

p. 16 

,, 

137 

Vanadurga 

1/108 

Arain&ya 



* 138 

Agnidurgfi 

! 

$&radatilaka 

p. 24 

,, 

139 

Jayadurga 

99 


p. 20 

,, 

140 

Vindhyavasinl 



p. 27 


’ 141 

Ripumarinl 

X/109 

„ 


,, 

142 

Mah&kali 

1/117 

Candlkalpa 

p.3 


143 

Tripurabhairavi 

1/126 

Saradatilaka 

p. 27 


144 

Sarvamarigala 

1/118 

&arabhatantra 

p. 10 

— 

145 

Aparajita 

1/129 

N&radasamhita 

p. 17 

As in No. 143. 

146 

Indr&k#I 

1/130 

Indrak^Ikalpa 

p. 22 


147 

Annapurna 

1/131 

Karanagama 

p. 23 



SOME UNKNOWN OR LESS KNOWN SANSKRIT POETS DISCOVERED 
FROM THE SUBHASITA-SARA-SAMUCCAYA 

By 

Dr. Jatindra Bimal Chaudhuri 

The MS. of the Subhasita-sara-samuceaya belonging to the Royal Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, No. 10566, is unique as no other MS. of this work is known 
to exist anywhere in India or outside and as it contains the verses of 151 
poets of which even the names of 34 are not known from the anthologies 
hitherto published. These poets are: (1) Anantabhratr; (2) Balaji Bhatta; 
(3) B&lamukunda; (4) Bhfldad&ra (?); (5) Bindu Kavi; (6) Brahmendra 
SvSmin; (7) CintAuiani; (8) Gauri; (9) GhanaSyama; (10) Gurjara Kavi; 
(11) Ka6ipati; (12) Kulapandita; (13) Kurmacala; (14) Madhusftdana 
Sv&min; (15) Madireksana; (16) Maithila; (17) Mohana, probably same as 
Mohana Ojh&ka, quoted in the same work; (18) N&ge4a $§8trin; (19) Natha- 
kum&ra; (20) R&macandra Agamin; (21) R&majit; (22) Author of the 
S&hitya-sudh&sindhu ; (23) Sivabhakta; (24) Sripati Bhatta; (25) Author of 
the Subh&§ita-s&ra-samuccaya ; (26) Trilocana Triba<jlika; (27) Uddamabh&nu; 
(28) Vajrataflka 6&strin; (29) VSAmiSra; (30) Varad&carya; (31) Venidatta ; 
(32) Ve^I P&qdeya; (33) Vidhudaya; (34) Vij&fikura. Again, many verses 
by the remaining poets are not found in the printed anthologies. Therefore, 
t)ie importance of the Subh§§ita-sara-samuccaya cannot be overrated. 

. Most of the poets quoted in the Subh&f ita-eira-samuccaya flourished in 
Medi»val India. The anthologies compiled between 1400—1700 A.D. contain 


146 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


naturally quite a large number of these verses. But as very few of these 
anthologies have as yet been published, many Sanskrit poets still are unknown # 
to us. We notice here the lives and literary activities of the above-mentioned 
34 poets only. 

( 1 ) Ananiabhratf 

The Subhasita-sara-samuccaya (henceforth abbreviated as SSS.) records 
only one verse of this poet in which Viparita-surata is described . 1 The same 
verse is also preserved in the PadyavenI 1 (henceforth abbreviated as PV.). 


( 2 ) Baldji Bhatta 

Only three verses of this poet are known to exist. The PV. records all 
of them, whereas the Sukti-sundara, henceforth abbreviated as SS., preserves’ 
one and the SSS. another.* PV. 60 eulogizes a king who is similar to Kamadeva 
in physical charm but differs from him in the art of archery. In PV. 81, the' 
poet describes the fame of the king which is so white that Satyabh’&mfi 
mistakes W for Balarama and poor women mistake the Gunja for pearls, 
e ird verse is devoted to the description of the Sun. BSlaji Bhatta’s 
ye is quite fascinating; his power of imagination distinctly exceeds 'the 

(3) Balamukunda 

R -. The , SS f- Vi® ° nly anthol °g ica l work that records the name of 

rs IM r Wy ’ 0nly 0De Verae oUhk P° et 18 Preserved in it. 
viz. No. 259. It describes the Moon : 

1*^ ^ ftpjTVT: I 

( 4 ) Bhudaddra 

(No £ us* r of th " pew “" ““ e » i« sss. 

f So'itvSIamkararid honooforth .bbreTiMri .» S A ouoto. 

l “_ m . te . Sm> 8«lter.-peddb. 1 i (V. 3»gS) imder the .erne rsue. Both 
gseee-irort in the are “l» ! ‘ Il y unintelligible end we ere left to mere 


mnau A an 


28 i, STo^rr st *? t — 2si ' ** *». 

end SSS. 851 = PV 62« SSS- quotes only two. Tie. SSS 260 = 686 

-Ifc— i. - “• ^ rv. 


1 Vent No. 734. 

* PV. 60; PV. SU . 

W> 


' 888. 68 and PV. 81 - 88. 62. 


* PV. 471. 



147 


SOOT .UNKNOWN OB tB86 KNOWN SANSKRIT FONTS 

of tjaipkara and the other -half formed the forehead of a beautiful damsel. 
The other was donated to Heaven. In his verse PV. 263 on the vermilion- 
markon the parting line of the hair, the poet opines that the red line betrays 
the loving heart of the girl and the parting line of the hair is nothing but a 
path designed for the free coming and going of the god of love. The black 
mark on the moon is, according to our poet, neither a black antelope nor a 
jha$a (large fish), but the burnt Cupid placed as such by clever Rati on the 
body of the repository of ambrosia for rejuvenation and revival to life (PV. 
589 = S8S. 250). In PV. 626 = SSS. 351, the poet demonstrates that the 
rainy season is as pleasing as a woman. In his anyokti on the flower Campaka , 
he blames this flower, charming and fragrant as it is, for not being able to 
attract the bees, connoisseurs of the art of selecting flowers (PV. 669). 

(6) Brahmendra Svamin 

Only one verse of this poet is preserved for us today, viz. : 

I 

| PV. 557 = SSS. 131. 

One Brahmendra Svamin was a contemporary of Emperor Shah Jehan (1628- 
1658 A.D.). He honoured Kavindracarya Sarasvati with an address on the 
happy occasion of the abolition of the pilgrim-tax by the Emperor through 
his mediation and persuasion. 1 This Brahmendra Svamin is probably identical 
with our poet. It is curious that the addresses of Brahmendra Svamin and 
Brahmendra Sarasvati * in honour of Kavindracarya partly agree word by word 
though it is not likely that the two persons would be the same. 

(7) Cintdmani 

The PV. quotes verses of Cint&mani, viz. 153, 159, 237, 662, 578, 880 
and three verses of Cintamagi Diksita who is probably the same as our poet, 
viz. 279, 509 and 643. The SSS. quotes only one of them, viz. 578, devoted 
to the description of moon-rise: — 

iTTC MIHlHfi a f^i ■nnnfat TOTO I 

In PV. 153, Cint&mapi praises Jehangir (1605-1627 A.D.) and in PV. 159, 
his son Parvez. There is no doubt that our poet was a contemporary of 
Jehangir. Therefore, Cint&mani must have flourished in the beginning of the 
seventeenth century A.D. 



, (8) Oauri 

The only souroe of our knowledge about this woman poet is the Padyavepl. 
The SS. is indebted to this work for the verses of Gaurl. A detailed aooount 


* 8m KavtadNMandrodaya, p. W. 


' Op. Ml. 



148 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


of this poetess has been given in the Introduction to Sanskrit Poetesses, Part A 
and therefore, the same is not repeated here. 

(9) Ghanasydma 

Ghana^yama was the Minister and Court-poet of King Tukkoji of Tanjore 
(1729-1735 A.D.). So there is no doubt that this poet flourished in the 
beginning of the eighteenth century A.D. He was a very voluminous writer 
and was fortunate in having two learned wives, Sundarl and Kamala, who 
wrote a commentary on the Viddha-^alabhanjika of Raja6ekhara. For a 
detailed account of this poet, reference may be made to my article on Ghana- 
6yama published in the September issue of the Indian Historical Quarterly , 
1943.1 

(10) Gurjara Kavi 

One Gurjara Kavi praises Kavlndra on having the pilgrim-tax abolished’ 
by Shah Jehan* and it is quite likely that .our Gurjara Kavi will be identical 
with this poet. The Subhasita-sara-samuccava, quoting the verses of 
Ve^idatta, must have been composed after the middle of the seventeenth 
century A.D. — by 1675 A.D. Shah Jehan ruled from 1628-1658 A.D. and 
Gurjara ’s address to Kavindra was composed within this period. This poet is 
only likely to be quoted by the author of the SSS., who was compiling his work 
soon after this period. 

The SSS. quotes only one of his verses. It is on the Evening : 

VJ 

hwt wffa i ^8$ =PV. 669. 

(11) Kadipati 

Out of 11 verses quoted in the SSS., three are traced in the Mukundananda- 
bhfiija of KMpati,* viz. f5*., and being 

verses 72, 91 and 158 of the work. This KMpati was also the author of 
the SaAglta-Gafigadhara-vyakhya called iWananandinl. 4 In the PrastS- 
vanft of the Mukundananda-bhana, KMpati says that he belonged to the 
Kaupdinya Gotra: — 

irgwjTt j g | 

(12) Kulapandita 

Nothing about this poet is at present known. Only one verse by him is 
quoted in the SSS. ; it is on Sunrise : 


1 S«> d*> Modem Renew, October, 1943, pp. 299-300, for an abridged amount 
* Kavtndrs-csndrodaye, pp. 32-33, V. 211. 


' Ninjaya-eigara Press ed„ 3rd revised edition, Bombay, 1926. • 

* Cat. Osfc, I, 106 and Trinnioal Catalogue, IV. 7696. MSS. in Mithila bv J*v**«d -TT s 
sad Taylor’s Catalogue of Oriental MSS. in the Library of the College, Fort St Qeorgel 86 



80MB UNKNOWN OB LESS KNOWN 8ANSKBIT POETS 


140 


ft i w rihigmii im ft 

UT^g^rTTf EMT CTM t fty I 

ftPmffii <Ky > w fy i «i =PV. sio. 

The PadyaveijI attributes the verse to Kp&ia Pa^dita ; so Kulapa^ta 
was probably a designation of our poet. 

(13) Kurmdcala 

Only one verse of Kurmacala describing the rainy season has been 
§ quoted in the SSS. : 



The above is attributed to Rudrachandra in the Rasika-jlvana (Vol. II 
of Pracyavani Mandira Sanskrit Text Series, p. 53), V. 1251 and the PV. 629 
attributes the same to Kurmacala-nrpati. Rudracandra was probably the 
name of the King of Kumaun, author of this verse. Kurmacala 's name is 
not found in any anthology compiled before 1600 A.D. 

(14) Madhusudana Svamin 

The SSV. quotes two verses from Madhusudana, viz. Nos. 3481-3482. 
The PV. quotes verses of Madhusudana Svamin as well as Sarasvati, ahd it 
does not seem likely that they would be identical. Madhusudana Sarasvati’ s 
only poetical work hitherto known is the Ananda-mandakinl but none of the 
three verses quoted in the SSS., Nos. Ill (= PV. 537), 671 (= PV. 486) and 
732 (= PV. 471 and BJ. 1137) beginning as W etc., BOTPKPP 

etc. and fETTUfa etc. respectively, are traced there. Madhu- 

sudana Sarasvati also led the life of an ascetic and it is not known whether in 
some part of his life he used the designation Svamin. In the present stage of 
our knowledge , we cannot, however, identify them. 

(15) Madirekqana 

The SSS. quotes the verses of a few poetesses, viz. Gauri, Madireksapa, 
Morika, Padmavatl, Phalguhastini and Sila Bhattarikfc. The name of 
Madirek^ana is not found in any other anthology. 1 


(16) Maithila 

Only two versos are attributed to this poet of Mithila in the SSS., viz. 
No. 572 grain, etc. and No. 746, WTWfwftmT, etc. The former is 

on the lamentations of a separated lover and the latter on Ratavasana. 
It is the same as V. 547 of Subh&sita-padya-samgraha, a MS. of which has 


1 For her verae, date, etc., see Sanskrit Poetewes, Part A, 2nd edition, pp. xixand 18. 


160 


3. C. LAW VOLUME 


, an({ a t present belongs to the Benares 
only recently been discovered and P ^ ^ ^ (V. 989) and 

Sanskrit College MSS. Library. » » ^ ^ in th e gPS 

PR. (43.4). Four other verses are . No 501) 

Tlie anthologies preserve the nanwa 

aD * r a Pnriara Maithila; but these names indicate merely 

of such poets as Gauda, Gurjara, M mft really considered 

the places where the poets flourished, lie y y 

as more or less anonymous. 


(17) Mohana or Mohana Ojhaka 

The PV. and the SSS. preserve 24 verses of Mohana Ojha or Oj h&ka, of . 
which 22 are common in both the work and only two, viz. SSS. 496, art 
etc., a verse on the lamentations of a separated lady-lover and No. 698., 
etc., a verse on the Ratarambha arc not found in the PV. 
One verse of Mohana, viz. Jlfu INPrtartt, etc., has bee n twice quoted both in 
the SSS. and the PV. under the headings and I 

From a study of his verses, it appears that Mohana Ojhaka wrote a work on 
the Rasa-sastra from which the verses have been quoted. We may classify 
his verses thus : 

Heroines : (a) JiMTlfwr — PV. 319; (6) ofytfdl — PV. 366; (c) <n4W- 
«®rr— PV. 367; and (d) aifiwifw — PV. 377. 

Heroes: (a) WUflwru*! — PV. 422; (6) — PV- 43 °- 

Tdrunya: PV. 188; PV. 189 = SSS. 816. 

Various phases of love: Rata; Ratarambha, Ratavasana, etc. 

Roma vail: PV. 202. 

Breasts: PV. 214. 

The lamentations of a lover and lady-lover: PV. 289= SSS. 560 and 
SSS. 495. 

Entreaties in the morning: PV. 488. 

Water-sport In PV. 548 = SSS. 81. 

One noticeable feature of Mohana ’s composition is his aversion to the 
Vakrokti. His verses, verging on alliteration, are at times quite sweet: 

* fwftq gag i 

nftifawra ft vfrt fargu: i PV. 378. 


(18) Nageia Gastrin 

A poet of this name is not found in any other anthology. It is unfortunate 
that a’ single verse of this poet should be preserved for us in the SSS., verse 
No. 229: 



151 


Bom mnorowir ob lxsb ksowh sawbebit posts 

n iNimat i 
^ nqmfayftra « 

Four verses of one Nage&i Pandits, son of Somar&ja Partita, are found 
in the Kavfndra-candrodaya, p. 10 . 


(19) Nathakumara 

The SA. (V. 580) and the SSS. (V. 107) quote the same verse of Natha- 
kumfira on DolS: iiftpfT-* 44l4$4tg<Wt.M.lftall 

B w n awit i 4 

It is also quoted in the RJ. (V. 1269) and attributed to Kumaranfiyaka 
there. The name Nathakumara is also preserved in the &P. and the SMV. 
So Nathakumara and Kumaranayaka must be identical. 


(20) Ramacandra Agamin 

Ramacandra Agamin, nine of whose verses have been quoted in the PV., 
is to be distinguished from Ramacandra Bhatta. The former was the son of 
Janardana Bhatta and grandson of Purusottama whereas the latter was the 
son of Laksmana Bhatta and younger brother of Vallabha Acarya. Rama- 
candra Bhatta is certainly a far greater, and consequently, more popular poet 
than Ramacandra Agamin. 

Ramacandra Agamin wrote a work called Radha-vinoda-kavya with a 
commentary on the same. In verse 19 of the Radha-vinoda, he says: 

I 


and again, in 21-22: 

Bftpw fr w wit ww i 


^ V -f* m - m I _ % 

ajraffpT vrnpr Ufa iiinwiiw 

tu^gitUMo W$- 

vttoto M*nruw «f*raT wr» i 


. 1 SA. y w m y Jl i 
* M. SA. ifkBT I 


* v.r. SA. q ^l y i y i | 


152 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


R&macandra Agamin appears to have composed this work at an early 
age; see V. 24, ” 

Ramacandra Agamin is also to be distinguished from R&macandra 
Adhvarin, son of Patanjali Makhtevara, grandson of Kesava Adhvarin and 
great-grandson of Ratnakheta Adhvarin. 

That the author of the Radha-vinoda-k&vya was R&macandra Agamin is 
seen from the colophon as given in MS. No. 376 of 1892-95, now belonging to 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 

The verses of Ramacandra Agamin as quoted in the SSS. and PV. may be 
classified as follows: — 

1 . King : STQTPr : PV. 113 (anonymous in O.T.). 

2. „ on jiw : PV. 121. 

3. fi ra r fiOTH H : PV. 295. 

: PV. 519. 

5. (after : PV. 523 = SSS. 89. 

6- : PV. 535 = SSS. 109. 

7- W*fcr- PV. 550 = SSS. 126. 

8. PV. 617 = SSS. 326. 

9- : PV. 646. 

(21) Rama jit 

i The Padyaven! quotes six verses of Ramajit, e.g.: (1) No. 327, 

etc. on \ (2) No. 531, 4, etc. on 

(3) No. 552, ufVabHJ etc. on ; (4) No. 597. 

etc. on iiwraptl ; (5) No. 659, R U l ftfa , etc. on 

and (6) No. 800, ^nWPSf^dW, etc. on Of these, 

the SSS. 130 is the same as PV. 552. The Cat. Cat. 1 notices one RJ^n(, 
author of the or a work on Dharma, Bhandarkar’s 

Report, 1882-83, 3. 96 (102). But there is no evidence to establish any 
identity between the two. 

In PV. 552 on the Sunset, the Sun is described as a faithless husband, who 
ignores his wife, the East, becomes degraded and consequently begins to fade 
away in life. 

The thoughts of Ramajit are sublime. In PV. 697, K&madeva is repre- 
sented as carrying a bow without its flower-shafts as in winter flowers dropped 
off and the vernal flowers were still within the trees during the Vasanta- 
mtftdhi. * 

In his verse on the Winter-breeze, PV. 658, Ramajit says the breeze is 
undoubtedly the friend of fire as even the winter-breeze, by nature cool as it 
is, sets the heart to fire : 



)ME UNKNOWN OR LESS KNOWN SANSKRIT POETS 


153 


fwwrh *nrf^ ^5- 

$ *rg 1 

*Tfir ^aftn^ 11 

(22) Sahityasudhasindhu , Author of 

The S&hityasudh&sindhu, a rhetorical work, was composed by Visvanatha, 

' 8011 Trimalla and grandson of Ananta of Dharmasura city on the Godavari 
before 1602 A.D., which is the date of a MS. of the work preserved at present 
in Kashmir and noticed by Stein in his Catalogue of MSS. in Kashmir (xxix). 
This Visvanatha is also the author of the Mrgankalekha-natika, a MS. of which 
is dated Samvat 1664, i.e. 1608 ATM As Visvanatha * quotes Candidasa, 
author of a commentary on Mammata, he could not have flourished much 
earlier than 1600 A.D. The Sahityasudhasindhu consists of three Tarangas. 

(23) Sivabhakta 

This may be the real name or an epitiiet of the poet. The name of this 
poet is not unfortunately found in any other anthology. The only verse 
by him is preserved in the SSS., No. 308, etc. in its 

section on I The verse is also quoted anonymously in other 

anthologies. 

(24) tiripati Bhatta 

SSS. 176, tqft 3T, etc. is the only verse of Sripati Bhatta quoted in this 

anthology. The same verse has been quoted by Jalhana in his Sukti-muktavali, 
p. 256, v. 12, under the name Srithakkura. No other anthology quotes any 
verse of Sripati except the SUK. which quotes only one verse. This verse on 
^Ptfy^jqicf, ^ ^ etc. is a very good verse indeed. But 

whether this Sripati is identical with the author of our anthology still remains 
to be ascertained. 

(25) Author of the Subhofita-sara-samiiccaya 

It is rather strange that unlike all other authors of anthologies, the author 
of the SSS. should leave for us in a compilation of 844 verses only 7 verses. 
The verses are on Spring-breeze (No. 301); a separated lady-love during the 
summer (No. 330); the wife of a traveller (No. 441); two 

on KWH (Nos. 833 and 837) and two on WTWPf (Nos. 749 and 750). Two of 
the verses claimed by him as his own, viz. the one on (No. 339) 


1 Vide printed edition, Introduction. The poet here says of himself : 

'rf^r-WTCT^C- Wl'fol ifom filWT W «fr 

WrrtwTfinfTirt ^TflnirfrfWjWfni I M&dhavadeva, author of the Ny&ya-a&m, also 

Appears to belong to the family of Vtfvan&thadeva. 



154 


B, C. LAW VOLUME 


and the other on (No. 441) are quite enjoyable and are, therefore, 

quoted here : 

No. 339. f’W 

siPitPir *rcfci 


No. 44i. *rfa: airairacn^%5f*T f^rert *w*?ri 

wsHTsfl %iji i 

ammit jrrsrnnl afaf^r ^rnftsfq 3uva 
^W 1 filoHj 11^41 | 


The compiler appears to have violated all principles of honesty as he 
claims two verses of Vepidatta, viz. PV. Nos. 749 and 750 as his own. Again, 
SSS. 339 is attributed to Bhanukara in the PR. (42.17) and RJ. (942). 
V. 441 is also an imitation ; cf. SSRB. 101.9. 

As this author quotes the Padyaveni, it must have been composed later 
than that work. Venidatta composed the PV. in the middle of the seventeenth 
century. The SSS. was in all probability composed by the end of the 
seventeenth century. 

(26) Trilocana Triva^Xka 

There are sets of verses on Moon-rise by Nagesa 6astrin, Trilocana 
Trivfidlka (Tewari), Venipandeya and others, which evidently show that they 
were all contemporaries and composed the verses in a competition or for some 
similar purpose. Otherwise, the fourth line of all verses, 

* would not have been the same. They were all evidently contemporaries 
of the author of the SSS. and flourished in the second half of the eighteenth 
century A.D. 

(27) UdMmabKdnu 

The following verse is attributed to Uddamabhanu in the SSS. 155 and to 
Udd&mabharati in PV. 564. The description is a grand one: — 

ii i -i ^ i **• * » 

WnjWwraiSn! t|T«Tffl tpRTJ *IIJ<!T I 

si 

VTOfa Kfr^ ^ TO?( | ^ I 

Only another verse of Udd&mabh&rati or Udd&mabh&nu is found in the 
PV. No. 565. The name of the poet seems to have been muddled somehow or 
other. It is not likely that the poet would be called both Udd&mabh&rati 
and Udd&mabh&nu. 



SOME UNKNOWN OK LESS KNOWN SANSKRIT POETS 155 

(28) Vajratanka Sdstrin 

The name Vajratatika is unknown to anthological literature except for 
the SSS. where some of his verses are quoted, viz. 41 on Sunrise and 218-219 
on the pangs of women whose lovers are away from them. 

TOWRTOinft «nu^eiS|jin^ I 

»TT^*I fwiw I 8\ | 

Verses 218-219: 

fann<aC| i i^ i i 

wvrwBWcngmreftaRt g g 

’fwrwr fwi 

^ (?) ?w i 

©v 



^ mmfim zva* to i 

(29) Vanmidra 

The SSS. quotes the only verse of Vanmisra, the subject being 

n i 

iTC’G a? «rmfa 

f’foufw 1 15^ I 

The verse is attributed to Dehari Miira in the Vidyakara-sahasraka, 
V. 047. The BJ. and the PJR. attribute it to Babumifoa and the PV. to 
Samkara Mi&ra. 

(30) Varada Atiirya, Author of the Vaeanta-tilakd 

SSS. 16-17 and SSS. 39-40, describing the morning and the sunrise 
respectively, are traced in Vasanta-tilaka of Varada Ac&rya. 1 This Varada 
Ac&rya was af contemporary of R&mabhadra Dlk$ita, author of the Snig&ra- 
tilaka Bh&ija and the Patafijali-carita. He was the son of SudarSana Kavi of 


1 See pp. 4-0 of Jlv&aanda Vidyitigan’s edition, Calcutta, 1872. 




156 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Conjeeveram, as the poet himself says in the beginning of the Vasanta-tilaka.i 
Varadarya flourished in the latter half of the eighteenth century. In his • 
drama Vedanta-vilasa or Yatiraja-vijaya, Varada Acarya describes the life of 
R&m&nuja in six acts. 

(31) Venldatta 

The Sukti-Sundara lias quoted two verses of Veriidatta and the SSS. 
28. All these are taken from the PV. which contains 231 of his verses. The 
SS. rind SSS. were both greatly influenced by the Padyaveiji as is evident 
from the structure as well as the series of parallel quotations in them. 

Venidatta composed his work Panca-tattva-praka^ika * in 1644. As the 
SUkti-Sundara which must have been composed by the end of the seventeenth t 
century quotes the verses of the PV., it must have been composed by the 
middle of the seventeenth century or slightly later. Again, Shah Jehan 
(1628-1658 A.D.) is referred to in one of the verses of Harinarayana Mi6ra, 8 
which fixes up the upper limit of the date of the composition of the work. 

Vemdatta was the son of Jagajjivana and grandson of Nilakantha. 
Venldatta reveres Nilakantha as the ornament of the Yajfiika-family. The 
PV. quotes sixteen verses of Jagajjivana and six verses from his Vrajya. This 
work also quotes one of the verses of Nilakantha and two verses of Yajiiika. 
Probably, this Nilakantha and Yajiiika are the same as the grandfather and 
the ancestor of Venldatta referred to in the colophons. So it is doubtless 
that Venidatta was born in a very cultured family and reared up in environ- 
ments that were very congenial to the making of a poet. In some verses 
Venidatta praises King Nasalati ; probably, he is the same as Miramiratmaja 
or son of Miramira referred to in some verses. In some verses, again, he praises 
King Rama. This Rama is, probably, the same as Virasimhasuta praised 
elsewhere by Venidatta. Besides these kings, Venidatta eulogizes in PV. 93 
a king called Pratapa. Venidatta was certainly patronized by them. Yajnika 
praises one Rajivanetra as well who was probably his patron too. 

The compilers of anthologies usually incorporate some of their verses in 
their compilations. Venidatta too has preserved for us 231 verses in this 
anthology out of a collection of 889 verses. Almost every section of the 
work contains some of his verses. Some of these verses will probably be 
traceable in his V&sudeva-carita, the only MS. of which is preserved in the 
India Office Library and cannot, therefore, under these war circumstances, be 
consulted by me. The Panca-tattva-prakaSika which has been noticed in 
Rajendral&l Mitra’s Notices might also contain some of these verses or at 
least furnish some clue to the original sources of some of them; but the MSS. 
notioed bf R&jendralal are mostly not procurable nowadays. It is not 
unlikely that Venidatta composed the major portion of these verses for the work 
Padyavenf. 


2 wtftsf W ©tc., p. 2. 

* PV. 141 - SS. 13S. 


8 Rajendral&l Mitra’a Notice*, 1436. 



SOME UNKNOWN OR LESS KNOWN SANSKRIT POETS 


167 


Veijldatta was not a first class poet but nobody can doubt, after perusing 
the PV., that the author was a connoisseur of poetry. The weak part of the 
PV. is the composition of the author himself; but the verses culled by him 
from other sources are simply marvellous ; every one of them is a gem. No 
other Sanskrit anthology of this age can be compared with the PV. in this 
respect. The verses of Venidatta are pleasing to the ear, but present gram- 
matical inaccuracies and what is more — they cannot be properly interpreted. 
They also abound in redundant uses which should be purged out but for 
metrical reasons. Still, his verses were not altogether ignored; thus, the SS. 
quotes two of his verses and SSS. quite a good many of them. 

There are six Tarahgas in the PV. The first on the description of gods, 
•viz. Siva, Visnu, Bhavani and Surya, consists of 52 verses. The second on 
the description of kings consists of 120 verses. Herein Akbar, Ramacandra, 
•son of Virabhanu, Dalapati and Gurjarendra are eulogized by Akbariya- 
Kalidasa. Bhanukara praises Virabhanu and Nizamshah; Cintamani — 
Jehangir and his son Shah Parvez; Harinarayana — Emperor Shah Jehan; 
Vanlkanthabharana — Dilllndracudamani; Ganapati — Vasudeva; Ramacandra 
Bhatta — Vlrasimha ; Raja^ekhara — VIrabhupa ; &amkara Bhatta — Darpa- 
narayana and Yajnika — Rajivanetra. The patrons of Venidatta have been 
mentioned before. The third Taranga consisting of 100 verses deals with 
women — their girlhood, advent of youth, youthful age, their limbs and various 
adornments. The fourth is devoted to love ; herein the lovers and lady -lovers 
are found in their various mood-types and other categorical divisions and the 
eight Sattvika-bhavas are also beautifully illustrated. The fifth in 134 verses 
deals with various parts of the day and needless to say, cannot dispense with 
the description of love. The sixth deals with miscellaneous subject-matters; 
the first 67 verses are devoted to the description of six Indian seasons; then 
follow the verses on the forest and hermitage; then there are 78 anyoktis with 
reference to various animals, birds, trees, etc.; then 35 verses are found in 
praise or censure of the benevolent, the rogues, etc. Then 12 verses are 
devoted to the praise of the poetical works and poets ; here in PV. 788 Ganapati 
praises highly Gape^vara and in PV. 799 Bhanukara eulogizes Narahari. The 
following thirty verses deal with the other sentiments than Srhg&ra. Puzzles 
are dealt with in the following 39 verses ; the ten Incarnations in the following 
20 verses and so on. 

Venidatta gives us the names of 115 poets 1 whose verses he has quoted 
and there are many anonymous verses. Of the poets mentioned by name, 
only 15 poets are well known to us; the rest are more or less new discoveries 
to us. A few Bengali poets headed by MadhusUdana Sarasvati are also found 
here. Of the women poets, Kerali, Gaurl, Padm&vati, Morika and Vikata- 
nitambft have fceen quoted here. Besides these, the sources of some verses have 
been mentioned by Venidatta, viz. the Bhoja-prabandha, Jagajjlvana-vrajyH, 


1 An amount of these poets will be found in my forthcoming work Padyave^l of Vepldfttte, 
Publication No, 1 of the Institute of Oriental Learning (Pritoyavfcjtf Mandira) in the Text Series. 



158 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Ratn&vall, Subh&sita-mukt&vali and Vanirasaia-vrajyft. Thus the names of 
the authors or sources of only 108 verses quoted in PV. are not known to us. 

(32) Vent Pdndeya 

< As stated before under Trilocana Triv&Jika, Ve$I P&pdeya and others 
must have composed the verses with the fourth line in all of them as the same, 
certainly because they all agreed or intended to do so. Most probably, he 
was a contemporary of the author of the SSS. The SSS. preserves seven of 
his verses — all on moon-rise, Nos. 230-236. 

(33) Vidhudaya * 

One poet Candrodaya’s single verse on Moon-rise has been quoted in the 
SSV. Presumably, this Candrodaya will be identical with our poet Vidhtldaya, 
but until further evidence is forthcoming, we cannot identify them. This 
Vidhudaya is indeed a good poet as his verses show. His verBes on Vayafcsandhi, 
Nos. 803-804 of the SSS., are grand. 

(34) Bijankura 

The only verse of this poet quoted in SSS. is No. 605, 
etc. This verse is attributed to Bijaka in SSV. Therefore, BIj&fikura and 
Bijaka are identical. 

Abbreviations 

PR. = Padya-racanS. 

PV. = Padyave^i. 

RJ. = Rasika-jivana. 

SS. = Sukti-sundara. 

SA. = SabhyalamkaragLa. 

SSS. = Subhasita-sara-samucoaya. 


KAMMA, OR THE BUDDHIST LAW OF CAUSATION 

By 

Retd. Theba NIbada 

Inequality 

What is the cause of this inequality of mankind ? How do we account 
for this totally ill-balanced world ? 

Why are some vicious persons prosperous and virtuous persons 
unfortunate? 

Why should one be brought up in the lap of luxury, endowed with finp 
mental, moral, and physical qualities, and another in absolute poverty, steeped 
to the lips in misery ? Why should one be bom a. millionaire and another a 



KAMMA, OR THE BUDDHIST LAW OF CAUSATION 


159 


pauper ? Why should one be made a mental prodigy and another an idiot ? 

• Why should one be born with saintly characteristics and another with criminal 
tendencies? Why should some be linguists, artists, mathematicians or 
musicians from their very cradle ? Why should some be congenitally blind, 
deaf, and deformed ? 

Is this inequality due to blind chance or accident ? Strictly speaking, 
nothing happens to any man that he does not deserve for some reason or 
other. 

Could this be the fiat of an irresponsible God-Creator ? 

It is impossible to conceive of such a being either in or outside the universe. 

Some writers of old authoritatively declare that God created man after 
.his own image. Some modem thinkers frankly state that man created God 
after his own image. The latter seems to be more reasonable. 

* ‘ What kind of a Deity must it be who creates a baby-soul, born of diseased 

parents, foredoomed to ill-health and a life of poverty, misery, probably crime ? 
In these days surely no one could for a moment entertain such a lame explana- 
tion or consider it in any way satisfactory .’ 1 

As Charles Bradlaugh says, c the existence of evil is a terrible stumbling 
block to the Theist. Pain, misery, crime, poverty confront the advocate of 
eternal goodness, and challenge with unanswerable potency his declaration 
of Deity as all-good, all-wise, and all-powerful \* 

According to the theological principles man is created arbitrarily and 
without his desire, and at the moment of his creation is either blessed or 
damned eternally. Hence, man is either good or evil, fortunate or unfortunate, 
noble or depraved, from the first step in the process of his physical creation to 
the moment of his last breath, regardless of his individual desires, hopes, 
ambitions, struggles or devoted prayers. Such is theological fatalism. 

In the words of Schopenhauer ‘ Whoever regards himself as having become 
out of nothing must also think that he will again become nothing; for that an 
eternity has passed before he was, and then a second eternity has begun, 
through which he will never cease to be, is a monstrous thought. 

‘If birth is the absolute beginning, then death must be his absolute end; 
and the assumption that man is made out of nothing leads necessarily to the 
assumption that death is his absolute end.* 

According to Einstein ‘If this being (God) is omnipotent, then every 
occurrence, including every human action, every human thought, and every 
human feeling and aspiration is also His work; how is it possible to think of 
holding men responsible for their deeds and thoughts before such an Almighty 
Being? 

‘In giving out punishments and rewards, He would to a certain extent 
be passing judgment on Himself. How can this be combined with the 
goodness and righteousness ascribed to Him ? * 

i " 1 — - 1 ' - ■ 

4 A. E. FomU. 

* Sm bis M»y on ‘A PIm for Attwian’— Bumanily't Gain from Unbditf, p. 23. 




160 


jj C . LAW VOLUME 


Commenting on human suffering and God Prof. J. B. S- Haldane aaya 
‘Either suffering is needed to perfect human character, or God » not 
Almighty. The former theory is disproved by the fact that some people who 
have suffered very little, but have been fortunate in their ancestry and educa- 
tion have very fine characters. The objection to the second is that it is only 
in connection with the universe as a whole that there is any intellectual gap 
to be filled by the postulation of a deity. And a creator could presumably 
create whatever he or it wanted.’ 


In Despair , a poem of his old age, Lord Tennyson thus boldly attacks 
God, who as recorded by Isaiah, says: ‘I make peace and create evil ’ (Isaiah 
xlv. 7). 

‘ What ! I should call on that infinite love that has served us so well ? * 

Infinite cruelty, rather, that made everlasting hell, 

Made us, foreknew us, foredoom’d us, and does what he will with his own 
Better our dead brute mother who never has heard us groan.’ 


In the Jatakas the Bodhisatta dismisses this idea of a God-Creator 
thus : — 

‘He who has eyes can see the sickening sight; 

Why does not Brahma set his creatures right ? 

If his wide power no limits can restrain, 

Why is his hand so rarely spread to bless ? 


Why are his creatures all condemned to pain, 

Why does he not to all give happiness ? 

Why do fraud, lies, and ignorance prevail, 

Why triumphs falsehood, — truth and justice fail ? 

I count your Brahma one th ’unjust among, 

Who made a world to shelter wrong.’ 

(J&taka Stories, Vol. VI, p. 1 10.) 

‘ If there exists some Lord all powerful to fulfil 
In every creature bliss or woe, and action good or ill, 

That Lord is stained with sin. Man does work his will/ 

(Jataka Stories, Vol. V, p. 122.), 

Surely the doctrine that all men are sinners and have the essential sin of 
Adam is a challenge to justice, mercy, love, and omnipotent fairness/ 


Heredity 

According to some modern thinkers this variation is due to heredity and 
environment. One must admit that they are partly instrumental, but they 
cannot be solely responsible for the subtle distinctions and vast differences 
that exist amongst individuals. Why should, for instance, twins who a*e 
physically alike, enjoying the same privileges of upbringing, be very often 
‘temperamentally, intellectually, and morally totally different ? 



KAMMA, OB TBB BU0DHBT LAW OF CAUSATIOK 


1«1 


Heredity alone cannot aooount for this variation. It explains only 
• similarities but not the differences. Phyuoal gem explains <mly a portion of 
man. , With regard to mental, intellectual, and moral differences we are left 
in the dark. The theory of heredity cannot give a satisfactory explanation 
for the birth of a criminal in a long line of honourable ancestors, for the birth 
of a saint or a noble man in a family rotten to the trees, for the arising of 
colossal characters like Homer and Plato, men of genius like Shakespeare, 
infant prodigies like Pascal, Mozart, Beethoven, Raphael, etc. 

According to Buddhism this variation is due not only to heredity, 
environment, ‘nature and nurture’, but also to our own Kamma or, in other 
words, to our own inherited past actions and present deeds. We ourselves 
are responsible for our own deeds, happiness and misery. We create our own 
heavens. We create our own hells. We are the architects of our own fate. 

. • ‘Every living being,’ says the Buddha, ‘has Kamma as its own, its 
inheritance, its cause, its kinsman, its refuge. Kamma is that which 
differentiates all living beings into low and high states.’ 

Alluding to this variation the Atthasftlin! states : — 

‘Depending on this difference in Kamma appears the difference in the 
birth of beings, high and low, base and exalted, happy and miserable. 
Depending on the difference in Kamma appears the difference in the individual 
features of beings as beautiful and ugly, high-born or low-born, well-built 
or deformed. Depending on the difference in Kamma appears the difference 
in the worldly conditions of beings as gain and loss, fame and disgrace, 
blame and praise, happiness and misery. 

‘By Kamma the world moves, 
by Kamma men live, 
and by Kamma are beings bound; 

As by its pin the rolling chariot wheel. 

By Kamma one attains glory and praise, 

By Kamma bondage, ruin and tyranny. 

Knowing that Kamma bears fruit manifold, 

Why say ye, “ In the world no Kamma is ? 

(Samyutta Nik&ya, Vol. I, p. 227.) 

Thus, according to the Buddhist conception, our mental, intellectual, 
and moral differences are mainly due to our own actions and tendencies. 

Although Buddhism attributes this variation ohiefly to Kamma, yet it 
does not assert that everything is due to Kamma. In such a case there is no 
difference between Buddhism and some theistio religions which attribute 
everything to a single cause. Kamma is only one of the twenty-four conditions 
enumerated in the PaffAana. 

Refuting the erroneous view that ‘Whatsoever weal or woe or neutral 
feeling is expenenoed, all that is due to some previous action’, the Buddha 
states in the A&guttara Nikftya:— 

‘So, then, owing to a previous notion, men will beoome murderers, thieves, 
unchaste, liars, slanderers, babblers, oovetous, malioious, and perverse in view. 

it 



162 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


•n.-. fa, .hn. .ho fall b..k o, a. !om« *»j - *»,»“?■*¥ . 

i. neither deeire to do, nor effort to do, nor nooeeeity to do thm deed or .Mein 

from that deed. 5 

According to Abhidhammavatara there are five Niyimae or orders that 
prevail in the physioal and mental realm of which Kamma is one. 

They are : 

1. Kamma Niydma , order of action and result; e.g. good and bad 
deeds produce desirable and undesirable results respectively. 

Utu Niydma , physical (inorganic) order; e.g. seasonal phenomena 
of winds and rains, periodical bearing of flowers and fruits, etc. 
Blja Niydma , order of germs or seeds; e.g. similar seeds producing 
similar fruits, rice producing from rice-seed, sugary taste resulting 
from sugar-cane or honey, etc. 

4. Citta Niydma, order of mind; e.g. processes of consciousness (Citta 


2 . 


3 . 


vithi), etc. 

5. Dhamma Niydma , order of the norm; e.g. the phenomena occurring 
at the advent of a Bodhisatta in his last birth, gravitation, etc. 


Every phenomenon, mental or physical, could be explained by one of 
these five orders. 

This law of Kamma, it has to be admitted, can neither be proved nor 
disproved experimentally . 


What is Kamma ? 

The Pali term Kamma — Sanskrit Karma — literally means ‘action’. Any 
kind of action, whether mental, verbal or physical, is treated as Kamma. In 
its ultimate sense Kamma means good and bad volition (Kusala AkuscUa 


The Buddha says: ‘I declare, 0 Bhikkhus, that volition is Kamma. 
Having willed, one acts by body, speech, and thought.’ 

Every volitional action, except that of a Buddha and an Arahant, is 
called Kamma. The Buddhas and Arahants do not accumulate fresh Kamma, 
as they have destroyed all passions, the root of Kamma. They are delivered 
from evil and good. 

There is no Kamma where there is no consciousness (N&ma). Plants, for 
instance, do not accumulate Kamma. Nor is any action a Kamma which is 
unintentional, for Kam m a, as defined above, depends on the volition that is 
involved in the doing. Any deed which is devoid of willing and intention is, 
therefore, not regarded as Kamma. 

It is evident from the above that in the working of Kamma mind is the 
most important factor. All our actions, words, and thoughts afe tinged by the 
moral or immoral type of consciousness experienced at such particular moments . 
‘When the mind is unguarded, bodily action is unguarded, speech also is 
unguarded; thought also is tlaguarded. When the mind is guarded, bodily 
aotion is guarded, and thought also is guarded. ’ 
xxs 



KAMMA, OB TBM BU0DHI8T LAW Of CAUSATION 


m 


‘By mind the world is led, by mind is drawn: 

And all men own the sovereignty of mind.* 

* If one speaks or acts with an evil mind, pain follows one as the wheel, 
the hoof of the ox/ 

‘ If one speaks or acts with a good mind, happiness follows one as the shadow 
that never departs/ 

This immaterial mind is capable of producing tremendous changes in the 
external world. For instanoe, the most wonderful and powerful machines 
that tend to revolutionize the world today are the direct results of thoughts 
that originated in the minds of great thinkers. 

Xamvm and Vipdka. 

According to the Abhidhamma Kamma constitutes the twelve types of 
‘immoral consciousness, eight types of moral consciousness pertaining to the 
Sentient Realm (Kdmavacara), five types of moral consciousness pertaining 
to the Realms of Form (Rdpdvacara), and four types of moral consciousness 
pertaining to the Formless Realms (Arupavaeara ). 1 

The volitional activities of the supramundane consciousness (Lokuttara 
Citta) are not regarded as Kamma since they do not cause rebirth. They, on 
the contrary, tend to eradicate passions that condition rebirth. In the supra- 
mundane consciousness wisdom (PanOd) is predominant, whilst in the ordinary 
types of consciousness volition (Cetand) is predominant. 

The nine types of moral consciousness pertaining to the Realms of Forms 
and to the Formless Realms are the five Rupavacara and the four Arupavaeara 
Jhanas (Ecstasies). They are purely mental. 

Words and deeds are caused by the remaining twenty types of conscious- 
ness. Verbal actions are done by mind by means of speech. Bodily actions 
are by the mind through the instrument of the body. Purely mental actions 
have no other instrument than the mind. 

These twenty-nine types of consciousness are called Kamma because they 
have the power to produce their due effects (Vipdka) quite automatically, 
independent of any external agenoy. Just as every volitional activity is 
aooompanied by its due effect. 

Those types of consciousness one experiences as inevitable consequences 
of one’s good and bad thoughts are oalled resultant consciousness (Vipaka). 
The twenty-three types of resultant consciousness pertaining to the Sentient 
Realm, the five types of resultant consciousness pertaining to the Realms of 
Form and the four types of resultant consciousness pertaining to the Formless 
Realms are called the Vip&ka or fruition of Kamma. 

The external differences such as health, wealth, sickness, poverty, etc. 
are the Vip&kftBisaxpsa— consequences. 

A mango seed, for instanoe, is like the Kamma; mango fruit is like, the 
Vjpfcka, effect; the leaves and flowers are like the Vip&k&nisamsa. 


1 SMOompiftd ium of Phiiosophy, Ch. 1. 




164 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Kamma, therefore, does not necessarily mean only past actions ; it may be 
both past and present aotions. 

For instance, at the moment of giving something to the poor, I experience 
a good thought which will have its reaction at any opportune moment in the 
form of a gift from another. On receiving the gift I experience a good con- 
sciousness which is the result of the past good thought of mine. 

We plant a seed today. Sooner or later we will be able to reap its fruits. 
In the same way, according to the law of Kamma, every good and bad thought 
will produce its reaction when a suitable occasion arises. 

Kamma is action, and Vipaka, fruit, is its reaction. It is not fate. It is 
not predestination which is imposed on us by some mysterious unknown 
power, to which we must helplessly submit ourselves. It is one's own doing 
which reacts on one’s own self. It is a law in itself. In other words, it is a 
law of cause and effect in the ethical realm. 

We have, for instance, the freedom to put our hand into the fire or not. 
But when once we put our hand, the burning is inevitable. In the same way 
we have complete freedom to do any act, but the reaction is inevitable. 

Hence, it is as clear as daylight that the doctrine of Kamma is the very 
opposite of fatalism. This just doctrine holds that man can control his 
future by creating now what will produce good effects in the future. 

It is this doctrine of Kamma which the mother teaches her child when 
she says: ‘Be good and you will be happy, and others will love you. But 
if you are bad, you will be unhappy, and others will hate you.’ 

The Samyutta Nikaya says : 

‘According to the seed that’s sown, 

So is the fruit ye reap therefrom, 

Doer of good will gather good, 

Doer of evil, evil reaps. 

Sown is the seed, and thou shalt taste 
The fruit thereof . 9 1 

What is the Cause of Kamma ? 

This so-called ‘I’, which is composed of mind and matter, is compelled 
to act. It receives impressions from internal and external stimuli. Sensa- 
tions arise thereby, and owing to lack of right understanding resulting from 
latent Ignorance and Craving, one accumulates deeds which consequently 
produce rebirth in manifold states. 

Evil acts lead to misery, good acts lead to happiness. Nevertheless, 
good actions are necessary to escape this cycle of rebirth. 

A drowning man would tenaciously cling on to a corpse which, ordinarily, 
he would detest, and save himself. After his escape he would no longer cling 
to it but throw it away. Even so a person would do good to escape this cycle 
of birth and death. After gaining Deliverance he would no more acc umulate 


1 {tappers tbs Bflbtioal saytag, * As thou sowsst thou shalt rasp*. 


KAMMA, OB TH1 BUDDHIST LAW Of OIUSATIOH 


165 


fresh Kammie activities which produce rebirth. He will be beyond good and 
• evil. 

Not knowing things as they truly are does one accumulate Kamma. No 
Kamma is accumulated by him who has completely eradicated his craving 
and has understood things as they truly are. 

The Doer of Kamrm. 

Who is the doer of Kamma ? Who reaps the fruit of Kamma ? * Is it a 
sort of accretion about a soul, as is taught in Hinduism, which the soul, a part 
of the Divine Essence, builds about itself ? * 

Says the Venerable Buddhaghosa Thera in the Visuddhi Magga: 

‘ No doer is there who does the deed 
Nor is there one who feels the fruit ; 

Constituent parts alone roll on * 

In the ultimate sense (Paramattha Saccena) a Buddhist cannot conceive of 
any unc hang ing entity, any being in the form of a Deva, a man or an a n i mal . 
These external forms are merely the temporary manifestations of the invisible 
Kammie force. * Being ’ is only a term used for conventional purposes. Strictly 
speaking, what we call a ‘being’ is nothing but a mere composition of mind 
and matter. 

Matter, according to Buddhism, is merely a manifestation of foroes and 
qualities. Mind, too, is nothing beyond a complex compound of fleeting mental 
states. Each unit of consciousness consists of three phases — genesis (Uppfida), 
development (Thiti), and dissolution (Bhafiga). One unit of consciousness 
perishes only to give birth to another. The subsequent thought-moment is 
neither the same as its predecessor, because it is not absolutely identical, nor 
entirely another, being the same stream of Kamma energy. 

We Buddhists believe that there is no actor apart from action, no peroeiver 
apart from perception, or, in other words, no conscious subject behind 
consciousness. 

Who, then, is the doer of Kamma ? What experiences Kamma ? 

Volition or will (Cetand) is itself the doer. Feeling (Vedand) is itself the 
reaper of the fruits of Kamma. Apart from these mental states there is none 
to sow and none to reap. 

Just as, says the Venerable Buddhaghosa, in the case of these elements of 
a matter that go under the name of tree, as soon as at any point the fruit 
springs up, it is then said ‘the tree bears fruit ’ or ‘thus the tree has fructified* ; 
so also in the oase of groups (Khandas) which go under the name of Deva or 
man when a fruition of happiness or misery springs up at any point, then it is 
said ‘that Deva or man is happy or miserable’. Strictly speaking, there is 
neither a sower nor a reaper besides the volition and the feeling. 

Where is Kamma ? 

t 'Stored within the psyche (mind)’, says a oertain writer on psycho- 
analysis, ‘but usually inaccessible and to be reached only by some* is the 
whole record, without exception, of every experience the individual has ever 



166 


B. 0. LAW VOLVUt 


rased through every influence felt, every impression received. The >ub- 

JLiioJSi'. not only • 

retains th. ireprere of primeval impalsee Mid tMutaxw which »> for torn 
being outgrown as we fondly deem in civilised man, are subconsciously active 
and apt to break out in disconcerting strength at unexpected moments.’ 

Buddhists would make the same assertion but with a slight modification. 
Not stored within the psyche, would we say, for there is neither a reoeptacle 
nor a storehouse in this ever-changing complex machinery of man but depen- 
dent on the Five Groups (Paficakkhanda) or the flux is every experience the 
individual has passed through, every influence felt, every impression received, 
every characteristic, divine, human or brutal. In short, the whole Kamma 
force is dependent on the flux, ever ready to manifest itself in multifarious 
phenomena as occasion arises. 

‘Where, Beverend Sir, is Kamma?’ questions King Milinda from the- • 
Venerable Nagasena. 

‘0 Maharaja/ replies the Venerable N&gasena, ‘Kamma is not said to be 
stored somewhere in this fleeting consciousness or in any other part of the 
body. But dependent on mind and matter it rests manifesting itself at the 
opportune moment, just as mangoes are not said to be stored somewhere in the 
mango tree, but dependent on the mango tree they lie springing up in due 
season.’ 

Just as wind or fire is not stored in any particular place, even so Kamma 
is not stored anywhere within or without this body. 

Kamma is an individual force, and is transmitted from one existence to 
another. It plays the chiefest part in the moulding of character and explains 
that marvellous phenomenon of Genius. The clear understanding of this 
doctrine is essential for the welfare of the world. 


The Working of Kamma . 

The working of Kamma is not a subject which could be easily grasped 
by the ordinary intellect. Only a Buddha can fully comprehend this intricate 
law. In order to understand the working of Kamma it is necessary to get 
some idea of the process of consciousness (Citta Vithi) according to the 
Abhidhamma. 

The subject, the consciousness, receives objects from within and without. 
When a person is in a state of profound sleep his mind is said to be vacant, or, 
in other words, in a state of Bhavanga. We experience such a subconscious 
cftate when our minds do not respond to external objects. This subconscious 
state or the flow of Bhavanga is interrupted when objects enter the mind. 
The Bhavanga consciousness, which one always experiences as long as it is 
uninterrupted by stimuli, vibrates for two thought -moments ayd passes away. 
Then the consciousness of the kind that apprehends sensation (iPahcadvdrS- 
vajjana) arises and ceases. At this stage the natural flow is checked aqd 
turned towards the object. Immediately after which there arises and ceases 
visual oomciowmm (Cakkhu vififidna), but yet knows no more about it. This 



SAKHA, OB TH1 BUDDHIST LAW OF CAUSATION 


1 « 


sense operation is followed by a moment of reoeption of the object so seen 
(Sampaficchana). Next comes the investigating faculty (Saniirana) or a 
momentary examination of the object received. After this comes that stage 
of representative cognition termed the determining consciousness (Votthapana) 
on which depends the subsequent psychologically important stage — appercep- 
tion— or Javana. This Javana stage usually lasts for seven thought-moments, 
or, at times of death, five. The whole process which happens in an infinitesimal 
part of time ends with the registering consciousness (Taddlambam), lasting for 
two thought-moments. It must be understood that at this important apper- 
ceptional stage one does both good and bad Kamma. 

‘The simile of the mango tree may here serve to illustrate the above 
process. A man, lost in deep sleep, is lying at the foot of a mango tree with 
his head covered. A wind now stirs the branches, and a fruit falls besides the 
. sleeping man. He is in consequence aroused from dreamless slumbers. He 
removes his head-covering in order to ascertain what has awakened him. He 
sees the newly fallen fruit, picks it up and examines it. Apprehending it to 
be a fruit with certain constitutive attributes observed in the previous stage 
of investigation, he eats it, and then, replacing his head-covering, onoe more 
resigns himself to sleep. 

‘The dreamless sleep corresponds to the unperturbed current of the stream 
of being (Bhavanga). The striking of the wind against the tree is like the 
“past” life-moment, during which the object enters the stream and passes 
down with it, without perturbing it. The swaying of the branches in that wind 
represents the vibration of the stream of being. The falling of the fruit 
corresponds to the arrest or interruption of being, the moment at which the 
stream is “cut off” by thought; the waking of the man to the awaking of 
attention in the act of cognition on occasion of sense reaction of sight. The 
picking up of the fruit is comparable to the operation of receiving ; inspection 
of it recalls the examining function. The simple apprehension of the fruit 
as such, with certain constitutive attributives of its own, corresponds to the 
discriminative or determining stage ; the eating of the fruit resembles the act 
of apperception. Finally, the swallowing of the last morsels that are left in 
the mouth corresponds to the operation of retention, after which the mind 
subsides into more vital process, even as the man onoe more falls asleep.* 
(Compendium of Philosophy by S. Z. Aung, Introductory Essay, p. 30.) 

If, for instanoe, A hits 5, the latter will consequently experience some pain. 
This unpleasant sensation is the result of some past bad Kamma. If B is not 
a self-controlled person, he will, through his indiscrimination, engender 
thoughts of hatred towards A . The generating of those thoughts occurs in the 
Javana process. This doing of bad Kamma is his own, even if it be admitted 
that A acted as the cause, and he, too, did a bad Kamma on his part. Here 
comes the queltion of freewill in Buddhism. 

The evil effect of the first Javana thought-moment being the weakest, B 
may map it in this life itself. This is called ‘immediately effective* {Ditfkt i- 



168 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


If it did not operate in this life, the Kamma becomes ‘ineffective ’ (Ahosi). 

The next weakest is the seventh thought-moment. The evil effect of 
which B may reap in the second birth. This is called ‘subsequently effective’ 

( Upapajjavedaniya) Kamma. 

This too becomes ineffective if it did not operate in the second birth. 

The effects of the intermediate thought-moments may take place at any 
time until B attains Nibbana. The Kamma of this type is known as ‘in- 
definitely effective’ (Apardpariyavedaniya). 

The working of good Kamma is similar to the above. The effect of a good 
Kamma generally occurs in the form of a pleasant sensation. 

It is evident from this classification of Kamma that there are 
actions which may produce their due effects in this very life, or in a subsequent . 
life, or in any life in the course of one’s wanderings in Samsara. 

The above-mentioned classification of Kamma is with reference to the • 
time in which effects are worked out. 

The following classification is according to ‘function’. 

Every birth is conditioned by a past good or bad Kamma which pre- 
dominates at the moment of death. The Kamma that conditions the future 
birth is called Reproductive or Janaka Kamma. 

Our forms are but the outward manifestations of the invisible Kammic 
force. This all-pervading force carries with it all our characteristics, which 
usually lie latent, but may arise to the surface at unexpected moments. Hence 
it is difficult to judge another as long as one is a worldling. A person may 
safely be judged by the thought he experiences at a particular moment. As to 
his future one cannot definitely say. 

The death of a person is merely ‘the temporary end of a temporary 
phenomenon’. Though the present form perishes another form which is 
neither the same nor entirely different takes place according to the thought 
that was powerful at the death moment, as the Kammic force which propels 
the life-flux still survives. It is this last thought, which is technically called 
Reproductive Kamma, that determines the state of a person in his subsequent 
birth. This may be either good or a bad Kamma. 

Now another Kamma may step forward to assist or maintain the action of 
this Reproductive Kamma. Just as this Kamma has the tendency to 
strengthen the Reproductive Kamma some other action, which tends to 
weaken, interrupt, or retard the fruition of the Reproductive Kamma, may 
step in. Such actions are respectively termed ‘Supportive’ ( UpaUhambhaka ) 
and ‘Counteractive’ ( Upapidaka) Kamma. 

According to the Law of Kamma the potential energy of the Reproductive 
Kamma could be nullified by a more powerful opposing Kamma of the past, 
which, seeking an opportunity, may quite unexpectedly operate, just as a 
powerful opposing force can check the path of the flying arrow and bring it 
down to the ground. Such action is called ‘Destructive’ or UpaghiHaka 
Kamma, which Is more effective than the above two in that it not only 
obstructs but also destroys the whole force. 



KAMMA. OR THE BUDDHIST LAW OF CAUSATION 


169 


There is another classification of Kamma according to ‘the priority of 
effect’. The first is Qaruka which means weighty or serious. This Kamma 
which is either good or bad produces results in this life or in the next for 
certain. If good, it is purely mental as in the case of Jhdnas (Ecstasies). 
Otherwise it is verbal or bodily. The five kinds of Weighty Kamma are : 

’ (1) Matricide, 

(2) Parricide, 

(3) The murder of an Arahant, 

(4) The wounding of a Buddha, 

(6) The creation of a schism in the Saigha. 

Permanent Scepticism ( Niyata Micchdditthi) is also termed one of the 
•Weighty Kammas. 

If, for instance, any person were to develop the Jhdnas and later were to 
• commit one of these heinous crimes, his good Kamma would get obliterated 
by the powerful evil Kamma. His subsequent birth will be conditioned by the 
evil Kamma in spite of his having gained the Jhdnas earlier. 

In the absence of Weighty Kamma to condition the future birth, a Death - 
proximate (Asanna) Kamma might operate. This Kamma is that which one 
does immediately before the dying moment. Owing to the great part it 
plays in determining the birth much importance is attached to this death-bed 
Kamma in almost all Buddhist countries. The custom of reminding the dying 
man of his good deeds and making him do good deeds on his death-bed still 
prevails in Ceylon, Burma and other Buddhist countries. 

Sometimes a bad person may die happily and receive a good birth, if 
fortunately he remembers or does a good act at the last moment. This does 
not mean that although he enjoys a good birth he will be exempt from the 
effects of the evil deeds he accumulated during his lifetime. 

At times a good person may die unhappily by suddenly remembering an 
evil act of his or by harbouring some unpleasant thought, perchance compelled 
by unfavourable circumstances. Such unhappy ends are sometimes due to 
ignoranoe of the relatives who may molest or worry the dying person. 

As a rule the last thought-moment is conditioned by the general conduct 
of a person. However, it is always advisable to remind the dying person of 
his good deeds and turn his attention away from all worldly bonds and worries. 

‘Habitual’ (Acinna) Kamma is the next in priority of effect. It is the 
Kamma that one habitually performs and recollects and for which one has a 
great liking. 

Habits, whether good or bad, become second nature. They tend to form 
the character of a person. At leisure moments one often thinks of one’s 
habitual characteristics. In the same way at the death moment, unless 
influenced by other circumstanoes, one, as a rule, recalls to mind one’s habitual 
characteristics. 

A miser will instantly think of his gold and may not be able to detaoh his 
mind from his oherished possessions. A drunkard will be worried with his 
glass of liquor. A social worker will be interested in his social activities. A 



170 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


spiritual adviser will be always intent on his spiritual work. Thus we 
dominated by our habitual doings, especially at our death moments, in spite 
of the attempts of the friends and relatives to turn our attention otherwise 

The last category is the ‘ Cumulative 1 (Katatta) Kamma in which is included 
all that cannot be brought under the above-mentioned three. This is, as it 

were, the reserve fund of a particular being. 

The last classification is according to the place in which the Kamma effects 


transpire, namely: 

(1) Evil Kamma (Akusala) which may ripen in the Sentient Existence 

(KamaloJca). 

(2) Good Kamma (Kusala) which may ripen in the Sentient Existence. 

(3) Good Kamma ( Kusala ) which may ripen in the Realm of Form . 

(Rupaloka). 

(4) Good Kamma which may ripen in the Formless Realms (Arupaloka). • 


(1) Evil Kamma . — 

There are ten evil Kammas which are caused by deed, word, and thought. 
Three are caused by deed — namely : killing, stealing, and unchastity. Four 
are caused by word — namely: lying, slandering, harsh speech, and frivolous 
talk. Three are caused by mind — namely: covetousness, ill-will, and false 
view. 

Killing means the destruction of any living being. The Pali term used is 
Pana which means that which breathes. According to Abhidhamma Pana 
is the psychophysical life confined to a particular existence. The quick 
destruction of this life force without allowing it to run its natural or due 
course is Pdndtipdta. Animals are also included in living beings, but not plant 
life. In plants there is a kind of life born of heat but not that kind of vitality 
bom of Kamma found in men and animals. 

(2) Good Kamma which may ripen in the Sentient Existence: — 

There are ten moral actions — namely, generosity ( Dana ), morality (SUa), 
meditation ( Bhdvana ), reverence (Apacayara), service ( Veyyavacca ), trans- 
ference of merit ( Pattidana ), rejoicing in other’s merit (PaUanumodam), hearing 
the doctrine (Dhammasavana ) , expounding the Dhamma (Dhammactewna), 
straightening one’s views ( Ditthijju Kamma). 

These ten are sometimes treated as twelve. In which case 'Praising 
others' good works ’, and ‘ Taking the Three Refuges ’ (Sarana), and Mindfulness 
(Anussati) are used instead of straightening one’s views. 

(3) Good Kamma which may ripen in the Realms of Form : — 

(i) Moral consciousness of the first stage of Jhdna. This occurs 

together with initial application, sustained application, pleasur- 
able interest, happiness, and one-pointedness. 

(ii) Moral consciousness of the second stage of Jhdna'. This occurs 

together with sustained application, pleasurable interest, happi- 
ness, and one-pointedness. 



KAMMA, OB TH1 BUDDHIST LAW OF CADSATXOH 


in 


(iii) Moral consciousness of the third stage of Jh&na. This occurs 1 

together with pleasurable interest, happiness, and one-pointed- 

ness. 

(iv) Moral cohsciousness of the fourth stage of Jh&na. This occurs 

together with happiness and one-pointedness. 

(v) Moral consciousness of the fifth stage of Jh&na. This occurs 

together with equanimity and one-pointedness. 

These Jhanas have their corresponding effects in the Realms 

of Form. 

(4) Good Kamma which may ripen in the Formless Realms : — 

These are the four Arfipa Jhanas which have their corresponding effects in 
the Ariipa (Formless) Realms. 

(i) Moral consciousness dwelling in the infinity of space (Ak&sanah- 

cayatana). 

(ii) Moral consciousness dwelling in the infinity of consciousness 

( Vi&hamcayatana). 

(iii) Moral consciousness dwelling on nothingness (AkMcaiifiayatam). 

(iv) Moral consciousness wherein perception neither is nor is not ( Neva 

sahM Nasafimyatana). 

Nature of Kamma. 

Is one bound to reap all that one has won in just proportion? Not 
necessarily. In the AAguttara Nikaya the Buddha states: — 

£ If any one says, 0 Bhikkhus, that a man must reap according to his 
deeds, in that case, 0 Bhikkhus, there is no religious life nor is an opportunity 
afforded for the entire extinction of sorrow )(Dukkha). But if any one says, 

0 Bhikkhus, that what a man reaps accords with his deeds, in that case, 

0 Bhikkhus, there is a religious life and an opportunity is afforded for the 
entire extinction of sorrow.* 

In Buddhism, therefore, there is every possibility to mould one’s Kamma. 
Here one is not always compelled by an iron necessity. 

Although it is stated that neither in heaven, nor in the recesses of a cave, 
there is any place in the world where one could escape evil Kamma, yet one 
is not bound to pay all the past arrears of one’s Kamma. In such case no 
escape is possible. One is neither the master nor the servant of this Kamma, 
Even a most vicious person can by his own effort become the most virtuous 
person. We are always becoming something, and that something depends on 
our own actions. We may at any moment change for the better or for the 
worse. Even the most sinful person should not be discouraged or despised 
on acoount of his evil nature. We must have compassion on him for we must 
have also been in that same position at a certain stage. As we have changed 
for the better he may also change perhaps sooner than ourselves. Who can 
say what good Kamma he has in store for him ? Who knows his potential 
goodness? 



172 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Who thought that AAgulim&la, a highway robber and a murderer of more 
than a thousand of his fellow brethren, would become a Saint, judging him by 
his external deeds ? But he did become an Arahant and erased, so to say, all 
his past misdeeds. 

Who imagined that Alavaka, the fierce demon who feasted on the flesh 
of human beings, would ever become a Saint ? Yet he did give up his carni- 
vorous habits and attain the first stage of Sainthood. 

Who believed that Asoka who was stigmatized Canda, the wicked, on 
account of the atrocities caused by him to expand his empire, would ever win 
the noble title — Dhamm&soka or Asoka the Righteous ? But he did completely 
change his career to such an extent that today, ‘amidst the tens of thousands 
of names of monarchs that crowd the columns of history, their majesties and 
graciousnesses and serenities and royal highnesses and the like, the name of 
Asoka shines and shines almost alone, a star’. (H. G. Wells in his ‘Outline of 
History’.) 

These are a few instances to illustrate the fact that a complete reformation 
of character could be brought about by our own actions. 

It may also happen that in some cases a lesser evil may produce its due 
effect, while the effect of a greater evil may be minimized. 

The Buddha says: — 

‘Here, O Bhikkhus, a certain person is not disciplined in body, is not 
disciplined in morality, is not disciplined in mind, is not disciplined in wisdom, 
is with little good and less virtue, and lives painfully in consequences of 
trifles. Even a trivial evil act committed by such a person will lead him to 
a state of misery.’ 

‘Here, 0 Bhikkhus, a certain person is disciplined in body, is disciplined 
in morality, is disciplined in mind, is disciplined in wisdom, is with much good, 
is high-souled, and lives without limitation.’ 

‘A similar evil act committed by such a person ripens in this life itself 
and not even a small effect manifests itself (after death), not to say of a 
great one.’ 

‘It is as if, 0 Bhikkhus, a man were to put a lump of salt into a small 
cup of water. What do you think, 0 Bhikkhus ? Would now the small 
amount of water in this cup become saltish and undrinkable ? * 

‘Yes, Lord.’ 

‘And why?’ 

‘Because, Lord, there was very little water in the cup, and so it became 
saltish and undrinkable by this lump of salt.’ 

‘Suppose, 0 Bhikkhus, a man were to put a lump of salt into the river 
Ganges. What think you, 0 Bhikkhus? Would the river Ganges become 
saltish and undrinkable by the lump of salt ? ’ 

‘Nay, indeed, Lord/ 

‘And why not ?’ 

‘Because, Loyd, the mass of water in the river Ganges is great, and so it* 
would not become saltish and undrinkable.’ 



KAMMA, OR THE BUDDHIST LAW OF CAUSATION 


173 


‘In exactly the same way, 0 Bhikkhus, we may have the case of a person 
' who does some slight evil deed which brings him to a state of misery; or 
again, 0 Bhikkhus, we may have the case of another person who does the 
same trivial misdeed, and expiates in the present life. Not even a small 
effect manifests itself (after death), not to say of a great one.’ 

‘We may have, 0 Bhikkhus, the case of a person who is cast into a prison 
for a half-penny, penny, or for a hundred pence; or, again, 0 Bhikkhus, we 
may have the case of a person who is not cast into prison for a half-penny, 
for a penny, or for a hundred pence.’ 

‘Who, 0 Bhikkhus, is cast into prison for a half-penny, for a penny, or for 
a hundred pence ? ’ 

* ‘Whenever, 0 Bhikkhus, any one is poor, needy and indigent: he, 0 
Bhikkhus, is cast into prison for a half-penny, for a penny, or for a hundred 
pence/ 

‘Who, 0 Bhikkhus, is not cast into prison for a half-penny, for a penny, 
or for a hundred pence ? * 

‘Whenever, 0 Bhikkhus, any one is rich, wealthy, and affluent: he, 0 
Bhikkhus, is not cast into prison for a h^lf -penny, for a penny, or for a hundred 
pence/ 

‘In exactly the same way, 0 Bhikkhus, we may have the case of a person 
who does some slight evil deed which brings him to a state of misery; or again, 
0 Bhikkhus, we may have the case of another person who does the same trivial 
misdeed, and expiates in the present life. Not even a small effect manifests 
itself (after death), not to say of a great one/ 

Good begets good, but any after repentance on the part of the doer deprives 
him of due desirable results. 

In the working of Kamma it should be understood that there are malefi- 
cent apd beneficent forces to counteract and support this self-operating law. 
Birth (Qati) y time or conditions (Kdla), beauty ( Upadhi ), and effort ( Payoga ), 
are such aids and hindrances to the fruition of Kamma. 

If, for instance, a person is bom in a noble family or in a state of happiness, 
his fortunate birth will act sometimes as a hindrance to the fruition of his evil 
Kamma. 

If, on the other hand, he is bom in a state of misery or in an unfortunate 
family, his unfavourable birth will provide an easy opportunity for his evil 
Kamma to operate. 

This is technically known as Oafi Sampatti (Favourable birth) and Oati 
Vipatti (Unfavourable birth). 

An unintelligent person, who, by some good Kamma, is bom in a royal 
family, will, on account of his noble parentage, be honoured by the people. 
If the same person were to have a less fortunate birth, he would not be similarly 
treated. 

Beauty (Upadhi Sampatti) and ugliness (Upadhi Vipatti) are two other 
factors that act as aids and hindrances to the working of Kamma. 



174 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


If by « good ta. » p— ■ tom. * Vf - “>• 
drfonJ, b. A «* b. .bb •» toy «“ b °““ 

Even . legitimate heir te the tone may net perhap. be meed to that ajabnd 

position if he happens to be physically deformed. 

Beauty, on the other hand, will be a valuable asset to the possessor. A 
good-looking son of a poor parent will perhaps attract the attention of a kind 
person, and might be able to distinguish himself through his influence. 

Favourable and unfavourable time or occasion (Kola Sampattt and Kola 
Vipatti) are another two factors that aid or impede the working of Kamma. 

In the case of a famine all without exception will be compelled to suffer 
the same fate. Here the unfavourable conditions open up the possibilities for 
evil Kamma to operate. The favourable conditions, on the other hand, will • 
prevent the operation of evil Kamma. 

The fourth and the last is effort (, Payoga ). If a person makes no effort to 
cure himself of a disease or to save himself from his difficulties, his evil Kamma 
will find suitable opportunity to produce its due effects. If, on the other hand, 
he endeavours on his part to surmount his difficulties, his good Kamma will 


come to his succour. 

When shipwrecked in deep sea, the Bodhisatta Maha Janaka made an 
effort to save himself, whilst the others prayed to the gods and left their fate in 
their hands, the result was that the Bodhisatta escaped whilst the others got 
drowned. This is technically known as Payoga Sampatti and Payoga Vipatti. 

It is evident from these counteractive and supportive factors that Kamma 
is sometimes influenced by external circumstances. 

It is this doctrine of Kamma that gives consolation, hope, self-reliance, 
and moral courage to a Buddhist. 

When the unexpected happens to him and when he is beset with difficulties 
almost insurmountable and misfortunes almost unbearable, he consoles himself 
with the thought that they are the results of his own past doings. He realizes 
that the inevitable must happen. He no doubt reaps what he has sown; he 
can at the same time turn up the weeds and sow useful seeds in their place, 
for the future is entirely in his hands. Kamma enables him to shape his 
future as he wills. 

When the wicked are successful in every walk of life, whilst the virtuous 
meet with ill-luck and are compelled to lead a miserable life, a Buddhist would 
neither accuse another of injustice nor blame the world for its unjust ways, 
since he knows that they are only reaping what they have sown. The virtuous 
are thereby not discouraged because they are convinced that their good acts 
will have their due effects in some future life though not in the present. 

Even the most corrupted person is not condemned in Buddhism. On the 
other hand, ha is loved and shown the way to a perfect life. ,He is assured 
that he has the chance to reform and remodel himself at any moment. Though 
bound to Suffer in states of misery, he has the hope of attaining eternal Peace, 

A Buddhist who is fully convinced of the doctrine of Kamwi* does pot 
pray to another to be saved but confidently relies on himself for his salvation. 



KAJIMA, OB THE BUDDHIST LAW 07 OAtTSATtOH 


175 


It is this belief in Kamma that validates his effort and kindles his en- 
thusiasm. It is also this firm belief in Kamma that prompts him to refrain 
from $vil and to do good and be good without being frightened of any punish- 
ments or tempted of any reward. He has no fear of the future, nor does he 
dread so-called death. He is ever kind, tolerant, and considerate. 

This Law of Kamma explains the problem of suffering, the mystery of so- 
called fate or predestination of other religions, and above all the inequality of 
mankind. 

As stated earlier, it is a law in itself, but it does not thereby follow that 
there should be a law-giver. Ordinary laws of nature, like gravitation, need 
no law-giver. The Law of Kamma too demands no law-giver. It operates in 
. its own field without the intervention of an external, independent, ruling agency. 

Nobody, for instance, has decreed that fire should burn. Nobody has 
• commanded that water should seek its own level. No scientist has ordered 
that water should consist of H 8 0, and that coldness should be one of its pro- 
perties. These are their intrinsic characteristics. 

Inherent in Kamma is the power of producing its due effect. The cause 
produces the effect; the effect explains the cause. Seed produces the fruit; 
the fruit explains the seed, as both are inter-related. Even so Kamma and 
its effect are inter-related; ‘the effect already blooms in the cause 

Happiness and suffering which are the common lot of humanity are the 
inevitable effects of some cause or causes. There is no doubt of the fact that 
both happiness and suffering have their attendant curses and blessings and 
that they are essential. In that well-known fable the stag admired his horns 
and blamed his feet, but when the hunter came his swift feet saved him ; his 
beautiful horns, caught in a thicket, destroyed him. 

But why should these disparities exist ? Are they the ‘ rewards * and 
‘ punishments ’ of an Almighty Being who sits on an imperial throne in heaven 
above controlling the destinies of the human race. No, they are not. They 
are the due effects of our own good and bad deeds. Our good actions make 
us happy; our evil actions make us miserable. We ourselves are responsible 
for our happiness and misery. We are the architects of our own fate. We are 
our own creators. We are our own destroyers. We build our own heavens. 
We build our own hells. 

What we think, speak, and do, become our own. It is these thoughts, 
words, and deeds that assume the name Kamma and pass from life to life, 
exalting and degrading us in the course of our wanderings in Sams&ra. 

Says the Buddha: 

‘Man’s merits and the sins he here hath wrought: 

That is the thing he owns, that takes he henoe, 

Th^t dogs his steps, like shadows in pursuit. 

Henoe let him make good store for life elsewhere. 

Sure platform in some other future world, 

Rewards of virtue on good beings wait.’ 

0 Kindred Sayings ’-Vol. I, p. 98.) 



MUSLIM PATRONAGE TO SANSKRIT LEARNING 

By 

Me. Chintaharan Chakravarti, M.A., Krishnagar College, Nadia 

That the Muhammadans took a keen interest in Sanskrit literature is 
known from different sources. At the instance of various Muhammadan 
princes a good many Sanskrit texts were translated into Persian and indepen- 
dent treatises came to be written embodying accounts of different phases of 
Hindu culture . 1 The importance of these works in the history of Sanskrit 
literature is immense. Some of them deal with Sanskrit texts that are little- 
known or absolutely unknown at the present day. A critical investigation of 
these works by students of Sanskrit is therefore expected to bring to light, 
much valuable material. 

It requires, however, to be noted that the interest the Muhammadans . . 
took in Sanskrit was manifested through other channels as well. It is noticed 
that more than one Muhammadan ruler followed the example of old Hindu 
kings in honouring scholars versed in Sanskrit and providing material en- 
couragement towards their literary pursuits. It is significant that these rulers 
were not primarily actuated by the spirit of spreading Islamic culture and 
literature through the medium of Sanskrit. As a matter of fact no attempt 
appears to have been made, like the Parsis and the Christians who had their 
scriptures translated into Sanskrit, to get a Sanskrit version of the Koran or 
the teachings thereof . 2 * * * * * It would thus appear that their activities in this 
direction were the result of a sheer love of knowledge. It will be noticed 
that of works composed under Muhammadan patronage we find only secular 
works, e.g. poemB, dictionaries, grammatical works and works on music, 
erotics and astronomy some of which were influenced by Persian. 

A complete and systematic account of the various activities of 
Muhammadan princes in providing encouragement to Sanskrit scholars 
will be interesting. Documentary evidence in this connection is found 
scattered mainly in Sanskrit works many of which still remain unpublished. 
Some of the works contain passages written to eulogize Muhammadan rulers 8 

i Elliot, History of India , V, 570-6; J. J. Modi, King Alcbar and Persian Translations of 

Sanskrit Books , Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, V, 83-107 ; M. Z. Siddiqui, 
The Services of the Muslims to the Sanskrit Literature , Calcutta Review, 1933, 215-25; N. N. Law, 
Promotion of Learning in India during Muhammadan Rule (by Muhammadans), pp. 147-60, 185. 

It is also leamt from 6rfvara f s Rdjatarahgiiii (Pariti^ta), I, 5. 85*6, that Zain-ul -Abidin of 
Kashmir had also a number of Sanskrit works translated into Persian. 

* Of the few Sanskrit versions of Persian works mention may be made of drlvara’s Kathd. 
kautuka , a Sanskrit rendering of Jami’e story of Yusuf and Zuleikha (ed. KAvyam&la, Bombay) 
done for the satisfaction of Muhammad Shah of Kashmir. 

Two other works composed at the instance of Hindu chiefs may also be mentioned: 

(1) Viraratnatekharahkhd, a Sanskrit version of the Akhlak-i-Mohsini made ty Sahibram at the 
desire of Ra^avfrasixpha of Kas hmir . (2) Aravyay&min h a Sanskrit version of the Arabian 
Nights (JASB.,1928, p. 466). 

* Independent works are also known to have been written for the same purpose, e.g. 
Nab&bakh&nacarita {Dese. Oat . Sans. MSS. Ind. Office , 7804), BQjavinoda ( Catalogue Catalogonm , 

1, 402), etc. 



MUSLIM PATRONAGE TO SAN8KRIT LEARNING 


177 


either in gratitude for their patronage or with a view to attract their attention 
to secure the same. v It is up to students of Sanskrit literature, especially 
those, engaged in bibliographical studies, to record pieces of evidence as they 
meet with them in the course of their studies, so that a comprehensive account 
may be drawn up some day. 

Seven years back I presented the information gathered by me in the form 
of an article in Bengali published in the Sakitya Pari$at Patrikd (44, 39-46). 
This was followed by M. M. Patkar’s paper Moghul Patronage to Sanskrit 
Learning (Poona Orientalist , III, 164ff.) and recently by a book entitled 
Muslim Patronage to Sanskritic Learning ( Calcutta, 1942)by Dr. J. B. Chaudhuri. 
Fortunately enough all the three cover new grounds and have very little in 

• common. Since the publication of my paper in Bengali some fresh materials 
have come to my hands and I present them along with those in the previous 

# paper in an English form 1 so that they may reach the wide world of scholars 
who may be able to throw more light on the subject by way of supplementing 
facts and identifying some of the little-known chiefs left unidentified by me. 

Of the Muhammadan princes who honoured and patronized Sanskrit 
scholars we know of at least three who flourished as early as the first half of 
the fifteenth century. Malik Sa}uta Sahi or Malik Sarak Sulitan Sahi of 
Kada, near Allahabad, who was the son of Bahadur Malik, seems to have been 
a great patron of Indian music and the literature on it. He collected various 
Sanskrit works on music and assembled scholars from different directions 
making grants of lands and gifts of gold, cloth, etc. In 1428 A.D. this band 
of scholars at the bidding of the Sahi composed the little-known work, the 
Sangitadiromani * 

In Bengal Jelal-ud-din continued the policy of his father Raja Gane6a 
and demonstrated his appreciation of scholars like Brhaspati, a deeply learned 
man of the time. Brhaspati received six titles from him and there was a 
regular ceremony when the title Rayamukuta was conferred on him. 8 


1 In my paper I have generally omitted authors dealt with by Patkar and Chaudhuri (even 
though the names of some of them occurred in my previous paper) except when I have had some 
fresh materials to be recorded. For the sake of giving complete pictures of Akbar and Shajehan 
I have not, however, omitted Puiu^urlka and Gahgadliara, and have included Nityananda whose 
account is based on that given by Patkar. Incidentally reference may be made to authors treated 
by Patkar and Chaudhuri. Patkar refers to Ramacandra, Pundarlka, Sura Mi&ra, Garigadhara, 
NUakagtha and Kj^nadasa of the time of Akbar, Kf?na and Rudra Kavi of the time of Jehangir, 
Munl6vara, Bhagavatl Svaml, Nity&nanda and Ved&hgar&ya of the time of Shajehan, ISvaradisa 
and Raghun&tha of the time of Aurangzeb. Chaudhuri gives accounts of Bh&nukara, Akbariya 
K&lid&sa, Amjdadatta, Pundarlka, Jagannatha, Harin&r&ya^a, Vaip&dhara, Caturbhuja and 
Lakpnlpati of the courts of Sher Shah, Akbar, Shahabuddin, Burhan Khan, Shajehan, Shayasta 
Khan and Muhammad Shah. It will be seen that direct evidence is not available in every ease 
to prove the patronage. 

* stv uwirrerfwwn i 

«nwi i 

— Manuscript (No. 1713) belonging to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

* Descriptive Catalogue of Sans. MSS. Ind. Office, 11, 964-55. 




178 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Zain-ul-Abidin (1420-1469) of Kashmir was another great and reputed 
patron of this period. Besides getting Sanskrit works translated » 
to took pains to collect manuscripts for scholars at considerable 
also brought back scholars presumably driven away previously and gHmted 
stipends to them. 2 He himself listened to the recitation of the Yogavdbffha 

° f ^Besides these Mandana, the prime minister and P rotAg6 of Almas&hi, 
identified with Hoshang Ghori of Malwa (fifteenth century), oomposed the 
SrAgaramawlana, Kdvya °, Sdrasvata 0 and SaAgxta 0 in most of which the patron 


is referred to in glowing terms. 4 

Udayaraja, a court-poet of Muhammad Begarha, Sultan of Gujrat (1458- 
69), was the author of the Bdjavinoda, a poem in praise of the Sultan. 6 

We may next refer to Salem Shah, a contemporary of Humayun, who 
honoured Candrakirti, author of the grammatical work, the Sdrasvatapralcriyd 6 

It was about the same time that Sabaji Prataparaya (1500-1560 A.D.), 
author of the Para surd may rat dp a . Bhrguvamdakdvya, etc., flourished. He 
was a protege of Burlian Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar who conferred on Sabaji 
the title of Prataparaya. 7 


1 gMUWvvmfv i 

^O^iwrat ftint I — Srlvara’s Rajatarangini, 1, 6. 79. 

Previously Sikandar Shah is stated to have burnt the manuscripts and scholars fled with the 
manuscripts they had so that Kashmir was practically depleted of this cultural treasure. 

w w i 

jzftm grornf i 

irtt i 

wwnrt ^rrm: fkwilft B— grlvara, op. cit., I, 76-77. 



* wnf ^f^rsT fanrawq h 


xxm ^fwrm i 

WTWnPt iT?t^Trg I — Jonar&ja*s Rdjatararigiiii, 1048, 1060. 

* ifhfurm Tfir uw nftni ircwm i 

^T*TT I — &rlvara, op. cit., I, 6. 80. 

4 P. K. Gode, Jain Antiquary, IX. 91-94. 

6 P. K. Gode, Journal of the University of Bombay, IX. 101-16. 

• 


*T^| 



— Belvalkar, Systems of Sanskrit Grammar, p. 98, f.n. 2.. 
7 *4«noX# of the Bhandarkar Oriental Risearch Institute, XXIV, 156ff. 


I2B 



m 


MUSLIM PATBONAGE TO 8AK6KBIT LBAEH1KG 


But among these patrons the name of Akbar probably stands foremost. 
It was under the orders of Akbar S&hi that Gafig&dhara composed his Nitisdra* 
It was presumably at his instance that Pu^larfka Vifthala wrote the Nartana- 
nirnaya* The same scholar composed the Sadragacandrodaya under the 
auspices of Burhan Khan Faruki . 8 The A kbarasahifyfyaradarpana was also 
written under his orders by Padmasundara on whom great honour was bestowed 
by this illustrious Muhammadan ruler . 4 It was again Akbar who seems to 
have taken the initiative in disseminating the knowledge of Persian and to 
some extent the culture represented by it among the people of India. So he got 
Knpndasa to compile a Persian Grammar in Sanskrit entitled ParasipraJcaia 
and also a lexicographical work of the same name . 6 
. Various scholars received titles from him. He conferred the title of 
Jagadguru 8 on Narayanabhatta, a great scholar and author of many books, 

• who may not unlikely be identical with a scholar of the same name referred to 
in the Ain-i-AJcbarV Nrsimha, father of Raghunatha, author of the Muhurta- 
mala, received the title of Jyotirvitsarasa from him on the occasion of the 
occupation of the fort of Aseri . 8 This Nrsimha may be the same person as 
Narsing mentioned in the Ain-i-Akbari • Akbar is stated to have honoured 
and bestowed the title of Upadhyaya on Bhanucandra, author of an incomplete 
commentary on the Kadambari of Banabhatta . 10 Siddhacandra who completed 


1 Due. Cat. Sand. MSS. As. Soc. Beng., VII, 5505. 

< 

I— R. L. Mitra, Notices Sane. MSS., VIII, 2880. 
An account of the work in Bengali has been given by 0. C. Ganguli in the Haraprasada - 
samvardhanalekhamdld , I, 7-13. For a chronology of the works of Vifcthala cf. P. K. Gode, 
Journal of Music Academy, VI-VIII, Iff. 

* Introductory verses 7-8 of the edition of the work (Bombay, 1912). 

4 uwt wir wit riftowtw 

ftw <*g « wwA- i 
wtwwto <nrr*- 

WTWngT Tt Tfi ^ yiW t lll fW I I, 8 of the edition of the work published in the 
Ganga Oriental Series (Bikaner, 1943). AJso see introduction, p. xxii. 

4 Edited by Weber (Berlin, 1887). Detailed account in Ind. Ant. (1912, pp. 44ff,). One 
MS. of the lexicographical work is found in the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

mfluw t f ami 


I 

7 


— RASB Manuscript, 

Du c. Cat. Sans. MSS. As. Soc. Beng., Ill, Preface p. xxviii. 
Ind. Hist. Quart., XIII, 34. 


— Due. Cot. Sans. MSS. As. Soc. Beng., HI, p. 787. 


4 Ind. Hitt. Quart., XIII , 88. 

** wflt I — Introductory ver»». 

wflwrt i- colophon. 




180 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the work of Bhanucandra was the recipient of the title $usyuhuma (?) from 
him. 1 Nllakantha, the author of the Tajik , also is said to have received 
honours at his hands. 2 

The patronage of Jehangir, son of Akbar, was extended, among others to 
Govinda barman, 8 son of Nllakantha, author of the Tajik , to Ka vikarnaphra , 
who composed the Parasipadaprakada at his instance, 4 as also to Ke^ava Sarman 
and Raya Paramananda. Of the last two Ke6ava appears to have been 
honoured with the title Jyotisparaya 6 and Paramananda wrote the astro- 
nomical treatise JaMngiravinodaratnakara at the instance of Ttbar Khan 
evidently for the satisfaction of Jehangir. 6 

It is not known if Jehangir was a Sanskritist himself. A manuscript of 
Vamana’s Kdvydlankarasutra, however, has a seal on it bearing the name 
Salim. 7 This indicates that the manuscript belonged to and formed part of 
the library of Jehangir. 

Jehangir’s son Shajehan maintained the tradition of his father and grand- 
father. He was the patron of Kavindracarya, Jagannatha, Nityananda, 
Vedangaraya and Para^urama. He conferred the title Sarvavidyanidhana 
on Kavindracarya, a Sannyasin and a great scholar. It is stated that on one 
occasion the latter with a large following waited on Shajehan on behalf of the 
Hindu community to protest against the system of pilgrim tax levied on 
pilgrims visiting Benares and Allahabad. It was on this occasion that the 
title was bestowed on him by the King in recognition of his vast scholarship. 8 

The great Jagannatha obtained from this King the title Panditaraja 9 and 
it has been supposed that it was Shajehan who conferred on a veteran scholar 
named ParaSurama Misra the title Vanivilasaraya. 10 VedaAgaraya com- 
posed the Pdrasiprakdsa for his satisfaction. 11 It was at the instance of 


1 \HK l fH¥m?nftVIWT^---Colophon . 

2 Kane, History of DharmaSdatra, Vol. I, p. 422; Patkar, op. cit. 
2 Desc. Cat. Sans. MSS. As. Soc. Beng., HI, p. 708. 

4 i 



— MS. belonging to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

2 Desc. Cat. Sans. MSS. As. Soc. Beng., Ill, 2724. 

4 Annals Bhandarlcar Or. Research Inst., XXIV, p. 228. 

7 Kavindracarya List (Gaekwad’s Oriental Series), Foreword, p. iv. 

2 Ibid., p. v. 

* Concluding portion of 

Asafavildsa (Chaudhuri, Muslim Patronage to Sans. Learning, p. 118). 

10 Gopinath Kaviraj, Saraswati Bhavan Studies, II, 1-4. 


11 «wr ffWTW 


—MS. belonging to the Royal Arietta Society of Bengal. 



MUSLIM PATRONAGE TO SANSKRIT LEARNING 


181 


Shajehan and his minister Vasaf Khan that one Nityananda wrote an astrono- 
mical work, the Siddhdntasindhu, in 1628 A.D. 1 It should be noted that there 
is no reference to any royal patronage in another work of the same author, the 
Siddhantardja * composed in 1639 A.D. 

Reference may now be made to some later and less-known personages. 
Veitfdatta composed the Pancatattvaprakasa 8 under orders of the son of 
Mlramlra, who himself was the author of a Sanskrit dictionary called the 
Asdlatiprakdia written at the instance of Asalati Khan. 4 Kalyanamalla 
wrote the Anafajaratya , a work on erotics, for the satisfaction of Lad Khan, 
son of Ahmad Khan, an ornament of the Lodi dynasty. 6 

& abdaratnavall , a dictionary of synonyms and homonyms, was composed 
• by Mathure^a under orders of Mucha Khan, son of 16a Khan in 1666 A.D. 6 
One Haricarana Mallika is stated to have composed a poem in mixed Sanskrit 


The actual name of the author was Malajit, who got the title Veddngardya from the 
Emperor of Delhi, apparently Shajehan (Bhandarkar, Report on the Search of Sans. MSS. in the 
Bombay Presidency during the years 1882-83, p. 36). 

— Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute MS. No. 432 of A 1881-82 of the Oai^akamatyjUina 
of Nandikefivara, son of Vedahgaraya. I am indebted for the above extract to Mr. P. K. Gode, 
Curator of the Institute. 

1 Peterson, Desc. Cat. Sans. MSS. State Library , Ulwar , Extr. No. 600. 

2 Ibid., Extr. No. 696. 

wrfiw Jwrarof i 

Due. Cat. Sant. MSS. At. Soc. Beng., VI, 4709A ; R. L. Mitre, Notices Sant. MSS., VI, 1437. 

* vniroTOfirart* jfvrr aftntaurni i 

wwffrun wnB fir « 

<4 Vi 

— Aufrecht, Cat. Codicum Manuser. Biblio. Bodleine, Codices Sanskrilicos, 444. 

tmj&rro faawfammrej srftmv i 



nfti ft wmfi r yy iwmm vfn i 

— Introductory vertee 2-3 (Punjab Sanskrit 8eries, Lahore). 

• • Desc. Cat. Sane. MSS. Ind. Office, U t 101647; R. L. Mitra, Notices Sans. MSS., ITT, 1 106 ; 
Aufrecht, op. o it., 439*40. 



182 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and Prakrit adorned with rhymes and alliterations which earned him the title 
Ka^thabharana from a local chief called Hussain Khan . 1 

The interest taken by Muhammadans in Sanskrit is illustrated in .other 
directions as well. Sanskrit happened to have been adopted as an official 
language for some time at least by the Muhammadan rulers of Kashmir. 
Sanskrit inscriptions have been found on a number of Muhammadan tombs 
there. One of these on a tomb in the cemetery of Baha’u-d-din Sahib at 
Srinagar bears a date corresponding to A.D. 1484.® 

We know at least one Muhammadan of Bengal recording his achievements 
in Sanskrit. A stone inscription at Dhurail (in the district of Dinajpur) of 
1455 Saka era records the construction of a bridge by one Faras Khan, minister 
of ministers, the son of Nrraraja Khan, in the reign of Muhammad Shah.» 

We have not much information about Sanskrit written by Muhammadans 
themselves. The names of a few who are believed to have written in Sanskrit 
are given below. To Abdur Rahim Khan Khanan are attributed two interesting 
works composed in a curious language— a mixture of Sanskrit and Persian. 
These are the Khetakautulea * and Madandstalca* A hymn to the Ganges of 
some popularity in Bengal is attributed to Daraf Khan, identified with Jaraf 
Khan, who conquered Saptagrama in Bengal. 6 Several verses attributed to 
Sayesta Khan are found in the Rasakalpadrutna of Caturbhuja. 7 A Sanskrit 
letter of Dara Suko has been published recently. 8 The author of the Asdlati- 
prakdia already referred to may be a Muhammadan, the son of Miramira. 


1 mtw 

— Candraprabha of Bharata Mallika (Calcutta, 1299 B.S.), p. 24. 

• S tein, Kalhana's Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir, Vol. I, p. 130, f.n .2; Z.D.M.G., 
XL, 9; Jnd . Ant., XX, 153. 

• N. Sanyal, List of Inscr. in the Museum of the Varendra Research Society, Rajshahi, p. 14. 

• Venkateevar Stream Machine Press, Bombay, 1908. 

Cf. Rahimanvildsa and Rahimratndvali. I am indebted for this information to Prof. 
Makhamlal Roychaudhuri. 

• Journal As. Soc . Beng., Vol. XVI, 1847, pp. 393ff. 

7 J. B» Ghaodhuri, op. cit p. 90. 

• Adyar JBibrary Bulletin, Oct., 1940, May and Oct., 1943. It may not unlikely be the 
work of Kavlndrftc&rya in whose Kavindrakalpadruma it is found incorporated. Another work, 
a Sanskr it version of his Majma-'ul-Baharun under the title Samudrasafigama, may have been 
composed by Dara himself or by some Pandit under his supervision (P. K. Gode, Bhdrat- 
ItMsaJSamMhaka-Mat&tla Quarterly, vol. 94, pp. 75-88). 



‘BUDDHAKHETTA’ IN THE APADANA 
By 

Mr. Dwijendralal Bartta, M.A. 

It is both from chronological point of view and as a class of poetical 
composition, the Pali Apadana ranks with the Buddhavamsa and Cariyapitaka. 
According to the traditional enumeration of the Buddhist canonical texts, 
these are reckoned as the last three works of the Khuddaka Nikdya. Even 
from the doctrinal point of view the three works together show the Mahayana 
Buddhism in the making. The Buddhavamsa , as pointed out by Professor 
Barua, 1 lays stress on the panidhana (mental resolve) of the Bodhisatta to 
become a supreme type of Buddha and on the prediction made as to his success 
in future as Buddha Gotama by the twenty-four Buddhas of the past 
during whose dispensations he had been developing his moral being. The 
Cariyapitaka emphasizes upon the triple object of moral efforts (cariya), 
namely, doing good to oneself, doing good to one’s people, and doing good to 
the world at large, and appropriately illustrates the way in which the Bodhisatta 
was fulfilling the ten perfectionary virtues (paramis or paramitas), each in three 
degrees of intensity. The Apadana , on the other hand, is, with the exception 
of the two chapters, Buddhapadana and Paccekabuddhapadana, mainly 
concerned with narrating the previous lives of the Theras and Theris who 
attained arahantship and came to self-expression. It also divulges the dif- 
ference between the achievements of a Perfect Buddha, a Paeeekabuddha and a 
Perfect Disciple, all of whom are arahants, in respect of spiritual attainments, 
particularly the purity of their nature. It is, however, significant that the 
DIghabhanakas, as Buddhaghosa tells us, 2 * * did not include in their list of works 
of the Khuddaka Nikaya, these four books, now found in the Pali canon, 
namely, the Apadana , Buddhavamsa , Cariyapitaka and Khuddakapatha. 

The canonical Apadana was compiled as an appendix to the Thera- 
Therigdtha or Psalms of the Early Buddhists. The psalms of some of the 
Therls, e.g. that of Sumedha, as pointed out by Mrs. Rhys Davids and others, 8 
contain the elements of the Apadana legends. But the Apadana embodies the 
legends of many Theras whose psalms are not to be found in the Theragdthd , 
and does not include the legends of all the Therls whose stanzas find place in 
the Therigatha. The psalm of Theri Yasodhara, whose legend is contained in 
the Apadana , is, however, sadly missed in the Therigatha. 

The Apad&nas, ascribed to the Theras and Theris, connect the past 
existences of these Theras and Theris with the present. Thus they display 
at least the two main characteristics of the J&takas or Birth-stories of the 
Buddha, namely, the narration of the past life by the Thera or Theri con- 
cerned and the identification of the present hero or heroine with the past, 


1 See Barua’s article entitled ‘Mah&y&na in the Making’ in Sir Asutosh Mooherjee Silver 

'Jubilee Volumes (Oaloutta, 1927), vol. HI, part 3, pp. 168£f. 

. * 8 Sumatigalavil&sini, part I, p. 15. 

8 Psalms of the Sitters , Intro., pp. xvii fi. 



184 


B. C. LAW VOITTME 


and as suoh they may be treated, in a sense, as the J&takas of the Theras and 
Thetis including the Buddha himself . 1 The Apadanas nevertheless differ from 
the J&takas, as they are, lacking in moralizing spirit. Their whole stress is 
on the works of piety, such as the homage paid to a former Buddha or an 
offering made to him or a Buddha-shrine in the past creating an occasion for 
forming a mental resolve (pauidhdna) to become an arahant during the dis- 
pensation of Buddha ^akyamuni. Their mental resolve, which was, in one 
way or other, a kind of prayer (patthana or abhipatthana ), was augmented by 
the prediction made by a person of authority, namely a Perfect Buddha 
whom he or she pleased by worship or service ( adhikara ). 

The Buddh&padana, or the Tradition of the previous excellent deeds or 
services of the Buddhas, which forms the first chapter of the Apaddna, contains 
a vivid and charming description of the Buddhakhetta. Buddhakhetta is pre- 
cisely a synonym of Buddhabhumi , 2 * the land of the Buddhas. According to 
Buddhaghosa, the Buddhakhetta is of three kinds : that of his Nativity ( jatik- 
khettam ), that of his Ministry (dnakkJiettam), and that of his Omniscience 
(visayakkhettam). Of these, the last-named is infinite and boundless, where 
the Tathagata knows whatever he wishes (yattha yam yarn Tathagata akarikhati, 
tarn tamjanati ). 8 It has been said that the sphere of the Buddha’s omniscience 
is incomprehensible to others . 4 * 

The main interest of the Buddhapadana, it will be seen, centres round the 
romantic conception of the Buddhakhetta , an ideal land of art and beauty. 
It is an ideal educational institution, situated in the midst of the most beautiful 
and sombre natural surroundings, an eternal school, where, in the words of 
Professor Barua , 6 ‘every one is a teacher and every one a pupil’. Here the 
Buddhas question other Buddhas about their own sphere, the sphere of omni- 
science, and on matters, deep and subtle. The disciples, too, ask the Buddhas, 
and the Buddhas the disciples about things to be known by the disciples them- 
selves. They question each other, and they answer each other. The Buddhas 
and the disciples, the masters and the attendants, the shakers and the audience, 
the teachers and the taught, all are seekers after truth in this grand Temple of 
Learning. Frankly and rightly they do discuss the things for their self- 
edification. Skilled in the maintenance of constant self-possession, they dwell 
harmoniously and in peace, and exert themselves to know the unknown, to 
realize the unrealized, and to master over what they have not yet mastered. 
The sphere of knowledge being infinite and boundless, even the Enlightened 
Ones are eager to be more enlightened, nay to be most enlightened. 

This description of the Buddhakhetta is indubiously entirely a creation 
of fine poetic imagination, and its effect is idyllic. The whole poem is oom- 


1 See ‘ Pubbakammapiioti n&ma BuddhApadanaip ’ in Apaddna, vol. I, pp t 299-301. 

* Of. Buddhamipsa, chap, n, v. 175. 

• Vmtddhmagga, vol II, p. 414; Path o f Purity , vol. II, p, 481. 

* Cf. Dhammapada-Affhakathd, vol. II, p. 199: Buddhavisayo na cmtetabbo ; also Aik/uttara- 

N4bfya t vol U, p. 142; Buddhavatfua , I, 64; Mahdvamsa, XVII, v. 66; XXXI, v. 126. 

• Barua, Barhut, Bk. I {Stone as a Story-teller), p. 102. 


BUDDHAK.HETTA ’ IK TH® APADlNA 


185 


posed in exquisitely elegant verses in 6loka metre which gained popularity 
under the influence of the Rdmayana. It is only the first two chapters of the 
Buddfuivamsa which bear comparison with it in respect of the imagery, the 
vividness of description, and the impressiveness of the theme itself. In the 
poetic conception of the Buddhalchetta , was forestalled the later Mahayanic 
idea of Sukhdvati , the glorious land of Buddhist Paradise. It may be noted 
that the Apadana of Sariputta gives us a similar description of the earlier 
A^rama institution (assamapada) of the hermit teachers in the midst of which 
stood the leaf-hut (pannasald) or simple cottage which has been replaced in the 
Buddhapadana by a magnificent edifice (pasada). Though the description of 
this edifice as a great model of architecture is confessedly imaginary and 
, idealistic, one cannot gainsay that in its substratum there were actualities. 

Besides instructions given by the Buddha to his disciples and followers, 

• monks and laymen, the Buddhist canonical texts contain instances of the chief 
disciples of the Buddha holding discussions with each other on various topics. 
Thus in the Anangana Sutta} Moggallana interrogates Sariputta regarding the 
‘undefiled’. The 1 Rathaviriiia Sutta 2 records a conversation between Sariputta 
and Punna Mantanlputta as to the nature of Nibbana which is compared to a 
journey of King Pasenadi from Savatthi to Saketa, by means of relays of seven 
chariots. The Mahdvedalla Sutta 8 also records a series of questions, asked by 
Mahakotthita and answered by Sariputta, on psychological topics, e.g. under- 
standing, consciousness, feeling, perception, etc. On other occasions, Sariputta 
is questioned by Mahakotthita as to kamma} yonisamanasikdra 8 avijjd and 
vijjaf the fetters of sense -perception, 7 certain things pronounced by the 
Buddha as indeterminate, 8 the six spheres of contact,® and the purpose for 
which bhikkhus lead the brahmacariya life. 10 Sariputta also questions 
Mahakassapa on the terms atapi and ottapl , n and Anuruddha on sekha , 12 and 
Upavana on bojjhanga. 1 * Again, Ananda is mentioned as questioning Sariputta 
regarding sotapatti , 14 and as to the reason why some beings are set free in this 
very life while others are not, 16 the speedy knowledge of aptness in things 18 
(ku8aladkainme8u khippanisanti ), and how a bhikkhu may learn new doctrines 
and retain old ones without confusion. 17 , 

An English rendering 18 of the Buddh&pad&na is, for the first time, given 
below so as to draw attention of the Indologists to this piece of composition 
which stands out as a striking specimen of early Buddhist poetry. 

i Majjhima-Nikdya, vol. I, pp. 25ff. * Ibid., pp. 145ff. 

a pp. 292ff. 4 Saipytttta-Nik&ya, vol. II, pp. 112f. 

* Ibid ,, vol. HI, pp. 178f. 1 Ibid., pp. 172f. 

7 Ibid., vol. IV, pp. 162f. * Ibid „ pp. 884f. 

* AriguUara-Nikdya, vol. H, p. 161 . 10 Ibid., vol. IV, p. 382. 

11 SamyuUa-Nihiya, vol. II, pp. 195£f . 18 Ibid., vol, V, pp. 174f., 298f. 

18 Ibid., p. 78* 14 Ibid., pp. 346, 362, 

14 Anguttara-Nibdya, vol. 11, p. 167. 18 Ibid., vol. IH, pp. 201f. 

17 Ibid,, p. 361 ; cf. also Malalaaekera, Dictionary o] Pali Proper Names, s.v. S&riputta. 

• 18 Much of what was meant to be signified may be missed by the reader in the translation 
partly for want of a commentary to guide the present translator, and partly due to his unfamiliarity 
with the technical details of Indian architecture. 



186 


b. c.'law volumb 
BuddhapadZna 

THE TRADITION OF THE PREVIOUS EXCELLENT DEEDS OF THE BTJDDHA8 

Translation 

T. Now, with a pure mind, attend to the Tradition of the previous 
excellent deeds of the Buddhas, the innumerable kings- of righteousness, 
replete with thirty Perfections. 1 

2. To the supreme enlightenment of the best of the Buddhas, to leaders 
of the world together with their Orders, I bowed down paying homage with 
joined hands. 2 

3. In the Buddha-realm, as many as are there the numerous jewels, 
both in the heaven above and on the earth below, I brought all to my mind. 

4. There on a silvery ground, I built a palace, many storied, jewelled, 
raised high to the sky, 

5. Having ornamented pillars, well executed, well divided and arranged, 
costly, a mass of gold, decorated with arched gateways and canopies. 

6. The first storey was of lapis lazuli, shining like a bright piece of 
cloud; there were (the presentations of) lotuses and lilies 3 strewn over in the 
excellent golden storey. 

7. Some (of the storeys) was of corals, some having coral-lustre, some 
shining red, while others resembling the Indagopaka -colour, 4 * illumined the 
quarters. 

8. They had doors, portals and windows well divided and arranged, four 
net-works of vedikas 6 and a delightful perfumed enclosure. 

9. And they were provided with the excellent peaked roofs — blue, 
yellow, red, white and bright black — and decorated with seven varieties of 
jewels. 

10. They had (devices of) lotuses of graceful looks, and were beautified 
by (the figures of) beasts and birds of prey, filled with (the presentations of) 
planets and stars, and adorned with (those of) the moon and sun.® 

11. They were covered over with a golden netting joined with the golden 
tinkling bells, and the lovely golden garlands (on them) sounded musically by 
the force of the wind. 

12. Festoons of banners, raised on them, were made lovely by various 
colours— crimson, red, yellow and gold-coloured. 


1 They consist of the ten principal virtues of Perfection ( pdrami ), such as, Ddna, SUa, and 
the rest, each in three degrees of intensity, including the ten minor virtues {upapdram l) f and 
the ten virtues in their ultimate sense (paramatthapdraml) ; for details, see Cariyd*Pifakatfha- 
kaihd 9 pp. 320f. 

* lit. ‘(with) the ten fingers’. 

8 Lit. ‘bom in* or sprung from, water t 

4 Indagopaka is ‘a sort of insect, observed to come out of the ground after rain’, cf. Pali- 
English Did. (P.T.S.), s.v. 

• Lit. ‘railings', ‘balustrades of tbe projecting windows', see Dialogues of the Buddfo, 
vol* II, p. 210; Mahdvamsa Transit pp. 220, 296. 

* • For similar representation, cf. Mah&vaipsa, chap. XXX, w. 62-97. 




‘BUDDHAKHETTA’ IN THE APADlNA 


187 


13. Diverse, numerous, many hundreds were the slabs, made of silver, 
of jewels, of rubies, and also of emeralds. 

li. The palace was resplendent with various beds, and covered with 
soft Benares fabrics, rugs, silk made of the Dukula-fibre, China cloth, 1 fine 
cloth, fibrous garments, 2 * whitish 8 garments, 4 * and all this manifold covering 
I spread out there in my mind. 

15. Adorned with jewelled peaked roofs in different storeys (the palace) 
stood firm, bearing torches shining like gems. 

16. The wooden posts and pillars and the beautiful golden gates, made of 
gold brought from the Jambu river, of excellent (sara) wood, and also of silver, 
shone forth. 

17. Divided and arranged into many breaks 6 and resplendent with 
doors and cross-bars (the palace had) on both sides many full vases filled with 
red, white and blue lotuses. 6 

18. All the Buddhas of the past, the leaders of the world, together with 
their Orders and disciples, I created in their natural beauty and appearance. 

19. Entering by that entrance, all the Buddhas together with their 
disciples — the circle of the elect — sat down on golden seats. 

20. The pre-eminent Buddhas that are now in the world, those of the 
past and present, I brought them ail into the mansion. 

21. Many hundreds of Paccekabuddhas, self-enlightened and invinoible, 
those of the past and present, I brought them all into the mansion. 

22. Many wishing trees, divine and earthly, there were; I procured all 
garments and covered (them each) with three robes. 

23. Filling the beautiful jewelled bowls, I offered (them) ready-made food, 
hard and soft, eatable and savoury, as well as drink and meal. 

24. Procuring divine garments, I provided them with robes of fine cloth; 
I entertained the whole circle of the elect with best food and (the four) sweet 
drinks of sugar, oil, honey and molasses. 

25. Entering the jewelled chamber, they, like lions lying down in caves, 
lay down in a lion’s posture 7 on costly beds. 

26. Mindful they rose and sat down cross-legged; they gave themselves 
up to delight in meditation on the way 8 of all the Buddhas. 

27. Some preached the doctrines, some sported by their supernormal 
power, some who had gained mastery over and developed the higher psychic 


1 Cf. Buddhavaijua , chap. XXIV, v. 11. 

* Cf. Patron%& in Kaufxliya ArthoMrtra, ii, 11. 

• Cf. Paurfraka in ibid., ii, 11. 4 Cf. Patpvarak&b in ibid., ii, 11. 5 Sandhi. 

• For a la tej description of pdsdda, cf. Mahdvaffna, chap. XXVII, w. 24-41 ; ThQpavatfita, 
pp. 67f. 

* i.e. on the right tide. 

* 1 Oocara. Lit., ‘ pasture \ search after food; here it evidently implies search for mental 

food. A suitable Oocaragdma is, however, mentioned, as one of the seven desiderates for one 

intent on meditation, see Vituddhimagga, p. 127. 



188 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


perception, applied themselves to it, while others numbering many hundred 
thousands worked transformations of themselves by their supernormal 
power. 

28. The Buddhas, too, questioned (other) Buddhas on points relating to 
omniscience, and comprehended by their knowledge matters, deep and subtle, 

29. The disciples questioned the Buddhas, the Buddhas questioned the 
disciples ; they questioned each other, to each other did they explain. 

30. The Buddhas, the Paccekabuddhas, the disciples and attendants, 
enjoying thus their delightful pursuits, rejoiced at the palace. 

31. ‘May they hold over head (each) an umbrella, embroidered with gold 
and silver nets and gems, and fringed with nets of pearls ! 

32. May there be awnings, resplendent with golden stars, variegated, and 
having flower-wreaths spread over (them) ; may they all hold them over head ! 

33. Be (the palace) laid out with wreaths of flowers, fragrant with rows 
of perfumes, strewn over with festoons of garments, and bedecked with strings 
of jewels ! 

34. Be it strewn over with flowers, much variegated, incensed with sweet 
perfumes, marked with five-finger marks of perfumes, and covered over with 
a golden covering. 

35. On four sides, be the tanks covered over with lotuses — red and white 
and blue ; be that these having lotus-pollens coming out, appear in golden hue ! 

36. All trees be blossomed around the palace, and let them drooping 
themselves sprinkle perfumed flowers over the mansion. 

37. Let the crested (peacocks) dance there, divine swans utter melodious 
sounds. Let the Karavika birds, 1 too, sing out and the flocks of birds be on 
all sides . 

38. Let all drums be sounded, all lutes be played. Let all varieties of 
music go on around the palace. 

39. As far as the Buddha-realm, and above the horizons of the world, 
magnificent, lustrous, faultless and jewelled, 

40. Let the golden divans be ; let candlesticks * be lighted, and the ten 
thousand (worlds) in succession be of one lustre. 

41. Let also courtesans, dancers and celestial nymphs dance, and various 
theatres be staged around the palace. 

42. On tree-tops, mountain-tops, or on the summit of the Sineru 
mountain, 8 let me raise all manners of banners, variegated and five-coloured. 

43. Let men, Nagas, Gandhabbas 4 and gods, all approach them paying 
homage with joined hands, and surround the palace.’ 


* Identified with Indian Cuckooes. 

* Lit. ‘Treee of lamps’; see Buddhavarjiaa, I, 45 ; cf. also ' dipasttambka of Lulian archaeology, 
or “ branched candlestick ” in the Bible as noted by Dr. B. C. Law in his translation of the 
Buddhavcupsa. 

* Skt. Suxneru. 

* Gandhabbas (Skt. Gandharvas), as a class, belong to the demigods who inhabit 'the 
C&tummab&r&jiki realm. 




‘BTJDDHAMETTA’ IK THE APADlKA 


189 


44. Whatever good deed done, ought to be done, or intended to be done 
by me, I did it well by body, speech and mind in (the abode of) the Thirty. 1 

45. ‘The beings who are conscious or unconscious, let all share in the 
result of the meritorious deed done by me. 

46. To (them) whom the result of the meritorious deed done by me has 
been offered, it is (thus) made well known. And to those who do not know of 
it, the gods should go and report. 

47. In the whole world, the beings that live but for the sake of food, 
let them obtain all manners of agreeable food by my heart’s wish.’ 

48. Mentally I offered the gift, mentally I brought the palace. I did 
homage to all the supreme Buddhas, Paccekas and disciples of the conquerors. 

49. By that meritorious deed, will and resolve, I, abandoning the human 
body, went up to the Thirty-three. 

50. I have come to know (only) of the two existences, divine and human; 
no other destiny have I experienced — this is the fulfilment of my mental wish. 

51. I have been superior to the gods, I have become the lord of men. 
Endowed with beauty and appearance, I am incomparable in the world in 
respect of wisdom. 

52. Food of various kinds and best, jewels not inadequate, and garments 
of all fashions come to me quickly from above (lit. the sky). 

53. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 
1 stretch forth my hand, divine eatables come to me. 

54. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever I 
stretch forth my hand, all varieties of jewels come to me. 

55. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 
I stretch forth my hand, all kinds of perfumes come to me. 

56. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 1 
stretch forth my hand, all kinds of vehicles come to me. 

57. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever I 
stretch forth my hand, all kinds of garlands come to me. 

58. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 
I stretch forth my hand, (all manners of) decorations come to me. 

59. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 
I stretch forth my hand, maidens of all descriptions come to me. 

’ 60. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever I 

stretch forth my hand, come (to me) honey and sugar. 

61. On earth as well as mountain, in the air, water and wood, wherever 
I stretch forth my hand, all varieties of solid food come to me. 

62 . To the poor and needy, to the professional and street-beggars, what- 
ever exoellent gift I made, (it was) for the attainment of the Enlightenment 
par excellence. 

63 . While making mountains and rocks roar, dense forests thunder, this 
world and heaven joyous, I have become a Buddha in the world. 

I It is the found figure for thirty-three, end is used as equivalent to the T&vatixpsa heaven; 
ef. Pciavatthu, iii, 1; Vmdmvaahu, 18. 30. 


190 


B, C. LAW VOLUME 


64 . In this world, tenfold is the direction of which there is no end, 
and in that direction are the innumerable Buddha -realms. 

65 . My halo is described as shooting forth rays in pairs ; let the blaze of 
rays between them be of great effulgence. 

66. In such world-system, let all persons see me, let all be joyful, and 
let all follow me. 

67. Let the drum of immortality be beaten with reverberating sweet- 
sound; in the midst of it let all persons hear my sweet voice. 

68. While the cloud of righteousness showers, let all be free from the 
defilements; let the lowest of beings be (at least) the Stream -winners. 

69. Giving away the gift worthy to be given, I fulfilled the precepts 
entirely, reached perfection in the matter of renunciation, and obtained the. 
Enlightenment par excellence. 

70. Questioning the wise, I put forth the best energy, reached perfection •< 
in the matter of forbearance, and obtained the Enlightenment par excellence. 

7 1 . Intent on truth , I fulfilled the perfection of truth ; reaching perfection 
in friendliness, I obtained the Enlightenment par excellence. 

72. In gain and loss, in happiness and sorrow, in respect and disrespect, 
being unperturbed under all vicissitudes, I obtained the Enlightenment par 
excellence. 

73. Viewing idleness from fear, and energy from peace, be energetic — 
this is the command of the Buddhas. 

74. Viewing dissention from fear, and amity from peace, be united and 
kindly in speech — this is the command of the Buddhas. 

75. Viewing indolence from fear, and diligence from }>eace, cultivate the 
eightfold path — this is the command of the Buddhas. 

76. Assembled (here) are many Buddhas and Arahants from all quarters ; 
to the supreme Buddhas and Arahants pay homage and bow down. 

77. Thus are the Buddhas incomprehensible, and incomprehensible are 
the qualities of the Buddhas and incomprehensible is the reward of those 
who have faith in the incomprehensible. 1 

Thus the Blessed One, while developing his own Buddha-life, related the 
religious discourse, called the Tradition of the previous excellent deeds of the 
Buddhas,* 


1 Of. MaMwmaa, chap. XVII, v. 56; chap. XXXI, v. 125. 

* Buddhdpaddna means the previous deeds of the Buddha#, their difficult tasks of the past, 
and the Buddhdpaddniya is so called because (the tradition of) these excellent deeds or services 
is handed down and preached by the Buddhas. 

‘ Buddhdpaddniya^ ndmd ti Buddhdnam purdtanakommatfi , por&ryarp dukkarakiriyam 
adhiMcoappavattattfi dentaUd Buddhdpaddniyan ti evann&maka^:^a^ 
p. 836. 



KALIDASA’S KUNTALEI&VABA DAUTYA 


By 

Db, V. Raghavan, M.A., Ph.D. 

We find in Bhoja’s S.K.A ., 1 II, p. 168, a verse with the following comments 
given as an illustration for a second variety of the 6abdalamkSra called 
Pathiti, in which a verse gives another meaning by the mere change of a main 
word, or the case (Vibhakti) only. 

uiftrat (*mi ««««.«) — 

TjTfwsrifa «wi 



wfir jwwwv'ln: i 

nant trrfaRrewft 

iraft i— S.K.A., p. 168 . 

According to this comment by Bhoja himself, some speaker pleads to some- 
body on behalf of the King of the Kuntalas ; and the person addressed gives 
the same verse as reply, changing ‘Tvayi’ into ‘Mayi’ thereby permitting 
the request asked for. 

This verse occurs in a similar context in Bhoja’s &r. Pra . 2 where Bhoja 
gives it while illustrating Uha naiyayiki vyapeksa, i.e. simply Uha. For- 
tunately, Bhoja gives in the &r. Pra. some more details about the speaker 
and the person addressed by him : 

TO* ^ipr^— 

fwfa fvprrart 

*v - ^ 

SPfnWT 5<ij*re 

-6f. Pra., Vol. H, Ch. VIII, p. 79. 

The 6f. Pra. iif a later work of Bhoja, written with greater care, pains and 
knowledge of other works. It is therefore likely that Bhoja corrects himself 


\ S.K.A. Saraevatikaitfhibharai^a of Bhoja : K&vyamilA edn. 

2 Pra. df&gira PrakMa of Bhoja: MS. in the Madraa Govt. On. MSS. Library. 




192 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


in the Sr Pra Perhaps, while he was quoting the verse and commenting 

on it in his S.K.I.. he we, quoting the v«» from h«»y. W. Mjm. 

whether even in the U Pre. Bboje .. quotog from the work 

for we know him already as having borrowed considerably from RfijaSekhara; 

and RajaSekhara it is who is our first writer to quote this verse 

etc. Rajasokhara gives it to illustrate the Harana of a part of a Pada, 

reproducing another’s verse itself with only the change of just a part of the 

word. 

r+idwtcT 'ajTfrrarcfa mm 

fq«fa fsnmnt 

<qfu fsrWrcTHTu: grwiMwcTtiP i 
w Thruir— 


yfh ii ” 

— Kavyamimamsa, Gaekwad edn., pp. 60-61. 

Here f qqfa changed into frnPJ is change; and wfh into Jffa is a 

change only of the q gfa , the locative being in tact. Thus this is a case of 

In the three texts from which we have above quoted, the S.K.A. and 
the 6r. Pra. of Bhoja, and the Kavyamimamsa of R&ja6ekhara, we have 
variations in most vital words. S.K.A. reads fawg the Sr. Pra. on the 
other hand substitutes and corresponding to it, we have the intro- 
ductory remark of Bhoja, fa qpftfa ffa faaprTfai*r W A qnftfa 

in the question must bring forth the answer of ftnrffl, and fqqg can be 
justified only when we know more about the contents of this Kavya and the 
mission on which Kalidasa went. The $r. Pra. further makes Vikramaditya’s 
reply faffa which can be understood only with a questioning K&ku. 
The Kavyamimamsa reads the speech of Kalidasa like the 6r. Pra. 
ftffa wfa and the reply of Vikramaditya like the S.K.A. fipqj sifa In tJfe 
face of such variation, we are not able to decide which is correct. 

If SJLA.’s readings are correct, the King of the Kimtalas was inferior 
and subordinate to Vikramaditya, who perhaps sent his poet K&lid&sa to the 
Kuntalas and see how he was conducting himself. K&lid&sa perhaps smoothens 
the strained relations and pleads with Vikrama on Kuntala’s behalf to allow 
him to enjoy himself. This Vikrama consents to. If 6jr. fra. is correct, 
K&lid&sa must be understood to reveal to Vikrama that Kuntala is carefree 
and is merry with his wives, at which Vikrama is either glad or is surprised. 
No clue to this personal relationship between the two kings is found here. 
The verse may yield the inference that very friendly relations existed between 



193 


K£LZD1SA'S pCXTKTAIJSVilU VAVTYA 

the paramount power of Vikrama and the subordinate Kuntala; Kalidasa 
was at the latter's court for no great purpose, except to be his court-poet for 
some time. On his return Vikrama asks about Kuntala generally and the 
poet eulogizes the King by this verse, in which Vikrama's valour is extolled. 
Vikrama is so powerful and protects the kingdoms of his vassals also, that the 
vassals, shifting the burden of protection to the sovereign, give themselves 
up to pleasure. In the Kavyamimamsa, the reading fipr<J fffif in Vikrama’s 
reply may mean '01 let him be enjoying'. To make any definite statement, 
we must have a surer textual authority, and not such a text which varies in 
each quotation of it. The only facts that we gather from the quotation in the 
St. Pra. are that poet Kalidasa came from Kuntala to Vikramaditya and that 
• the former was a smaller power. We cannot even infer from this that it was 
Vikrama who was the first patron of Kalidasa or that he sent Kalidasa on an 
embassy to Kuntala, and that this verse was spoken by Kalidasa on his return 
to Vikrama’s court. When we stand perplexed in this manner, Ksemendra 
promises to give us some help to clarify the matter a little more. In his 
Aucityavicaracarca he seems to tell us that poet Kalidasa wrote a poem 
called KuntaleSvaradautya, ‘Embassy to the king of Kuntala’, that he was the 
court-poet of Vikramaditya, the suzerain power, that he went as an ambassador 
to the court of a subordinate power, viz. that of the King of Kuntala, that 
he was not at once properly honoured, that he preferred to squat on the 
ground, and when, perhaps, asked to rise up and take a seat, he gave out a 
magnanimous verse that one should value sitting on Mother Earth more than 
on any other seat. 

n faftfvwcn tfiror: *rn ^ i 

I — Kavyamala Gucchaka, I, pp. 139-140. 

Firstly, one may be tempted to doubt that Kalidasa is simply a character 
in a piece called KunteSvaradautya, he is the speaker of this verse as^reTOV*, 
character in the story, and that he is not the poet-author of the Kuntesvara- 
dautya. But it must be borne in mind that Ksemendra is citing the names 
of poets and criticizing or complementing them and therefore it is not possible 
to make K&lic&sa only a character in the theme. Secondly, it may be urged 
that it is not clear that Kunte£var&dautya is a poem written by Kalidasa ; 
R&lid&sa perhaps did go on an embassy from Vikrama to Kuntala, but he 
might not have recorded his embassy in a poem also afterwards; his embassy 
*3 



194 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


was part of the facts people knew of the poet’s life and he spoke a few verses 
in Kuntala’s court and again at Vikrama’s ; all that remains of this embassy 
is some verses, some Muktakas relating to this embassy, current in tradition. 
Two of these verses are Ksemendra’s f? frdtfffT, etc. and etc. of Baja* 

4ekhara and Bhoja; it is not also improbable that one of the two other 
Kalid&sas mentioned by Baja^ekhara * is meant here but he is however not 
the real author; the real author might be some later poet who wove out this 
political Dutakavya with the romantic figure of Kalidasa as the centre and 
fathered it on Kalidasa himself, and this embassy of Kalidasa is only as much 
fact as things said of him in Ballala’s Bhojaprabandha. 

If this Kunte^vara- or Kuntale6vara-dautya is taken as a genuine work, 
a Kavya of the great Kalidasa himself, how are the consequences issuing 
from it to be fitted in the two prominent views on the date of Kalidasa ? Those 
who assign Kalidasa to the first century B.C. and hold him as the court -post 
of Vikramaditya of Ujjain who inaugurated the Vikrama Era in 57 B.C. will 
have to hold that it is this Vikramaditya who figures in the Kuntesvara- 
dautya. The Kuntaladesa was then ruled by the Satavahanas, with their 
capital at Pratisthana, and the K untales vara. figuring in the KunteSvaradautya 
is some Satavahana of Pratisthana. 2 What kind of relations between the two 
caused a Dautya between them by such a personality as poet Kalidasa, it is 
not possible to know now. 

Those who take Kalidasa as a court-poet of Candragupta II Vikramaditya 
easily explain things. They harness these two quotations from Kalidasa’s 
Kuntelvaradautya for proving this theory of theirs of Kalidasa’s date. 

In an article m the A.B.O.R.I., Vol. XII, p. 458 , Rev. H. Heras interprets 
these quotations in the 6r. Pra. and the Aucityaviearacarca. He says that 
the Kuntala King referred to in Kalidasa’s KuntaleSvaradautya is the 
Kadamba King Bhagiratha. Candragupta II Vikramaditya sent Kalidasa 
on an embassy to Bhagiratha to arrange for a marriage alliance between the 
two powers. The suggestion of marriage as the purpose of the embassy if 
said to gain strength by the fact that Candragupta II arranged for a diplomatic 
marriage with the family of the Vakatakas. 8 

R. M. Moreas states Heras’ conclusion more elaborately in Chapter ii 
of his book on the Kadambakula (pp. 19-22). He says: ‘Indeed it wil 
not be far from the truth, if we suggest that the historic embassy b 
Candragupta II Vikramaditya to the Kuntala King mentioned in the Sr 


* Wlthout “y new evidence, we cannot say anything on the identity of these Un g. Fron 
recent contributions on the Satav&hanas, it appears that the same Sitavahana. were ruW a 

^ ^ Pratisthana, that Vikramiditya of Ujjain is also a SAtavihan 
n f ^Ahvahana 0 f the Southern Kingdom who founded the feUvUiaa 
tbiaEra m 78 A.D. wasalso Vikramaditya. Confusion is thus increased by this foot regarding 
the two personalities, Vikramaditya and S&tav&hana. & ^ 

* Hera, wrongly give, the AucityavioSracarcS as the work of Hemacandra. Keemendf. 
it its author and H e macand r a is the author of the K&vy&nuttsana. Moreas repeats Hens’ 



KlLIDlSA’s KUNTALEgVARA DAIJTYA 


195 


Pra., by poet Bhoja, probably took place in the reign of this king/ The King 
referred to is Kadamba Bhagiratha (380-420 A.D.). Kadamba kings were 
exclusive owners of the title of Kuntale^vara. Moreas further suggests: 
Candragupta II was at this time dreading invasion from Hunas and was 
making marriage alliances with powerful kings in the south. One such marriage 
alliance seems to be an offer of a princess of the Gupta court to Kadamba 
Bhagiratha. Kalidasa was entrusted with the delicate task of negotiating 
this marriage. The Kuntesvaradautya is a result of this embassy. Bhagl- 
ratha’s power was then in the ascendent and so he did not offer a seat to the 
ambassador from the Gupta court. 

Dr. S. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar has discussed and drawn his own conclu- 
sions from this Kuntesvaradautya in his two articles on the Vakatakas in the 
A.B.O.R.I . , Vol. V, pp. 31-54 and in the Journal of the Mythic Society, 
'XV, pp. 160-162.1 

Dr. S. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar identifies the Kuntaiesa to whom Kalidasa 
goes on embassy, according to this Kavya called Kuntale6vara-dautya, as 
Vakataka Pravarasena II, author of the Setubandha, contemporary and 
grandson of Candragupta II Vikramaditya. The fourth Vakataka king named 
Rudrasena II married Prabhavatigupta, daughter of Deva(Candra)gupta 
and Kuberanaga. Their son is Pravarasena II. Prabhavatigupta was regent 
for her young son for some time and Pravarasena came to rule himself even 
in his maternal grandfather’s reign. 

This Vakataka Pravarasena II, contemporary and grandson of Candra- 
gupta II Vikramaditya, is the author of the Prakrt poem Setubandha. 
According to the commentary called Ramasetu on the Setubandha, Kalidasa 
rovised this poem. Ramadasa, author of the Ramasetu, says also that 
Pravarasena was in Vikramaditya’s (Candragupta ’s) court. 

Dr. S. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar quotes the evidence of the verse 

etc. from the Kavyamimamsa, the S.K.A., and the 6r. Pra. and 
holds the embassy of Kalidasa from Vikramaditya as one to this Pravarasena II. 
He justifies the name Kuntale&a for the Vakatakas with the argument that 
the early Vakataka King Prithvisena I claims to have conquered the Kuntalas 
and that probably the Kuntalas were still under the Vakatakas. He cites 
tlje authority of a poem called Bharata-carita (canto I) which refers to the 
Setubandha as written by Kuntalesa. 1 2 


1 In both the articles, Dr. S. K. Ayyangar wrongly says that the verse 
is quoted by Kgemendra in his Aucityavicaracarca. 

In the latter article he says that he is informed by Mr. A. Rangaswamy Saraswati that the 
6* . Pra. refers to the stanzas of a work of a royal poet Devagupta by name, and is given as a 
colloquy between this royal personage and K&lidasa, Bhoja mentions no author named 
Devagupta, either jriiile quoting the colloquy referred to or elsewhere. 

See also J.O.R., Vol. I, p. 89. 

* On p. 45 of his article in the A.B.O.R.I., Dr. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar interprets the verse 
etc. wrongly. He says: ‘VikramAditya construed the affa with 
and oharged (K&lidisa) with making a report of an ambiguous import.* According to Raja- 
iekhara, the change of into fvwg and into alters the sense completely and 


196 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


„ In the article in the Journal of the Mythic Society , Dr. S. Krishnaswamy 
Ayyangar argues that the Vakatakas were Bhojas. Y. R. Gupte points out 
(Journal of Indian History , Vol. V) that the Vakatakas were the old Bhojas, 
Vidarbhas and Krathakausikas. Kalidasa is traditionally represented as 
having been patronized by Bhoja ; and taking this Bhoja as the King of Dh&ra 
of the eleventh century, scholars laugh at the tradition. The Bhoja who 
patronized Kalidasa is Vakataka Pravarasena II, author of the Setubandha, 
in the production of which work Kalidasa collaborated (pp. 40 1-407 ). 

Mr. A. Rangaswamy Saras vati has something to say on the KunteSvara- 
dautya in a note on it in the Journal of the Mythic Society , XV, pp. 168-9. 
On p. 271, Rangaswamy Sarasvati suggests that Kunte6varadautya is a 
drama and he calls it twice a historical drama on p. 272 ! According to him/ 
the Kuntale&t in the Kuntesvaradautya was a favourite feudatory of 
Vikramaditya; he offered Kalidasa a seat but the poet preferred to squat on 
the floor. He adds: Ramagiri (Ramateka in the Central Provinces) was a 
temporary capital of the Vakatakas as can be gathered from a grant which 
Prabhavatigupta made for the feet of the Lord of Ramagiri. It is during 
Pravarasena J s sojourn at Ramagiri that Kalidasa, who accompanied his patron, 
wrote his lyric Meghasandesa, which mentions Ramagiryasrama as the 
temporary abode of the forlorn Yaksa. It was Kalidasa himself separated 
from his own wife that sent that cloud messenger. 

The suggestions of Heras and Moreas cannot meet with much favour. 
The verse quoted by Raja6ekhara and Bhoja, etc., 

prohibits any suggestion of the purpose of the embassy being a marriage 
negotiation. Had Kalidasa been sent to arrange for the marriage of a Gupta 
princess with Bhagiratha, the question of Vikramaditya on the return of the 
poet would not have been fqfi T a nd Kalidasa’s reply would 

have been different and certainly not that the Kuntala was enjoying himself 
happily with his harem. 

More definite ideas can be made out of Ksemendra’s quotation and com- 
ments on the verse etc. Firstly, Ksemendra tells us that its 

author is Kalidasa and the work is called Kuntesvara (Kuntalesvara) dautya. 
As already pointed out, it is not improbable that Kuntesvaradautya does 
not mean exactly a poetic composition but refers to the incident in Kalidasa’s 
life and career, viz. the embassy he went on from Vikramaditya to Kuntalefo; 
and there might have been handed down in tradition a few stray verses 
(Muktafcas) which Kalidasa spoke at both the courts as the ambassador. 
K^emendra’s comments clearly say : — 

(i) Kalidasa was the Duta of a suzerain power — 

(ii) The poet went as Duta to a vassal’s court — 


that was presumably what was suggested as an emendation by Vikram&ditya. The import is 
not ambiguous, and Vikramaditya did not emend or venture to suggest an improvement upon 
K &l idft s a . The verse is cited by Bhoja ae a case of Uha and of Harai^a by R&jafokhara and their 
import has already been explained* 


OBIYA LITERATURE IN THE EARLY STAGB8 


197 


(iii) He however did not receive the seat of honour due to him as a 

representative of the Maharaja— « 

vrrero. 

(iv) Kalidasa could not resent, for he had come for the achievement of 

something with the favour of the Kuntala King. The purpose 
of the embassy depended on a favourable reply from the Kuntala 
King. This is clearly borne out by the wordd 

So, Kalidasa chose to sit on the ground and 
perhaps when ’Kuntala realized his discourtesy and asked him 
to rise up and take a seat, Kalidasa spoke this verse, with 
all his magnanimity — yuiWlJltuftw . 

We want further evidences and fresh discoveries on the subject to say 
. anything more of the Kuntesvaradautya of Kalidasa . 1 


ORIYA LITERATURE IN THE EARLY STAGES 

By 

Mr. Priy aran jan Sen, M.A., P.R.S. 

The vernacular literatures of India have not yet come into their own. 
They have not yet succeeded in attracting that attention which should in the 
normal course be paid to them. The shadow of the classical language which 
at one time hung over Europe still casts its gloom oyer the villages of India 
and persists in maintaining its prestige even in the ‘enlightened twentieth 
century, though English is now undoubtedly the language of culture, fashion 
and advancement. The claims of the Bengali literature have been sufficiently 
vindicated by Dr. Dinesh Chandra Sen who, though he might not have been 
its first historian, had at least been the first to dedicate his life to its service. 
His days have been a well-filled record of researches and studies in the litera- 
ture of his province; to him belonged the credit of popularizing its knowledge 
and proclaiming its glories. The other provinces of India have not been 
equally fortunate and we are still more or less in the darkness of ignoranoe as 
to the nature and achievement of the literatures of our neighbours— the Oriyas 
and the Assamese. Recent times have witnessed the publication of useful 
manuals of Hindi literature. 

The present attempt has been designed to narrate the story of Oriya 
literature, displaying various links in the chain of its early history and men- 
tioning only those works which have been able to secure a foothold in the 
shifting sands of time. It cannot certainly pretend to be the first study on 
the subject. Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra, Hunter, Stirling and Beames have all 
made memorable contributions and as early as 1897, Manomohan Chakravarti 
did some considerable and valuable spade-work on this as well as other 


% This forms part of the writer's Ph.D. thesis ‘Bhoja’s 6pigftra PrakWa’. 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


108 

important topics of indological interest, through his articles on Oriya language 
and literature published in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of ^ en ^ al - 
Tarini Charan Ratha published a primer in Oriya in 1914 which contained a bare 
sketch of an outline of history. When Sir Asutosh Mookerjee organized the 
study of Indian Vernaculars under the Post-Graduate Department, in pursuance 
of his favourite scheme, Prof. B. C. Majumdar edited Typical Selections from, 
Oriya Literature with an introduction in which he gave us something like a 
historical review of the literature itself; in recent times, Pandit Binayak 
Misra, busy with the study of Orissan inscriptions, has still found time to write 
handbooks on the language and literature of the province in his own verna- 
cular. What still remains to be done is to gather the different strands and 
to settle them together so as to see them in the true perspective from the view- . 
point of literary development, and the present is only the beginning of an 
attempt in that direction. 

According to the 1931 census, the Oriya language was spoken by 8,535,805 
souls in the province of Bihar and Orissa only. The boundaries of Orissa have 
since been widened and an attempt has been made to unite all Oriya-speaking 
people under the same province on the ground of linguistic homogeneity. The 
approximate area of the new province of Orissa is 33,000 square miles, with 
a population of 8,277,000 souls. 

The language and literature of so large a number of our countrymen will 
furnish us with some means of knowing Indian culture in one of its provincial 
varieties, and thus form an important branch of study. The importnace of 
this will come home to us when we remember that the percentage of literacy in 
Orissa compares very favourably with its neighbouring provinces. Moreover 
waves after waves of foreign invasion have burst in, but the integrity of national 
life and culture has been comparatively unaffected and there has been a con- 
tinuity of literary activities which we propose to present hero historically. 

Orissa boasts of a hoary antiquity, the country is full of relics of the 
past, plentifully displaying the long distance of time to which it reaches back. 
There is no mention of it in Vedic literature, but it is specifically mentioned in 
the MahabharaUi 1 as a forest country on both sides of the VaitaranI, with its 
capital at Rajapuri. Its mention in the Arthaidstra of Kautilya in connection 
with the manufacture of a special variety of cotton fabric is remarkable. 
Kaltoga becomes prominent' again in the history of India with its king 
Kharavela who drove away the Yavanas then in possession of Muttra. An 
integral part of the Gupta Empire, it stood out as a centre of influence, both 
Jain and Buddhist. After an interval of disorder and confusion of political 
power it again emerges into prominence with a new line of kings, the Eastern 
Gatigas.* Orissa in the eleventh century was called South Ko&ala, and it 
was co-extensive with the area covered by the Tributary States of Orissa.® 
KaMgabda was counted from 271 6akabda or 349-50 A.D. 4 

1 Bk. XII, Chap. 4. 2 Orissa by Prof. S. K. Aiyangar, J.B.O.RJS ., Vol. VUI, Pt.J. 

4 See Inscription of Kajendra Chola I. ' 

4 'Early QaAga Kings', G. Ramdas, B.A., J.B.OM.S., Vol. IX, Pt. IH-IV, p. 415. 



OBIT A LTTERATtTBE Xlf THE 1ABLY STAGES 1M 

This antiquity of Orissa's history makes it natural that it should boast of 
the Sanskrit culture, and modern historians have spoken of ‘the Sanskrit 
literature of Orissa But there is an occasional tendency to ignore the 
influence of Sanskrit on modem Indian literature, and this tendency is seen 
even among the present-day writers on Oriya literature. The native element 
is undoubtedly worthy of being treated with greater emphasis, but, with due 
deference to the opinions of enthusiasts, it may be submitted that to admit the 
influence of Sanskrit is not to ignore the genius of the vernacular. Indeed 
when we review the literary output, we have to acknowledge that as a model, 
both in form and substance, Sanskrit literature has exerted an extensive 
influence on the provincial. In the case of Bengali literature we find that 
Sanskrit is a dominant note, but native genius works upon it in ways peculiar 
to itself ; treatises more or less free of the classical stamp are being daily dis- 
covered by our literary explorers. The Mymensingh Ballads, due to the 
indefatigable exertions of Dr. Dinesh Chandra Sen, have pointed to a tradition 
worth investigating by all interested in the history of Indian literature. 

Similarly, Sanskrit seems to have an unquestioned influence on Oriya, but 
creative artists in all countries and in all ages give out more than they get, 
and in most of the men of letters we find unmistakable signs of Sanskritio 
influence. The word influence should be understood in its proper implication ; 
sometimes it may merely help an inherent tendency to develop in a given 
direction, and in that sense it is to be understood in this context. More than 
any other place, Puri had been all along a centre of Sanskrit learning; the 
different religious sects of the Hindus had kept up there a discussion of the 
holy scriptures; the old culture had also been carefully preserved in the 
mountain stronghold of the chiefs of Orissa, and there the old atmosphere still 
holds in its integrity, however much the plains may be oblivious of their 
ancient tradition. The achievement of Orissa in point of astronomy, rhetoric, 
logic and law — according to the old tradition — has not been meagre ; and if the 
Sanskritic tradition is there still a living force, it follows that the development 
of literature cannot have been altogether independent of such a tradition. 
There may be differences of opinion with regard to its degree or extent, but 
that is another matter and worth detailed investigation, it need not cloud the 
main issue. 

Compilations in Sanskrit, as might be naturally expected, preceded those 
in Oriya, and beside stone and copper-plate inscriptions we get a number of 
Pauranic and Smrtic works written in Sanskrit — works like Ekamra-purana, 
Kapila-vamhita , , V irajd-mdhatmya , etc., which were none earlier than the 
thirteenth century A.D. In addition, Raghunandan speaks of the Orissa 
school of Smftik&ras whose rise corresponded with the phenomenal rise of 
Vijayanagar in the South where Sayanac&rya and Madhavac&rya found time, 
in spite of ar&uous duties pertaining to their high position in the State, to 
be actively interested in their pursuit of Vedic and classical studies. The 


1 Manomohan Chakravarti, 6. 



200 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


correspondence might indicate a causal connection as well. Raghunandan 
refers to the Vidyakarapaddhati again and again. 1 Along with these schools of 
Puraiia and Smrti culture, we may mention the school of rhetoricians, who may 
be said to have formed, like the Kashmirians, a distinct branch, consisting oi 
Vidyadhara, the author of Ekavali ; Vidyanatha, the author of Pratdparudriya 
Yaio-bhvsan ; Jagannatha Panditaraja, author of another remarkable work 
on Sanskrit rhetoric. Nor must we forget the great scholar ViSvanatha 
Kaviraj who ‘sported with eighteen courtesans of languages’ and whose codified 
work on Sanskrit rhetoric, the Sahityadarpan, commends itself as the standard 
book on the subject. Visvanatha Kaviraj is described by tradition as having 
lived m a village Bir Narasinghapur or Bir Harekrishnapur, near Athdrandld 
puskanm. In the same village was born the great smarta Gadadhar Rajguru 
who followed Raghunandan after a few years, and who was the author of a code 

Gadadhar Paddhati’. In his ancestral line, five or six generations back, was 

Bishi Pat-yoshi, and of this Bishi and Chanda Rayguru, Chanda being a 
corrupt or abbreviated form of Chandrachuda, many stories are current with 
reference to their powers of sddhand. Bishi and Chanda were expert in as 
many as eighteen branches of learning— the number perhaps signifying a 
fairly reasonable command over general knowledge. Tradition has it 'that a 
musical instrument like a drum was kept before temples, as many strokes to 
be given to it by a scholar as the branches of learning he was proficient in ; 
is 1 and Chanda, it is said, both gave eighteen strokes each. Basudev 

2 - a ’ a , “’ Vllla 8 er of Gadadhar, compiled Kdlaprakdia, Bhdvaprakdda 
Acaraprakada etc., corresponding to Kdlasdr, Ddnasdr, Acdrasdr, etc. The 
treatises by Gadadhar have been published by the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal and they are current in Madras and Midnapur. We may also point 

S? "» f “V !1 “ °™“ its other „„ . LJnZd 

Gamodara Svami, to whom a math had been dedicated and which is still in 
existence ; and who was the guru of Madhusudana Tirthasvami. I paid a visit 
to this village, three or four miles in length, with two Siva temples, dedicated 
to Ba unkesh and Lokanatha, at its two ends, each with a tank adjoining 
It is distinctly to be understood that Sanskrit has even now divided the 
creative writer s attention as a medium in which to clothe the graces, etc! of 

studTaT T f W n ting ? jt> th ° Ugh graduaJ1 >' discountenanced by the 
ya ’ aS QOt y6t g0ne < * uite ^ fashion. 'MM.' 
Haraprasad Sastn, an eminent scholar and a remarkably skilful searcher of 

nmnuscnpts, calculated in 1915 that there were more than two lakhs of palm- 
leaf manuscripts m Sanskrit in Puri district alone; enquiries made iTthe 

- tl °T at th6 in8tan0e 0f His ExoeUen cy Sir Edward Gait, 
himself an enthusiastic patron of letters, confirmed the estimate. Even 

^bTt mP °rT 8 ^ ° aitanya C ° mp08ed and com P ile d in Sanskrit, 
and the Saraevair-mlas, not yet in print, is an instance in point A Pandit 

was appointed by the Bihar and Orissa Research Society for instituting srarohes 


1 Manomohan Chakravarti, 6. 



OBIT A LITERATURE TO THE EARLY STAGES 


201 


for Sanskrit manuscripts, and the following were among the new finds: 
(1) QatyavafiUanvmritam, a metrical history of the Ganga dynasty, composed 
in 1441 A.D.; (2) Sanskrit commentaries on the Sahityadarpan ; (3) a new 
commentary on the Rdmayana , etc. 1 

The language of the province has developed in spite of the prevalence of 
Sanskrit, but what had been the earliest specimen of Oriya has been debated. 
Ever since the discovery of the Caryapadas by late MM. Haraprasad Sastri, 
the literary world had been accustomed to consider them as evidently Bengali; 
there had been occasional differences as to whether they fell, strictly speaking, 
within the range of Bengali literature or whether they belonged to the Prakrt 
just before the branching off into the provincial vernaculars took place. The 
issue was raised whether they were Oriya and in the Utkal Sahitya (Magh, 
1333) the matter was broached and the conclusion reached that they rightly 
belonged to Oriya literature. The arguments, for all they are worth, may well 
be examined here. 

The words in the original : 

Aji Bhusu Bahgali bhaili 
nija gharani candali leli 

have been taken to mean: ‘Bhusu has become a Bengali, because he has taken 
to wife a Candal woman’, taking Bengali in a disparaging sense, with reference 
to the non-Aryans who then lived in Bengal. The author of the argument 
unfortunately misses the point that ‘ Bahgali ’ means here one of the four 
systems of sadhana , and has no reference to race. The sense pertains not to 
anthropology in the narrower sense of the term but to a oertain religious 
practice. 

To the argument advanced by MM. Sastri that many words occurring in 
these padas were used in old Bengali, the writer of the article under reference 
replies that they were and are still used daily in Oriya, and many other words 
current in old Bengali are still used in unchanged or slightly changed forms 
in Orissa. This overlooks the fact that many words now obsolete for literature 
are in currency in villages and other places away from the centres of modern 
culture. The people, for example, of Bankura use certain words which are 
obsolete and meaningless to the people of East Bengal, but some of these 
words are preserved in old Bengali. In other words, philological tests have to 
be applied with caution to the various dialects in use. We may also remember 
iliat many words, now peculiar to Bengali, once were regarded as common to 
both Bengali and Oriya. 

It has been further contended that many words used in the padas cannot 
ye claimed to be of Bengali speech, and words like bvlatheu , sankelidu, Mild- 
fihuifai have been cited as instances. But any one, having the least acquain- 
tance with bofcks like Kritivasi Rdmdyam , will at once identify the last two 
its Bengali forms: 


i J.B.OJR.S.. Vol. v 


202 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


bhikkha magi bule ghare ghare 

—Kavikafikan can#i. 

e.g., bahudin haila punah bdhudi na aila 

— Ka^iram Dasa’s Mahabharata, Adiparva. 

hrsta haia bahudila daridra brahmana 
— Ibid . 

deh bdhudiya yena na jdi bharat 

— Krttivasa, Rdmayana. 

dhaiya dhdiyd keha dhanu bahuddi * 

— Jnanadas. 

Another line in the padas has been taken to be a strong proof of the 
caryds being Oriya in language : 

‘ Manikule bahid oriydne sdngao 9 

explaining it as ‘carry jewels and meet the Oriya woman’, but the mention 
of the term by itself is hardly any proof at all of the language being Oriya. 
The correct form is manikule bahid oriydne sarnai ‘enters oriyana having 
passed by manikula 5 — manikula and oriyana being technical names of 
stations (or cakras) within the body according to Yogic tradition. 

The photos of the script as reproduced in Sastri *s edition, it has been 
asserted, show on inspection that the MagadhI character was changed into the 
round alphabet of Oriya; the script is thus Oriya. It is, however, difficult to 
see how a theory like this can rest on such a weak basis. This is too much of a 
fragmentary application of palaeontology to demand attention. 

MM. Sastri had made a statement that * he found while collecting the songs 
in Nepal, a fragment composed in Oriya ’ ; this has led to the inference that the 
flow of thought and emotion as represented in literature ran from Orissa to 
Nepal. The truth seems to be that in Nepal was to be found the common 
stock-in-trade of the Buddhists and the Sahajiyas, and that this common 
stock was freely used by different dialects. The learned discoverer of the 
padas was certainly free from the bias of patriotism, otherwise he would not 
have emphasized that there was a solitary fragment composed in Oriya. 

One of the songs ends with the colophon ‘Krishnacharyya who comes from 
Orissa ’ ; but as he is described elsewhere as a Bharatabdsi or Indian, Sastri is 
unwilling to call him an Oriya and has been made the object of a meaningless 
jest that in this Sastri must have been under the idea that Orissa was outside 
India. That men used to move about freely from province to province seems 
to have been difficult of comprehension even to scholars with eyes for research. 
As a matter of fact, there has not yet been any unanimity about 
Krishn&chftryya ’s country of origin. Taranatha holds him as a native of 
Vidy&nagara in the country of Karna, presumably in Orissa, but his Tibetan 
biographers link him up with Somapuri which is believed to* have been in 
East Bengal . 1 There is, moreover, the reasonable supposition for the theory 
that there was more than one Krishnftch&ryya who composed the lays. 


1 Sh ft h i dulkh , Lu chants mystiques, pp. 28-29. 




OBIT A LITERATURE IE THE EARLY STAGES 


203 


The name of Lui frequently occurs in these songs and as Lui is still wor- 
shipped in Mayurbhanj; the origin of the Caryapadas is supposed to be 
Orissan beyond doubt. But then it is forgotten that Orissa is the resort of all 
decaying faiths, and the process of evolution is still at work. Many sects 
have their stronghold here, and their persistent vitality and the synthetizing 
power of Hinduism must both be credited with full force. 

That Orissa was once a centre of Buddhism is not at all a convincing item 
in the argument; Bengal in the days of the Pala kings was also predominantly 
Buddhistic in faith. The indications thrown out by philology are all to the 
position that the language of the Caryapadas approximates more to Bengali 
than to Oriya, and the contention on this score against MM. Sastri must be 
brushed aside as altogether untenable. 

The truth seems to be, as has already been observed, that such religious 
songs were a common feature of the times just as ballad literature was once 
the form common to all Europe. The songs found in Nepal are allied to Bengal 
only in their language; in all other respects they are Indian and transcend 
provincial boundaries. 

A characteristic iastance may well be cited here. Towards the close of 
the eighth century there ruled in Orissa a king named &ubhakara, extremely 
devoted to Buddha, his father was &ivakara Deva, and his grandfather 
Khemahkara Deva. 1 Prof. Sylvain Levi’s notes on the subject make it dis- 
tinctly clear that this king sent an autographed manuscript (the last section of 
the Avatamsaka , on the practice of the vow of the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, 
that is the Gandavyuha, of which the original is preserved among the Nepalese 
collections) to the Chinese emperor Te-tsong some time about 795 A.D. But 
those notes also make it cloar that such currents then freely flowed, ignoring 
all geographical barriers. Prajna, the monk who carried the manuscript 
referred to above, w f as a typical figure of the times. Bom on the western 
borders of India, ho had begun his studies in North India, continued them in 
Central India, resided in Nalanda, visited the sacred places, thus devoting 
18 years of his life to learning; he had settled down in the monastery of the 
king of Orissa for the study of yoga there, and next, moved to China where 
he is known to have begun his career by translating a book in 788 A.D. 

The earliest specimens of Oriya writing are very difficult to trace. In 
•the absence of any distinct examples, Dr. S. K. Chatterji’s general remark about 
the rise and growth of modem Indian languages may be accepted regarding 
Bengali, Oriya. etc. In some histories of vernacular literature, the sayings 
of D&k and Khana aro put down as specimens of an early stage of particular 
literatures. Some of the sayings of Dak have been collected in the Krushi- 
Par&iara , and a few examples may be as well quoted here 

1 . m&ghara casha, sunara kaeha. 

2. An¥mana kari casha. Mai nika kari ghasha. 

3. age bupa, pache bupa 

garbhanaka tuna tupa. 

— 1 YX7 vt_ ~ 



B, 0. LAW VOLtnnB 


204 

4. yebe barashai m&ghara sesha 
dhanya se raj& dhanya se date. 

5. uttara magha dakkhine paie 
nathe boile puta nisce barshe. 

6. fji na di£e hasi pa6e 

nathe boile putare nisce barafe. 

7. divase hula hula, rati ki niramala 

nathe boile putare e de6 chadi anya deSaku pala. 

8. 6ravana masara krushna cauthi 
caudiga yebe megha na uthi 
purva pascime yebe na bahai ba 
bapa boile putare de^antara ya. 

He must be a bold man who could claim an antiquity for the style, but the 
ideas contained in the sayings have been current through generations, and 
Dak has been identified with a popular Buddhist sage with practical sagacity, 
and there is no need to disturb the sayings from the antiquarian veneration 
with which they are invested. But that does not affect our position, and they 
are, for practical purposes, outside the scope of historical treatment. 

Barring these sayings of Dak and Khana, it had long been the official 
belief that the inscription of Narasingha Deva II, dated 1296 A.D., contained 
some Oriya words. About a century later, or to be more precise, in 1395 A.D., 
there was another inscription, of Narasingha Deva IV ; this contained several 
whole sentences which showed that the language was by that time fully 
developed, and was little different from modem Oriya in either orthography 
or grammar. Oriya emerged as a written language during the reign of the 
last kings of the Keshari dynasty which takes us to the earlier part of the 
eleventh century. Hunter says that even before Markanda Dasa, the author 
of the KeAava Koili , there was one Narayan Purohit who wrote Vritaratnakar , 
and there was also a royal poet of Ghumsara, Balabhadra Bhafija (1026-1057) 
by name, who wrote Bhdvdvati , a book sometimes ascribed to Upendra Bhafija 
as well. But Narayan Purohit and Balabhadra Bhafija are enveloped in 
obscurity which puts a stop to the wandering imagination of the literary 
historian. 

Before the twelfth century, then, we do not come across any Oriya 
inscription, or any inscription written in Oriya characters; in the absence of 
other works, then, we may reasonably conclude that there were no books 
written in the Oriya language then, and therefore worthy to be included in a 
history of Oriya literature. Many works written in those days have grown 
scarce now and may be found to be adorning manuscript libraries in far-off 
Europe. It is possible that works written in those centuries are now forgotten 
or it may be there were no works written at all in course of the years from 
the twelfth to the fourteenth century. A period of two to three hundred 
years is a time which a language requires to develop, to get power and strength 
enough to express ideas and receive a hearing. The article contributed to the 
N&rdyana by MM. Harapr&sad Sastrion Modem Buddhism is important from 



OBIT A LlTTOATtm* W iPHlC lABLlr STACKS 20$ 

this point of view and is highly suggestive, both ae regards Bengali and Oriya 
literature. The question of priority may be examined in regard to inscription- 
writing both in Bengali and Oriya. 

Coming to the fifteenth century we find the first warblings of poetry 
sweet like the Cuckoo’s songs and known by that name — Koilis. The first 
writer of Koilis, according to tradition, is Markanda Dasa, whose caste and 
birth-place have been variously surmised on slender grounds. His Keiam 
Koili and JMnodaya Koili are simple lyrics — adapted to young and old alike 
— and shot through and through with the Vaishnav sentiment. The form of 
the Koili poems is peculiar : each short verse has for its refrain : ‘ 0 Cuckoo ! ’ 
The whole poem consists of 34 verses, each beginning with a letter of the 
alphabet which consists of thirty-four letters : hence the name of the form is 
Caiitisa. It has been a popular, almost a conventional, form in Oriya literature. 
The Cauti&L is a favourite form in Bengali literature also. Kalaketu when 
in prison prays to Candl in this form, each letter of the alphabet, beginning 
with ka y being initially repeated four times in payar verse; ^rimanta on the 
slaughter ground prays in iripadl verse but in a more stingy manner with 
regard to the number of lines, followed by another Caiitisa in payar , all in the 
same book, Kavikaiikan candl : 

Kaho kalaketu mata rakkhibar tare 
Kailasa chadiya mata ura karagare 
Kali kapalini mata kapolakuntala 
Kalaratri kanjamukhi kata jana kala. 

Again, 

buddhi pradayini, bandhana-na^ini 
badha dura kara mata 
bhabani bharati bhavapriya bhuti 
bhairavi bhavapujita. 

Indeed, Bharatchandra goes one better in making it run to fifty letters, vowels 
and consonants combined, and li , both long and short, being included, as well 
as ang and ah, in his Vidydmndar when Sundar on the slaughter ground 
prays to the goddess Kali for deliverance from the extreme danger in which 
he stood. It has been a form in which the best and the greatest, as well as 
those who could not rise beyond a general level, have expressed themselves. 
In this sense it can be called a distinctive feature of the literature, not in the 
sense that it is a unique feature. Jagannath Dasa has adopted the form; 
Upendra Bhafija has written a Caiiti&i ; and there have been others who have 
not scrupled to use it for the display of their poetic power. The serial order 
of the letters of the alphabet is a mechanical device which the writer is bound 
to conform toy but the credit of the poet lies in overriding the mere framework 
and putting into it as much honey and dew as his powers afford him. To the 
ptow defunct Prachi Samiti, more than to any other literary association, belongs 
the credit of discovering new Caiiti&s and publishing them in a separate form 
giving prominence to the rich poems that lie deep below the surfaoe. 



206 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


The Koili then is a CautisS addressed to a cuekoo. The verses are 
characterized by puns and alliterations, in traditional form. In the Keiava 
Koili Krishna’s mother Yasoda is very much grieved at heart, for Krishna 
has gone to Mathura ; she remembers him and pours out her feeling to the bird 
in verses which begin with ka and gradually march up to ksha. An idea of the 
poem may be had from the following English rendering of some of the verses : — 

0 Koili ! Keshva has gone to Mathura. Who called away my son 
I do not know, but he has not returned, 0 Koili. 

0 Koili ! To whom shall I give thick milk in cakes ? The son 
who would have feasted on them has gone to Mathura, 0 Koili. 

0 Koili ! The son that had departed had not come back. The 
wooded Brindabana did not seem beautiful as before, 0 Koili. 

0 Koili! My house no more pleases Nanda. Without Govinda 
the town does not look inviting, 0 Koili. 

0 Koili! Nanda’s body is made of stone, for he dried his son’s 
eyes and set him on the chariot, 0 Koili. 

And so on, until the final verse : 

0 Koili ! with folded palms, says Markan^a, forgive me my faults, 
0 Koili. 

This is also known as Yasoda Koili. 

The author is supposed to be a contemporary of Saraia Das, the greatest 
translator into Oriya of the Mahdbharata. B. C. Majumdar in his Typical 
Selections from Oriya Literature records his impression that the finished form 
of the Keiava Koili is certainly of a date not later than 1450 A.D., during 
the reign of Kapilendra Deva. 

The text of the Keiava Koili is given a spiritual interpretation by 
Jagannath Dasa, the great author of the Oriya version of the Bhdgavat in his 
Arthakoili. Among comparatively old Koili poems may be mentioned 
Bdramdsi Koili by Sankara Dasa and Kdnta Koili by Balarama Dasa. The 
first is a season poem, much in the nature of Baramasyas or Barasyas familiar 
to the student of Bengali literature; the second refers to Sita. Then there is 
J ndnodaya Koili ; Prof. B. C. Majumdar in his Typical Selections ascribes this to 
Lokanatha Dasa, but there is nothing in the text of the Koili to help or warrant 
such an assumption; we have in the concluding verse the name of Natha, not* 
Lokanatha, and that, for aught we know, is a generic name, rather than 
indicative of an individual. 

This is the occasion to refer to a poem Kalasa Caiitiia discovered by the 
Prachi Samiti and concluded by it to be of the fourteenth century and as the 
work of Batsa Dasa. It was once very popular and there are references to it 
in the Saraia MaMbhSrata : 

Vedamantra yugate se ye parhanti kalasa. 

Vashishtha Marakanda avara Durvasa. 

It is not very unreasonable to think that it must have been written about 
100 years earlier to attain to such a fame. Its tune gave rise to a nartimilar 



VISHVE8HVABA SMBITI 


207 


tune called kalasa vdnl. The subject-matter of the poem is the marriage of 
Hara and Parvati, described with a grain of humour. 

Simplicity and freshness characterize these first products of Oriya 
literature. They are, truly speaking, literature for the people, or folk literature. 
With the growth and development of thoughts and forms they have not grown 
out of date, but have still currency in the hamlets where rural and real Orissa 
lives and dwells. A number of new Koilis have been written and jOaiitUas 
discovered and circulated. It will not be out of place to mention here again 
the splendid collections of Caiitiias published by the Prachi Samiti of Cuttack 
and edited witlv the idea of offering a counterblast to the modern craze for 
foreign forms and types of literature. Though this counterblast may fail of 
its immediate purpose, it will come as a refreshing draught to all lovers of 
pure poetry dressed in simplicity. 


ViSHVESHVARA SMRITI 
By 

MahImahopIdhyIya Pt. Bisheshwar Nath Reij, Jodhpur 

Tho Manusmriti is universally regarded as the oldest of all the Smritis. 
According to it, not only a widow is forbidden to re-marry but, taking 
into consideration the context of tho subject, even a virgin, when betrothed, 
is forbidden to marry other person than the one to whom she is betrothed 1 ; 
whereas in the Parashar Smriti, 2 a married woman is also permitted to take 
another man, when faced with five sorts of calamities. 

At one place it is laid down in the Manusmriti that a father, on the 
birth of his son, is considered to have been purified by only taking bath once, 3 
while, at another place, he is considered to be purified after the lapse of ten 
days. 4 

In the same Smriti, looking to the self-contradictory statement about 
the permission 6 and non-permission 4 regarding the taking of meat, it goes 
to show that possibly, from time to time, the later Pandits (learned men) 
might have managed to insert their own views in the original text. 

In Manusmriti as well as in other similar law-books rules are laid down 
about the right of a * 9 7 (son by a person other than the husband of his 

mother) to inherit his father’s property, about the * ftrefrl 9 (permission to a 
childless widow to have intercourse with the brother or any near kinsman of 
her deceased husband to raise up issue to him), 8 or about the authority to 
invite, at the time of ‘Shr&ddha’, mother’s father, maternal uncle or even 

* 1 — - ' — - * 

1 Chapter 9, ver§e 71. * Chapter 4, verse 30. 

* „ 5, „ 62. * „ 5, verses 61, 77, 79. 

J Chapter 3, verses 123, 263-72 and Chapter 5, verses 16, 18, 22, 23, 27, 30-32, 36, 36, 
if 6, „ 4 6-66, * Chapter 9, verse 146. 



B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


208 

father-in-law to partake of the dinner, 1 but all these are quite contrary to the 
customs prevailing in the present day. 

(Among the southerners the custom of marrying a maternal uncle’s 
daughter also appears to be against the dictates of the old law-books of India.) 
In the first chapter of Manusmriti is written : 

i.e. Svayambhuva Manu, the wise, composed this book. 

In the same chapter the following is written before the above : 

11 uji tt 

i.e. this Bhrigu would read to you the whole of this sacred book. 

It appears from the above quotations, that the book, which was 
composed by Svayambhuva, the first of the Manus, was read over to the 
other Rishis by his own son or disciple Bhrigu at his behest. 

Again, in the first chapter of Manusmriti, Manu says: 

tT#T JTTlfN Tfccft ^ R ^8 R 

i.e. first of all I created these ten great Rishis as Prajapatls. 

^ R R 

i.e. these Prajapatls further created seven illustrious Manus. 

In the same chapter Bhrigu further says : 

*pfh I I 

i.e. in the direct line of Svayambhuva, there were six more Manus. 

it irswit i i , 

i.e. these seven illustrious Manus, such as Svayambhuva, etc., after creating 
animate and inanimate beings, protected them in their respective cycles. 

By the above quotations from the first chapter, it appears by Manu’s 
words that Svayambhuva Manu created ten Prajapatls and they in their 
turn procreated seven more Manus but, according to Bhrigu, only seven 
Manus, including Svayambhuva, were bom up till that time. Thus the words 
of the one does not tally with those of the other. 

From the above quoted slokas of the first chapter as well as from the use 
of the word **JTP \ the past imperfect tense of the Sanskrit verb ' tTT-r5jii \ 
it becomes evident that this book was compiled by Bhrigu during the cycle 
of Vaivasvata, the seventh Manu, and not in the cycle of Sv&yambhuva, the 
first Manu. 

In addition to the above, this theory is also supported by the mention 
in this Smriti of the names of only the first seven Manus out c of the total of 
fourteen.* 


* Chapter 3, verse 148. 


1 Chapter 1, verses 61, 62. 



VI8HYE8HVABA 8MEITI 


209 


Further, in the tenth chapter of the same Manusmriti, it is written : 

wrari IWT inw«^PN T I 8^ i 
*8T*ft*rf *OTTI W I 

TO: W4HH>W fTOl W ! I 88 I 

i.e. in course of time, with the non-observance of the religious ceremonies 
and with the disappearance of Br&hmanas, the following sub-castes of 
Kshatriyas, viz. Paun^raka, Audra Dravida, Kamboja, Yavana, 6aka, 
P&rada, Palhava, China, Kirata, Darada and Kha6a were reduced to the 
status of a ^udra. 

From the above couplets it is evident that Manu’s Smriti, which is 
available at this day, was compiled after the advent of these tribes into India, 
or it was about the beginning of the Vikram Era that this book was composed. 

In the same (tenth) chapter of this Smriti the following couplet is found : — 

*PWTTt WRTf OlMWUnWT I 

W W9S IPS ^ 1 1 

i.e. the son born of a uro (a Brahmana deprived of the investiture with the 
sacred thread) is called sinful, Bhurjaka^taka and (according to different 
localities he is also known by the names of) Avantya, Vatadhana, Pushpadha, 
as well as &aikha. 

Here ‘6aikha’ the Sanskritized form of the Persian word ‘Shekh’, used 
for a convert or as a mark of dignity, is described as the offspring of 
a degenerated Brahmana. This goes to prove that interpolations were being 
made in this Smriti up till the conquest of Sindh and Sorath provinces by the 
Mohammedans or up till the first half of the ninth century A.D. 

Besides this the refined language used in the Manusmriti, as it is now 
found, also goes to show that it is not a very old work. The same is the 
case with the other Smritis too. 

In the old Smritis, wherever, for one reason or the other, an action is 
permitted or forbidden, the reason thereof is not expressed and though each 
and every injunction has been prescribed for the direct or indirect benefit 
of the society yet, according to the prevalent belief, their effect is preserved 
for the next world. Therefore the people of old generation, being ignorant of 
the real motives at the root of these injunctions, follow them blindly and go 
astray, while the people of younger generation, interested mostly in the 
temporal world, do not pay any heed to them. As an instance of the first 
case, we may take Menu’s injunction about forbidding the passing over of a 
cord with whloh a calf is tethered, * W \ simply to avoid 

a fall, as there is every probability that the calf, being frightened, might 
9 get up and this may result in the fall of the over-passer. But the aged folk, 
unable to grasp the real motive of the said injunction, would either give an 

*4 



210 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


ablution to a youngster, who has acted against it, even in the cold weather, 
or would force him to recross it to atone for his fault. 

Due to the above reason as well as to the conditions produced by the 
change of times people have lost some amount of interest in the Smritis. 
Therefore, when faced with total destruction, the wise would like to save one- 
half even at the sacrifice of the other half and according to this saying, taking 
advantage of the available laws of Manu and amending the same according to 
the needs of the day, a fresh Smriti, named ‘ Vishveshvara Smriti * has been 
compiled for inviting the criticism of the learned intelligentsia. 

From the various Smritis of the olden times we come to know that even 
the sages of old, with a view to safeguard the welfare of the Hindu society, 
adopted the method of describing the (duties) of an Aryan and amending 
the same to suit the requirements of the times. 

Following in their footsteps I have also endeavoured to take up this 
task, giving also the worldly reasons and consequences for the observance of 
the rules, wherever necessary. 

This book is divided into two parts; the first is the main Smriti, con- 
sisting of about 1,200 couplets, while the second part contains the 

old Hindu law as observed at present by the judiciary and has about 3,600 
couplets. 

Below are given some of the couplets : 

<fNhn’*nra^r »rr*nf%*rcr«n i 

f* arej o «*. wi 8*. 

’anwm-'a ?ofwrt i 

0\ 

wre * i «r. wt. 8^. 

ip n i 

wrajirdHTflyaffl fr i m. 88. 

%<j4«i(T( wNj wNrcft gvft i w. wt. i. 

wwttot stag} top i 

TOroi g ufr i m. ^ wt 

WWfTOPrftraj 53 Bra* 1 *r. 

*rnjf54«3^ fart* to 1 «r. vc. 

14B 



VISHVESHVABA SMBITI 


211 


ftsart arcfr y rc taa rq I a. art. *»• 
^Nrgj^f faifa ajrat %«fir ffax^ i 
front wfrrefa aaar ansga% i a. *, ait. \i. 
atamnitsftrcrtoa fT%?rt TTf*rat to i 
a^mrft ar%s%sj ftramtwt ^ to l a. 8 , ait. i. 
TOjsfftr *nr^»r TOiftfr a *nc%^ i 
to aarftstjrnnt a I a. b, aft. v. 

apt bt^ ama sjxf a^a wi«a 4 k^ : i 



a. 8, art. 


atoa: aart % a % aar aaatfro i 
aT TVgf t ^tftl % ^S3r«IT TT atf&TTi I a. 1., W>. \- 

anmlWai aafa $g*ag»itaxt i 

aamannt ttarart fa^Nn *flt-xanpm i a. i., ait. a^. 

jzran^ fapiaT yajnarcai aa i 

arataaro wa a^taarcartfa a i a. art. 

aararsj a ftrefa aransuratsfa a? i 

art^a: saaaaf *a: marca i a. <, aft. e. 

ara'artfsiwm^ ftafwxfaTtsgar i 

Ji^MiPfafrrwi «aT anit ftfhnt i a. i, aft. t •. 

M 

jzranaafaafar aat aa aiaw i 

xtaa afoftara toiw 5 cat to 1 a. i, ait. 8 . 

xawt faaan % ^ w afafroaari i 

M .1 

aa mfrau % a xtamristewatxj i a. «, ait. se. 

cwrart aw$sa arcro faxifro i 

aafafa^ atfsaart aavjfi fiiawfxfwi i a. ®, ait. a*. 


aa aa a aw a aftaiaraxT sa> i 

aufaa sfiafv aurt aftrawfo i a. «, art. «. 

xfiTOW fa«t «tat fafaa airo i 

arraraia taansar aprfaa a arc*^ i a. «, aft. 

Twxfajafa ^ta % fara xj$Tt i 

(V*far afaitjta Stefa tojt aatfaa^ i a. «, ait. i^t- 



a m anxp i *a w^maaa^ i a. «, ait. \*t. 



B. 0. LAW VOLTTME 


^ trfaUf&T JWI ?TTcT 1 JTPJ I 

«rcn wt 3 ntrotf i w. 4 , wt. 8«. 

wfat 5 *if| 5 rrTrstT i 

iroift jnfsnNit g w. 4, w\. 

wrareit fr ’rpmri f%*nrt w 1 

jJHumyawlsw ^rw wrajnsra^t g «r. 4, wt. *a. 

H,(*Hwitti*ii fr 'tffanrt *iiarai*»jf 1 

ft^r-n «rf«rRra5f % 1 I <n-Hi^*nfa^: | «r. wt. ^s. 

taaUnuiai wifir w fw m faftr^r 1 

i «h. \o t wt. ^=. 

*irt »ip Tftr fwwnnj 1 

f<RW*ifa 3 nnfa m g w. \», wt. 

npnt nt$«r 1 

^r*r *r mi ct^j wra t ^ Mt^ g; g «r. \\, wt. <. 

•itwflif qt*nit^r v 1 

Oiapr ^ cp^i J13: ^mwrtswf^ g w. wt. *. 
®WJirnrwt$f«r fojprfawrir 1 
«rei<^rd*wit wtot w|u nrftrf^3 g w. u. wt- M- 
fw*r 3 ?w wn-weit wfwn 1 
W «pif3 ww fwftr ara wiaut g w. wt. 
wt vnUttitr. 1 

lOTisn mfa tfr w*p g «r. wt. 
^^anft w ^i?nnnsr v 1 
^wtsfiswsfrct wfwrir^! g «r. ^ wt. a^. 
^foibreiti^i-oiAi firaprprt uww* i 

SW wt ftnRn g Tnwnr g 
4 KiW attot nft% a«n l 
*nwr fwnaw fro mfwwwftrfwrr g arnrom g 
OT^famnr: q roft q l g^j 1 
wit fWW apl I nrast want ant g nnmm 1 

*ran${rortn wran* 1 
*rft»3W wnmifai qarnwrr^ 1 nrn a n n g 
wnann% $ frowst tmaj; 1 
OTfroswrawnf ’jftfnj nunn 1 nrwrrar 1 



RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG THE 
MAINAMATI AND LALMAI RANGES, TIPPERA DISTRICT, 
EAST BENGAL 

By 

Me. T. N. Ramaohandran, M.A. 

The find of brick structures and images of terracotta material in course 
of trench diggings at Mainamati, six miles west of the town of Comilla, was 
brought to my notice by the Collector of Tippera District. An inspection 
was immediately arranged and a survey of a part of the area along the 
Mainamati and Lalmai ranges conducted. Owing to the advanced nature of 
the area from the military point of view a regular survey in a strictly 
archaeological sense could not be attempted and can be taken up only after 
the cessation of war. The results obtained in the course of my brief survey 1 
are sufficiently indicative, though tentative, of the importance of the area to 
archaeologists. The importance of the discoveries will be best known and a 
valuable contribution made to the history of Bengal when excavation will be 
possible after war. 

Geology. 

Five miles to the west of Comilla rises a low hill range with an average 
height of 90 feet above sea -level and 40 feet above the level of the surrounding 
plains. This low hill extends from Mainamati in the north to Lalmai Railway 
Station in the south, for a distance of about 10 miles, north to south, and is 
called Mainamati range near Mainamati and Lalmai range further down where 
it widens (vide plan, Plate XVII). To the west of the range lies Tripura 
State. The hill is called Lalmai (Rohitagiri) from the fact that it is made 
up of slightly micaceous, yellow -coloured sandstone and ferruginous concre- 
tions, which when decomposed colour the top of the hill brick-red. Hori- 
zontal intercalations of clay, only a few inches thick, varying in colour from 
white to dark black and occasional occurrences of argillaceous nodules mark 
the hill. Quartz pebbles are also observed but rarely. Near Chandipur the 
hill is called Chandimura (mura is hill), and this part of Lalmai is of sufficient 
geological importance, for here the character of the rock changes. Chandi- 
mura contains no micaceous material but consists of a conglomerate of de- 
composed rocks, mainly sandstone, with lumps of soft shaly mudstone here 
and there. Ferruginous concretions and quartz pebbles are rare but fossil 
wood abounds, the fragments completely silioified and some of them attaining 
considerable dimensions with diameter of several inohes. But all lie hori- 
zontally, apparently parallel to one another such as would be the case when 
drifted by strong current. Specimens picked up by us within our area of 
exploration wflre investigated by the experts of the Geological Survey of 

> • * # In this survey Messrs. K. G. Goswami of the Calcutta University and Rasmohan 
Chakra varti, Superintendent, Rammala Chhatravae, Comilla, were helpful, and I am thankful to 
them. 




214 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


India and the Calcutta University and were declared as of dicotyledonous 
plants closely allied to the genus Gflutoxylon already known from here.* 
Chittagong and Tippera are treated as a single botanical province, and accord- 
ing to Das Gupta and Sen as the Lalmai beds, where fossil woods are found, 
correspond to that of the Irrawaddy Division of Burma it may be concluded 
that the Lalmai rocks are most probably also of Pliocene Age like the rocks of 
the Irrawaddy Division. 

Mounds of Archaeological Interest 

Like its geological importance the Lalmai area affords sufficient interest 
to the archaeologists. The plains are studded with what appear to be en- 
tombed ruins, a supposition which proved to be nearly correct in an area 
four miles to the south-west of Comilla where the Central Public Works 
Department cut through a few mounds and extracted a large amount of bricks 
from well-planned structures. The Collector’s report regarding the diggings 
in the military area gave me high hopes of archaeological discoveries at Maina- 
mati, as the name ‘Mainamatr is in Bengal history and religion sufficient to 
conjure up a vista of archaeological wealth. 

The Name Maindmati. 

‘Mainamatr, the name by which the village and the adjoining hill are 
known today, recalls the name of Queen Mayanamati (Madanavati), the wife 
of Manikchandra of the Chandra dynasty that ruled in Bengal in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries A.D. Many ballads are popularly sung in Bengal in 
which the queen and her son Gopichandra figure. Some of these are collected 
in Gopichandrer-gdna , Vols. I and II (published by the Calcutta University), 
Qopichandrer-sanydsa , edited by Abdul Sukkur Muhammad, and Minachelana 
edited by Dr. N. K. Bhattasali. According to T&ranatha and some of these 
ballads, Gopichandra was a ruler of Mrikula (now known as Meharkula in 
Tippera District). 


1 Similar fossil wood specimens have been collected from this area and studied by the late 
Mr. Hem Chandra Das-Gupta in 1906, by Mr. N. N. Chatterji in 1939 and by Mr. Anil Mukheiji 
in 1942. Such studies have led experts to declare the Lalmai range as of exceptional interest 
because the fossil wood finds help in correlating the Lalmai or Tippera rocks with the other 
Indian rock systems of known age, particularly with ‘the fossU wood group of Burma*. The 
L al m ai range has been supposed to correspond to the lower series of the Irrawaddy Division. 
The fossil wood that was e x a mine d so far is supposed to be of the genus Qlutoxylon (the two 
qpecies of Qluta, O. Tavoyana and 0. Travancoriea , show much similarity with l>lm #i sp ecimen s). 

Its presence as fossils in the Mainam ati area shows that its distribution was wider in the past. 
Besides Travancore and Tinnevelly in South India and Tenasserim in Lower Burma it also existed 
in Bengal and Assam. The total absence of the living species from Bengal is, according to 
geologists, either due to its extinction or migration to more genial climatic tymditions and that 
the Quaternary Ice Age, with its world* wide effect, might have been responsible for the change in 
its habitat and distribution. For details see (1) Journal and Proceeding* of the Aeiatic Society 
of Bengal , Vol. IV (1908), pp. 349-61 ; (2) Quarterly Journal , Geological and Mining and M M* 
Society, India, Vol. II, pp. 139-41; Vol. XIV, No. 2, pp. 76 - 81 ; ( 8 ) Soierm and CuUuni l 
VdL VH, No. 7 , pp. 370-71 ; Vol. VII, No. 11, pp. 673 - 74 . ' 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAINAMATI & LALMAI RANGES 215 


Sahajaydm . 

In the old Bei^ali Charyd-padat, whose subject matter centres round the 
mystycal esoteric doctrines and Yogic theories and practices of the Buddhist 
Sahajayfina and whose authors (twenty-two authors of forty-seven Charyas 
out of a total of fifty), according to Dr. S. K. Chatterji, belonged to a period 
roughly between 950-1200 A.D., we find a hierarchy of Siddha poets who 
figure in the Goplchand legends also. They are MatsyendranAtha, Gorakh- 
natha, JAlandhari-pada or Hadi-pa and Kanha-pA, the last mentioned assign- 
able to the end of the twelfth century. Kanha-pA’s Guru was JAlandhari- 
pada or Hadi-pa, who was himself a disciple of Gorakh-nath, a great Saivite 
Yogi and Siddha. Queen Mainamati was Gorakh-nath’s disciple, while HAdi- 
pA figures in the legend-cycle of her son GopichAnda. This legend-cycle 
speaks of GopichAnda ’s unwilling renunciation, while young, of his kingdom 
and his wives, Aduna and Paduna, at the request of his mother Mainamati, 
who by dint of her Yogic powers had come to know that he could not other- 
wise be saved from premature death, and also how he left his home as a disciple 
of Hadi-pa, a Guru of low caste, who is no other than Gorakh-nAth’s disciple 
referred to in the Chary a-padas. 1 The Sahajayana referred to in the Chary d- 
padas relates to mystic Buddhism like Vajrayana. In VajrayAna cere- 
monials Were emphasized, while in Sahajayana ceremonials were dispensed 
with, though the goal of both was the same, viz. Mahasukha. The Sahajayana 
is further attested to by an inscription of the thirteenth century A.D., engraved 
on a copper-plate found at Mainamati which records a grant of land in favour 
of a Buddhist monastery built in the city of Pattikera by Ranavankamalla 
Harikaladeva in A.D. 1220 in the seventeenth year of his reign and which 
speaks of a superior officer of the royal groom as practising the Sahajadharma 
in Pattikeraka. 2 

The Kingdom of Pattikera. 

Pa^tikera was the capital of the kingdom of that name mentioned in 
Burmese Chronicles as Patikkara or Pateikkara and which may be traced as 
far back as the eleventh century A.D* A pargand of Tippera District which 
extends to Mainamati lulls is still known as PA^ikArA or Paitkara and in older 
• documents as PAtikerA or Paitkera. This helps us to look for PattikerA of the 
copper-plate in this pargand . Of particular interest is the evidence furnished 
by an inscription of the seventh century A.D. referring to a royal palace or 
residence at Karmanta, the modem Badkamta, 12 miles west of Comilla and 
6 miles west of Mainamati in Tippera District. Later records, such as the 

1 Refer MS. of 47 Charyd-padas composed by 22 poets in old Bengali with Sanskrit com- 
mentary, discovered by MM. Haraprasad Sastri; the History of Bengal , Vol. I (ed. by R. C. 
Majumdar), pp. 383-86. 

8 Indian Historical Quarterly , Vol. IX, p. 282. 

# * The manuscript Affasahasrikd PrajUdpdramitd, copied in 1016 AD., contains the picture 
>f Jthe sixteen-armed Buddhist Goddess Chu$4& with the label 'Paftikere Chui^varabhavan© 
IhutydA*. 



218 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Baghaura inscription of the time of the Ffila king Mahlp&la (eleventh century 
AJD.) and the Mehar copper-plate of D&modaradeva (1234 A.D.) establish the 
connection of Samatata with the modem Tippera District. In Samata$a was 
situated the principality or the kingdom of Pattikera, whose existence accord- 
ing to recent finds at Mainamati can be traced as far back ae_the eighth century 
A.D. Coins similar to certain symbolical coins of the Chandra dynasty of 
Arakan, who had their capital at Wiethali in Arakan from 788 to 957 A.D., 
and terracotta plaques with representations of Arakanese and Burmese men 
and women were found at Mainamati which throw light on the relation between 
India and Burma in the eighth to tenth centuries A.D. In the coins the name 
of the principality is given as Patikera while the Burmese Chronicles refer to 
this kingdom as Patikkara, the country of Kalas or foreigners which bounded 
on the west the kingdom of Anoratha (1044-1077 A.D.) and also to a king 
Pateikkara of the kingdom of Marawa’. The references in the Burmese 
Chronicles imply, but do not prove, that this kingdom was an independent 
State during the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D., when the Pftla and Sena 
kings were ruling over Bengal. An intimate intercourse between this kingdom 
and the kingdoms of Burma is proved by these Chronicles, and inter-marriages 
in the royal families between the two countries were also common. Pattikera 
princes and princesses figure in the romances and tragedies in Burmese annals, 
poems and melo-dramas, and the names of the Burmese king Kyanzittha 
(1084-1112 A.D.), Alaungsithu and Narathu are well known. 1 Indian 
Buddhism was welcomed by Kyanzittha who built the Ananda temple at 
Pagan after the temples of the Indian mainland. The Ananda temple is 
described as the best creation of Indo-Burmese art. Harikaladeva Rana- 
vankamalla, who in 1220 A.D. was presumably ruling as an independent kin g 
appears to have been a feudatory chief, who along with two other r uling 
families with name-endings -deva came to power after the collapse of the Sena 
power in the thirteenth century A.D. Strangely enough we do not hear of the 
principality of Pattikera after Harikaladeva; only the name survives in the 
modem pargand of PatikarS or Pai(,kara. Probably it was absorbed in the 
growing kingdom of the Deva family. 


The Chandrae of Eastern Bengal. 

Another kingdom like the principality of Pat$ikerfi that flourished around 
modem Comilla between 900 and 1050 A.D. was that of the Chandrae, whose 
existence is .known from inscriptions* This Chandra dynasty ’reoeives pro- 
minent mention at the hands of Lama Tfirftn&tha, though there is not sufficient 
evidence to prove its existence from the sixth to the eighth centuries A.D. as 
TfirSnfitha attempts to. We leam from inscriptions, coins and Burmese 
Chronicles of a dynasty of kings that ruled in the Arakan region jn the seventh 


Vol I, pp*2S7 4t*°' V BUrma ’ PP ' 49 ‘ 80: Birtor V °! Bengal (ad. by Dr. R. 0. Majunja 

* Binary iff Bengal, Vol. I (ad. by Dr. R. C. Majumdar), pp. 19S-S7, 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAINAMATI & LALMAI RANGES 217 

oentury A.D. and even earlier. Their names end in -ohandra and an account 
of nine of them ruling from 788 to 957 A.D. is recorded in the Burmese Chro- 
nioles. 1 Coins similar to those found in Arakan and figured by Phayre have 
been found near Mainamati in the present survey * and like them, have to 
be assigned on pal&eographical grounds to the seventh or eighth century A.D., 
if not earlier. While the coins found in Arakan speak of Dharmachandra, 
Piitichandra and Virachandra in respect of the Chandra dynasty of Arakan, 
exactly similar thin silver issues, also symbolical in purpose, were found at 
Mainamati with the legend PatiHrya above couchant humped bull on the 
obverse, and the trident with Sun and Moon above and garlands hanging 
from it on the reverse. One such coin, out of a hoard of 63, found in the 
enclosure of Anandaraja’s palace ruins (Mound No. 5) in Mainamati is figured 
here (Plate V, fig. 1). Vincent Smith notices another similar coin with the 
legend £rt $ ivasya and remarks that such coins were found buried among 
old ruins in Arakan and were supposed to belong to the Chandra dynasty 
that tradition records as having ruled between 788 and 957 A.D. While 
the date of such coins found at Mainamati is determinable from the palaeo- 
graphy of the legends on the coin figured (PL V, fig. 1), the name Patikerya 
is of singular interest to us for our study of the archaeology of Mainamati. 
It at once refers to the famous Pattikeraka-vihara of the Pala period which 
ranked in importance with such ancient Buddhist monasteries as of Odanta- 
puri, Somapura, Vikramailla, Nalanda, Traikutaka, Devikota, Pandita, 
Sannagara, Jagaddala, Phullahari and Vikramapuri. Anandaraja’s palace 
mound in Mainamati was definitely a monastery, probably the renowned 
Pattikeraka monastery itself, and the coin in question was a symbolic issue 
of this, while perhaps the Chandras were ruling Eastern Bengal. 

The Chandras of Rohitagiri. 

From inscriptions we hear of six such Chandra kings that ruled in Eastern 
and/or Southern Bengal between 900-1050 A.D. with Rohitagiri , perhaps 
modem Lalmai hills now surveyed, as their capital. First is Layahaohandra 
whose kingdom has to be located around modem Comilla. Next we have 
evidence of a dynasty as follows 

Pfirnachandra 

i 

Suvarnachandra 

I 

Trailokyachandra 

i 

Srichandra 

Govindachandra 


♦ * Phayre, Coins of Arakan, of Pegu and of Burma, pp. 28-80 and 42. 
• Phayre, Plate II, fig. 12. 



218 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


It seems fairly certain that Rohit&giri, the seat of these Chandras, was 
probably near Comilla and perhaps included the present Lalmai hills, five 
miles to the west of Comilla. 1 ‘Bohitagiri’ and ‘Lalmai’ both mean ‘red hill’. 
Suvarnachandra is said to have become a follower of Buddha, and his successors 
were also Buddhists. The history of this family stops w&h ^richandra and 
we have no information of his successor. 6richandra appears to have flourished 
at the close of the tenth or the beginning of the eleventh century A.D. Govinda- 
chandra [also with his name ending with -chandra], who is referred in the 
accounts of Rajendrach ola’s invasion of Bengal (1021 A.D.), appears to have 
succeeded iSrichandra. In what relationship both Layahachandra and 
Govindachandra stood to the Chandra dynasty beginning with Purnachandra 
is not known; it is likely that they were of the same family. 2 The Chandra 
kingdom appears to have been destroyed by the invasion of the Kalachun Karna 
(1041-1070 A.D.) and we do. not hear of it after the middle of the eleventh 
century A.D. It is thus easy to appreciate that the Mainamati and Lalmai 
hills that form the venue of the present survey witnessed the glory of the 
Chandra kings and the kings of the Pattikera principality from about the 
eighth to the thirteenth centuries A.D. 

Mounds in Mainamati Village. 

At Mainamati itself, five miles west of Comilla several mounds were 
noticed in an extensive plain. In an area of one square mile, 20 such were 
noticed within the military bounds from the river Gumti in the north to 
the local survey school in the south (Plate XVII, Plans 1, 2 and 2A). Near 
one of these mounds (2) it was reported to me by the District Magistrate 
that trench diggings had exposed a stone image of a Jaina Tirthahkara and 
potsherds. The image could not be recovered and it was reported that 
the Station Staff Officer at Mainamati had probably removed it somewhere 
for safety. The potsherds were, however, with Mr. Rasmohan Chakravarti, 
Superintendent of the Rammala Library, Comilla, and were available for 
my examination. They were mostly bits of pans, pots, lids and pot-rests, 
with such designs as the zig-zag, herring-bone, chess-board and chevron. 
They were evidently bits from pottery of monastic use. Regarding the stone 
image itself, we have the testimony of Mr. R. M. Chakravarti who saw iV 
a couple of months before we started the survey and told me that it was 
a nude image, from which it was easy to recognize a Jaina. Tirthahkara 
image. No other Jaina remains could be noticed in the locality. We do not 
hear much of Jainism in East Bengal. The existence of a Jaina Vihara in 
the fourth century A.D. at Vata-Gohali in the present site of Paharpur, Hiuen 
Tsang’s reference in the seventh century A.D. to the influence the Nirgranthas 
had in North, South and East Bengal, the subsequent disappearance from 
Bengal of the sect of Nirgranthas during the P&la and Sena period, the probable 


* History of Bengal, Vol. I (ed. by Dr. R. C. Majumdar), p. 194, 

* Ibid., p. 196. 




ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAIN AM ATI & LALMAI RANGES 219 


assimilation of the Nirgranthas towards the end of the Pfila period in the 
Avadhfitas and such other religious sects and the re-establishment in Northern 
Bengal during the Muhammadan period of the old religion in its new form, 
thanks to the services of Jaina immigrants from Western India — are some 
of the features jftjhe development of Jainism in Bengal. Its sway in East 
Bengal in contrast to the spectacular hold that Buddhism had in Bengal was 
not much. As at Paharpur, so also at Mainamati, Jainism appears to have 
flourished side by side with Buddhism and Brahmanism. It is likely that 
subsequent excavations near mound 2 may reveal Jaina vestiges. 

Brahmanical Images . 

Brahmanical images in and around Mainamati have been known for a long 
time ; some of them are now kept in the Rammala Library, Comilla, under the 
custody of Mr. Chakra varti. 1 Indeed the best specimen is an image of Surya of 
black chlorite, revealing Pala workmanship (PI. IV). The iconographic details of 
Surya (Bhaskara) are completely represented. Within a background, 3' 10* X 
1' IT, stands Sflrya erect holding symmetrically a lotus in each hand, while 
flying Vidyadhara couples hovering above, parasol juxtaposed right in the 
centre over his head, eleven Suryas (out of the twelve dvadaia-Adityas) and 
Gane6a flanking him, Danda and PiAgala standing one on each side, an 
attendant-woman (Chamaradharini) on either side, his consort, Chhayadevi, in 
front of his legs, Aruna in front driving a rotunda of seven horses and Ushas 
and Sandhya symmetrically poised below at the extreme ends as bow-women 
— are detailed with such narrative wealth and exuberance that the sculpture 
can go as the best specimen of ‘symmetria prisca’ such as is described by 
Leonardo da Vinci, while its Pala date is easily recognized. It was represented 
to me that this image was found some years ago from the river Gumti in the 
hamlet of Pakilara near Mainamati Post Office (Plate IV). 

Other images of similar date found at Varella, three miles north of Maina- 
mati represent Vasudeva, Hara-Gauri, Jagadh&tri, Gane6a and Vishnu. The 
material is black chlorite and workmanship Pala. It would be easy and 
refreshing to discover that the place harboured all the religions of the time. 

Kutila-mura and Bairagi-mura (Mounds 3 and 4). 

One mile to the south of Mainamati survey school are two mounds known 
as Kutila-mura and Bairagi-mura, both situated on the Mainamati range (3 and 
4 of Plan). Kutila-mura is an extensive mound about a furlong square. 
Fossil wood specimens of the genus Olutoxybn were picked up in this area. 
Potsherds with designs such as squares, herring-bone and clubs were collected 
from the surface in large number (Plate III, fig. 14). To the west of these 
mounds lies Bairagi-mura (No. 3). Luckily these mounds have not been visited 
by the contactors in their search for bricks and henoe appear to be promising 
for scientific excavation. 

* " "' T ' - I '" ' • ' 

• 1 I learn that as a measure of safety owing to war, they have since been removed to 
Brahmanberia, Tippera District. 



220 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Anandaraja's Palace Ruins (Mound No. 5). 

A big mound (No. 5 of plan), about a furlong square and one and a half 
miles to the south of Kutila-mura and four miles to the south-west of Camilla 
(Plate I, a), was the scene of heavy depredation for bricks. Cart-loads of 
bricks were removed from this mound before action oould te taken to check. 1 
The ruins revealed, however, on plan a square monastery about a furlong each 
side, with an arrangement, as at Paharpur, of a central temple with reoessed 
comers and re-entrant angles. Probably the arrangement of the oentral temple 
resulted, as at Paharpur, in a cruciform shape with one projecting angle between 
the arms of the cross. It is evident from what has been exposed by the 
contractors that the remains of a temple surrounded by a monastery existed 
here. The recessed angles of the central temple revealed an arrangement, as 
at Paharpur, of walls which were relieved on the outer face by projecting 
mouldings and cornices of ornamental bricks on top with designs of stepped 
pyramid, lotus petals (cyma recta), chess-board patterns and bands of terracotta 
plaques set in recessed panels below running around the basement. Bricks 
of large size supported these plaques on the bottom thereby forming a sunk 
panel for the plaques to be assembled. There were no traces of any binding 
material that held these plaques or the cornices above and the bricks below 
together. Similar comice patterns and arrangement of terracotta plaques 
are also known from Mahasthan 2 in Bengal and Burma, Siam and Java. 
In the central temple enclosure were recovered a large number of terracotta 
plaques with carvings drawn from divine, semi-divine, human, animal, bird 
and aquatic lives and ornamental bricks and other decorative pieces of terracotta 
material that had gone to dress the facade of the basement. It was evident 
that the decorative plaques were meant to catch the eye of the circumambu- 
lating worshippers. It was easy to discover that the site is prominently 
Buddhist, the ensemble of evidence from plaques, architecture, and style of 
sculpture lending support to this conclusion as also to a period from the eighth 
to the tenth centuries A.D. to which they should be referred. 


Terracotta Plaques . 


The plaques recovered from the central temple enclosure here offer very 
interesting study, as at Paharpur and Mahasthan in North Bengal and in 


the same dynamic movement and expressive of popular fancy and folk imagina- 
tion or folk art. In the art that these terraoottas reveal we cannot see much 
of Pftla and Sena artistic tendencies as both P&la and Sena constituted a 
hieratic school in whioh little scope was afforded to folk art. If we remember 
this it will be easy to appreciate that the themes are drawn from the daily 


1 I taka this opportunity to offer my thanks to Dm. Shyama Prasad Mookerji, E. C.Majumdar, 
Kalidaa Nag, Hxm*Wa Justice Edgley and Rao Bahadur K. N. Dikshit, who kindly and ably 
helped me in checking brick depredations in Mainamati and Lalmai areas of such archaeological 
promise. 1 

* AJSJ. , AM*, 1936-37, plates XV and XVI. 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAIN AM ATI A LALMAI RANGES 221 


life of the people, from all creations of God and nature in the various stages 
of activity, emotion, movement and rest. There is a purposeful rhythm 
runnmg through the whole series, as at Paharpur, which intimately connects 
this tolk art with contemporaneous stone representations of the hieratic 
religious art of Bpqp al of the period. Besides giving us a true insight into the 
real social life of the people of those days they help to throw a flood of light 
on the history of the place and the religion of the monuments which they were 
decorating. Divine and semi-divine figures, composite animals, hybrids, 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, celestial musicians, Vidyadharas and 
Yakshas among the demi-gods, men and women in various movements, war- 
riors, archers, acrobats balancing bodies on their hands, sages and ascetics, 
musicians with their instruments, and domestic and family studies are re- 
presented with all their local and ethnical characteristics. Among animals, lion, 
wild boar, antelope and pig are popular while motifs such as Makara, Vydla 
(leograph) and addorsed lions are worth mentioning. Similarly we find ducks 
and the royal swan or harhsa. Among gods only Buddha and Padmapani 
are depicted and it would appear that representations of divinities of the 
hierarchical religion are rare. The flora is not omitted and meandering 
creepers, lotuses and the Greek acanthus, the last as a motif, appear to have 
been popular, while Gupta art seems to have influenced the style of workman- 
ship. A few selected specimens are figured here to illustrate. Among human 
beings warriors in action with shield and dagger (Plate X, fig. 3), with sword 
in left hand (Plate X, fig. 2), with dagger in right, the left in a threatening 
attitude (Uirjini — Plate X, fig. 1), and killing tiger (Plate X, fig. 4) and archers 
(Plate X, fig. 5) offer interesting study. From a description of Vidyadharas 
being associated with swords given in the V ishnudharmottara (Chapter 42, 
w. 9-10) it is possible to identify some of the warriors here as Vidyadharas, 
particularly those who appear to fly and wear lotus-boots as at Paharpur 
(Plate X, figs. 1, 2, 3, 6, 6 and 7). A bearded and emaciated sage in an 
attitude of dancing (Plate XI, fig. 5) forms the subject of another plaque. 
A Brahmin with moustache, small knotted beard and three stranded Tajno - 
pavita with his wife sitting by his side and child on his lap forms an interesting 
domestic study (Plate XI, fig. 7). Another plaque shows a lady seated with 
right hand resting on her thigh and left hand touching her head as though 
bemoaning her fate and this would recall a familiar Indian mode of expression 
of grief or pensiveness (Plate XI, fig. 8). A plaque showing the Buddha seated 
in Vajrasana with right hand in bhUmisparia attitude (Plate VII, fig. 6) and 
another representing Padmapani seated in mahdrdja-lila pose, with kundodas 
in the ears, braided hair in curls, right hand resting on the ground and left 
holding lotus by its stalk (Plate VII, fig. 5) are the best specimens from here 
of the hieratic religious art of Bengal which was prevailing under the P&las. 
Representations of the demi-gods form the majority. Vidyadharas (Plate 
VIII, figs. 3 and 6 ; Plate IX, figs. 3 and 6) are depioted on three best specimens 
»f realistic study. A Vidy&dhan, who formed part of a Vidyadhara couple 
-hat was hovering in the sky, forms the subject-matter of yet another plaque 



22 2 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


that recalls the Gupta style of art (Plate IX, fig. 2). While Vidy&dharas are 
human, the Gandharvas and the Kinnaras are hybrid in oharacter. Certain 
texts describe a Kinnara as one with human figure and head of horse, or 
horse's body and the head of a man. Other texts draw a distinction be/ween 
Kinnara and Kimpurusha by ascribing horse-head and hjigtym^kfliv to the 
Kinnara and human head and horse-body to the Kimpurusha. 1 The Gan- 
dharvas are celestial musicians who sing and dance and hold a lute or a churning 
stick or other musical instruments. The Kinnaras are likewise celebrated as 
choristers in epic and classical poetry. The hybrid character of the Gan- 
dharvas, which they share with Kinnaras and Kimpurushas, is also interesting 
to the student of comparative philology, as for this reason it is possible to 
trace an etymological connection between Sanskrit Gandharva and centaur* 
Greek Kentauros, Avestic Gandarewa, Iranian Gandarewa, and Dra vidian 
Kudirai. 2 Indian sculpture does not exhibit much difference in their concep- 
tion in the three schools of Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism except in details 
of workmanship and style. 8 It is interesting, though confusing, that all the 
variant descriptions are supported by sculptures and paintings found in India 
and Ceylon. Sculptures from Bharhut and Sanchi in Central India, Paharpur 
in Bengal, Udaigiri, Rameswaram, Kanchipuram and Mallam in South India 
and paintings from Ajanta (Hyderabad) are a few cases to illustrate the point. 
A beautiful rendering of a Kinnara with animal's legs and upper body and 
face human, with wings instead of arms and the head decorated with lotus 
foliage and the ears with Kundalc is and fierce looking eyes such as are 


Vdchaspatya ; Bhdgavata Parana, Book VII, Chatper 20; but Vishnudharmottara (Book 
UI, Chapter 42, verses 13-14) recognizes two classes of Kinnara— one with horse-body and human 
head and the other vice versa . But the Mdnasdra, which is a standard work on the subject, 
describes the Kinn a r a as with legs of animals, upper body like that of man, face with Garuda 
features, arms provided with wings, the crown decorated with lotus, etc. This description is 
also found in Ceylon. 

2 In Vedic literature the Kinnaras figure under the name Kimpurusha and are reckoned 
among the Gandharvas as celestial musicians. According to the Jainas the Gandharvas and 
Kinnar as constitute one of the eight orders of the Vyantaras. The Matsya Parana describes 
the Gandharvas as flying in the cloud region with their consorts, the Apsarasas, and holding 
garlands and bunches of flowers, the idea being that they hurry to the shrine to worship the 
deity. Their main functions being music and dance, they have to be distinguished from their 
compeers, the Vidy&dharas and the Yakshaa, who are described as the chief repositories of secret 
learning. 

* Grunwedel enumerate* six classes of secondary gods in Brahmin mythology, viz.- 
(1) Kinnaras, (2) Kimpurushas, (3) Gandharvas, (4) Pannagas or Nagas, (6) Siddhas, and 
(8) Vidyidharas. These correspond more or less to the Vyantara gods of the Jaina, viz. : PiMohas, 
Bhutas, Yakahae, R&kshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas and Gandharvas. The eight 
classes ofdemi-gods enumerated in Buddhist literature are Devas, Nigas, Rikshasas Gandharvas 
Asuras, Gannas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas. In the Brahmin mythology cited by Grunwedel and 
Rajendralal Mitra, the Gandharvas are assigned to a class of secondary gods or attendants, which 
includes (1) K i nnaras, Kubera’s musicians who have human body and horse's 'need; (2) Kim- 
purushaa with human face and the body of a bird, often confounded with Kiaum* and 
Gandharvas; (8) Gandharvas with human bust and a bird’s body whose wive* are the A psasftsajj T 
(4) Pannagas or NSgae; (8) Siddhas flying in the air and appearing anywhere at any moment! 
(6) VidySdbaree or celestial students skilled in all knowledge; (7) Yakshas; (8) Rftksh ete?< 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAINAMATI & LALMAI RANGES 

associated with the Garu^a bird, forms the subject-matter of a very interesting 
plaque (Plate VI, fig. 1). A KimpurushI, with human head and animal's 
body, is illustrated in another plaque (Plate VIII, fig. 4). A Yaksha figure in 
frontal pose with hands held in tarpammudra is shown on yet another plaque 
(Plate Among animals, antelope (Plate XIII, fig. 10), wild boar 

(Plate XIV, fig. 7), pig and lion (the last being a poor study — Plate XIII, 
fig. 1) and animal complexes and decorative motifs such as Malcara (Plate 
XVI, fig. 1), Vyala or leograph with profuse lion’s mane (Plate XIII, fig. 5), 
and addorsed lions going on comer brackets afford interesting study. The 
harhsa or the royal swan with bent neck and with plumed tail (Plate XVI, 
fig. 9) among birds and the Greek acanthus occurring here as a motif (Plate 
XVI, fig. 3) provide a refreshing study. 

Bricks found in this area are of various sizes and shapes, the largest 
size being 13£'x 9*x ; while rectangular bricks constitute the majority, 

square bricks and tiles are also known. Ornamented bricks, which decorated 
the mouldings and which agree in design and decoration with those found 
at Paharpur and Bangarh, present very interesting major and minor designs 
and geometrical patterns. A few are illustrated in Plate III (figs. 1-5). It 
will be seen that the bell-shaped stupa was a popular major design as elsewhere 
(fig. 5) and the zig-zag (fig. 4), the chevron, the stepped pyramid, cyma recta 
(Plate VI, fig. 1) and dental edges with zig-zag course between (Plate III, 
fig. 3) were popular decorative patterns. Potsherds were picked up in large 
numbers and one can readily recognize that they were of pans, lids and pots, 
some of them with designs, such as chevron, straight lines, herring-bone, 
squares and trellis (Plate III, figs. 6-10, 13, 15-16). A potsherd of the black 
variety with beautiful glaze and with an interesting design on its edge look- 
ing like letters (Plate III, fig. 17) was picked up from the centre. The design 
is perhaps more calligraphic than epigraphio in intent. Among other things 
found here mention may be made of two fossil wood pieces of the genus 
Oluta and sixty-three thin silver coins. Only one coin in this group which 
could be recovered has been described already (Plate V, fig. 1). 

Rupban-Kanya's Palace (Mound No. 6). 

To the south of Anandaraja’s palaoe ruins is another mound (No. 6 of 
Plan) called Rupban-KanyS’s palace. The mound measures about 400 feet 
square and is 15 feet high from the surrounding paddy field. Traces of a 
central structure and enclosing walls can be made out. A stone cubical 
pillar base showing the design of a chaitya window on* each side was found in 
the centre of the mound suggesting the existence of a stone viandapa or shrine. 
Terracotta plaques and bricks of various sizes, maximum being 13'xllJ'x 
2J* were also in evidenoe. Though brick depredation was heavy here, traoes 
of a structui^ perhaps a monastery with arrangement of central temple and 
surrou n di ng cells can be noticed. A few plaques were also recovered which 
sho^ the semi-divine Yaksha, the hybrid Kimpurusha and the wild boar 
in all its wild majesty. 



m 


O. LAW VOLUME 


Bhojardja*8 Palace (Mound No. 7). 


Near Rupban-Kanya’s palace and half a mile to the south of Anandar&ja’s 
palace are the ruins called Bhojar&ja’s palace in an area of about 40^ feet 
square (Plate II, fig. a). The arrangement was similar to that ofAgggtJ^rftja’s 
palace with a small mound about 30 feet high, in the oentifr^Tnedigging for 
brioks here had exposed well laid out brick courses and a square temple with 
massive walls (Plate II, fig. 6) and with its basement profusely decorated 
with carved plaques and ornamental brioks. Though brick spoliation had 
been heavy here, a chamber, 6 feet square, found in the centre suggests that 
the central structure may have been composed of box-like chambers as at 
Medh (Mahasthan) (Plate II, fig. b). Bricks of various sizes, the maximum 
size being 13* X nr X2|* were also recovered. But the terracotta plaques 
with interesting carvings drawn from human, divine, semi-divine, animal*^ 
bird lives and flora as at Ananda raja’s palace afford interesting study. Among 
animals, the elephant (Plate XIV, fig. 4) marching magnificently with 
its usual gait, called by poets kunjara-gati (PI. XVIII, fig. 10), the buffalo 
bending and scratching its head with its leg (Plate XIV, fig. 5), the wild boar 
in an attacking mood (Plate XIV, fig. 6), the rhinoceros, the antelope and the 
chameleon on a tree-branch are worth mentioning. The buffalo and the wild 
boar (Plate XIV, figs. 5 and 6) are masterpieces of realistic study in terracotta 
material. Among birds the royal swan ( hamsa ) with its plumed and foliated 
tail seems to have caught the fancy of the local artists. The hamsa pecking 
at or holding in its beak a string of pearls is also known (Plate XVI, fig. 8). 
The subject-matter and the conception of ‘the hamsa and the pearl string* 
(Muktaphala-lobhi Kalahamsa) would at once recall the golden age of the 
classical art that was ushered in the Gupta period. Among flowers, the lotus 
juxtaposed between foliated acanthus (Plate XVI, fig. 4) seems to have been 
popular as a motif . The flowers of the country are shown individually as 
well as in conventional groupings that go to form interesting motifs (Plate 
XVI, fig. 4). Men in various fighting attitudes and with weapons of war 
(Plate X, figs. 7-8), as killing tiger (Plate X, fig. 6), acrobats balancing their 
uplifted bodies and attempting difficult feats (Plate IX, fig. 7), and semi- 
divine beings, such as Kinnara with human head and bird*s body and wings 
(Plate VHI, fig. 6), Kinnara with human body and horse-head (to which class 
the horse-headed Tumburu belongs — Plate VIII, fig. 8), Gandharva, as a 
celestial musician, playing on tyxrmru (Plate VIII, fig. 7), and Gandharva 
{or perhaps a human being) beating time on a pitcher {ghafa ) (Plate IX, fig. 8) 
and Vidy&dharas hovering in the sky with garlands in their hands (Plate 
VIII, fig. 9) form the subjects treated on a number of terracotta plaques 
recovered from the central mound. Some of the plaques exhibit a character 
similar to that of stone sculpture of the times. Exuberant Ns, conception 
and in the richness of subject-matter, the local artists did not scruple tp stoop 
even to small matters or situations, and no subject appeared to them aft d&T 
sma ll or unworthy of attention. The find of such terraoottas here with singula^ 




i i nnim i aunt ht*r 

i.f \\ i, ij }, 


\ »-w* Nh«»\vin>? ra^ntmnt 
'»«n n.af hurst. 


(e) Kotburi rwiti 


tVt *i{! still! h 









Plate V 


votive images of the Buddha in Vajrasrw.a. f rom Rupben 








w terracotta plaques 

1 Buddhist divine beings from Rapban-tnurS 
from AimnJ.trftjrt’s momH , 







* fr >m Chamn-miaa. L„ln,m. 





Terracotta plaque*— -A: 
ipbAti>murS ; 4~S f wm Bho : 
Amndarfija’a 


tiwiiftl studies, 
faraju’s palace mound : 7 


t’LATE XV 





Plate XVIII 




ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAINAMATI & L ALMA I RANGES 226 

subjects carved on them would single out the structure as one of exceptional 
interest. It was probably a Buddhist Vihdra with the temple or shrine in 
the oentre as at Paharpur. Pottery picked up here were mostly hopelessly 
crushed, as the one figured (PL III, fig. 11) will show. 

Itdkhola (Mound No. 8). 

Two hundred yards to the south of Bhojaraja’s palace is a big mound 
covered by thick vegetation, where quarrying for bricks had been heavy. The 
plan of structure was not discernible, but a few bricks and terracotta plaques 
recovered from here suggest its date as similar to that of the Anandaraja’s 
palace ruins. 

Rupban-murd (Mound No. 10). 

A furlong to the south of Itakhola is a vast site, one-fourth mile square 
in area, locally called Rupban-mura (Plate XVII, mound 10). Here the 
mound or mounds (at least three can be made out) are very high and 
brick depredation was on a large scale. One, when exposed, revealed in its 
centre a cruciform brick structure resembling in plan the central temple of 
Paharpur and of the Nandangarh temple, with re-entrant angles and recessed 
comers richly dressed on the outside with carved plaques and mouldings 
bearing interesting designs (Plate II, fig. c). Further it was reported to me 
that from this ruin were recovered seven pots containing votive images of the 
Buddha in bronze. Thanks to the efforts of the local officers of the Central 
Public Works Department, twelve images were recovered from the contractors 
and one from a private citizen of Comilla. They are all small votive images 
such as Buddhist pilgrims carried on their pilgrimage, and represent Vajrd- 
sam Buddha-Bhattaraka with the Vajra clearly shown on the pedestal in 
front and with the Buddhist creed formula embossed on the underside. The 
Buddha’s right hand indicates the bhumisparfa-mitdrd (Plate V, fig. 2). The 
monographic details and the workmanship of these images are similar to those 
of the inscribed votive bronzes recovered from Jhewari in Chittagong District, 
assignable to the ninth-eleventh centuries A.D. The images are very tiny, 
the maximum height being 2 inches. On one image only the Vajra was not 
indicated, but the creed formula was present in all. Two smaller mounds 
found nearby probably entomb votive stupas. The find of these images as 
well as the subject-matter of the oarvings on a majority of the plaques recovered 
from this area at onoe mark this as a Buddhist establishment, probably 
a monastery with arrangement of temples, as at Paharpur, and flanking cells 
as in a Buddhist monastery. Two structures have been disturbed so far but 
there are still two or three more unopened. The ensemble of evidence fur- 
nished by the terracottas and the images point to ninth-eleventh centuries AJX 
as the probable date of this ruin, while the subject-matter of the terraootte 
plaques and* the ornamental bricks throws a flood of light on the lives, beliefs 
and emotions of the people of Bengal of those days. 

ss 



226 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Plaques. 

As at Anandaraja’s palace, a very large number of terracotta plaques 
from the basement of the structure exposed here reveal scenes drawn from the 
daily lives of the people, creations of God and nature in various stages of 
movement, equipoise, emotion and experience. With simple tools and cheap 
material, such as mud and clay, the local folk-artists have achieved almost 
a marvel in sculptural art. All lives are represented — divine, semi-divine, 
human, animal, bird and flora — not to speak of popular stories and decorative 
patterns, motifs and compositions. The terracotta plaques (in Mainamati 
and Lalmai areas) are wider in size than at Paharpur while the art represented 
on them is of a higher class of excellence, in spite of limitations of material. 
Among the divine, Bodhisattva Vajrapani (Plate VII, fig. 2), Padmapani 
(Plate VII, fig. 1), Trailokyavijaya in alidha pose and with the Vajra in one 
of his left hands (Plate VII, fig. 3), and Prince Siddhartha cutting off his locks 
of hair before his renunciation are popular. Among the semi-divine, Yakshas 
(Plate VII, fig. 4), Vidyadharas (Plate VIII, fig. 9 ; Plate X, fig. 7 ; Plate XI, 
fig. 1 ; Plate XVIII, figs. 8-9), Gandharva as drummer (Plate VIII, fig. 2) with 
an expression of gratification and deep intent in his performance, Kinnara 
in close fitting tunic (kanchuka) beating time with his hands, and Kimpurusha 
are noticed. Among the human, warriors with different weapons of war, 
archers, men fighting with tigers, dancing and playing on flute (Plate XI, 
fig. 4), women in their toilet or sleeping and cowherdess churning milk can be 
noticed. Of special interest are a few subjects which may be noted in detail. 
A study of irony is attempted in one plaque where a man sitting at ease, 
profusely dressed and decorated, is attempting to learn fighting, like Uttara 
in the harem of Virata, which had led him to a ridiculous position of dis- 
proportionate weapons held in wrong hands. The warrior holds a big shield 
in his right hand and a small dagger in his left (Plate XI, fig. 6). A woman 
sleeping forms the subject of another and this may be taken to represent Maya, 
Buddha’s mother, dreaming of the white elephant that entered her womb. 
On a third plaque a pot-bellied fat man with striped under-garment and 
necklet of beads, recalling Gupta features, is shown seated. A king sitting at 
ease and displaying conspicuously an armlet (afigada) on his left arm, a foreigner 
probably a Burman with striped pyjamas, a sword tucked to his waist and 
with head dressed with a turban (ushnisha), such as is seen in Burma today, 
are carved on two interesting plaques. A Patakd-ndyika or standard-bearing 
woman, holding a flag of religious significance and hurrying towards probably 
a shrine, is shown on another plaque (Plate XV, fig. 6). Her dress with incised 
circular marks on it reminds us of the modem brocaded female attire. She 
appears to be a foreigner, probably Burmese or Arakanese. A lady with 
patm-kunifatas in her ears and hair arranged elegantly in a top knot (dhammiUa) 
even as the modem Burmese lady does, the profile study of a man, and a stout 
lady in a nude condition dancing, form the subject-matter of three more 
plaques wherein human study is refreshingly delineated. 

* 5 » 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAINAMAT1 & LALMAI RANGES 227 

Serpents from the reptile class, lions, striped antelopes recumbent (Plate 
XIII, figs. 9 and 11), elephants caparisoned (Plate XIV, figs. 1 and 2) and 
with rider (Plate XIV, fig. 3), tigers with their tell-tale stripes, grinning mon- 
keys (Plate XIII, fig. 8), rhinoceros, wild boar, caparisoned bull with tail 
raised in vigour (Plate XIII, fig. 3) and squirrel on tree-branch afford an 
interesting animal study. Some of the animals are also seen in decorative 
compositions and motifs. Such are — the Makara (Plate XVI, fig. 2) and 
Kirtimukha resembling the Javanese Kala-makara motif (Plate XIII, figs. 4 
and 6 ; Plate XVIII, fig. 6). Frontal study of an elephant, such as one finds 
surmounting capitals with its four legs drawn in front in a line and with the trunk 
in their centre (Plate XV, fig. 3), the conventional antelope within a foliage 
inset, the lion within a cave formed by foliage which recalls the Gupta technique 
known from Samath (Plate XV, fig. 4), addorsed harhsas with bead-necklace 
in their beaks, also a symmetric study of Gupta art tradition (Plate XVI, 
fig. 6) and serpent couples ( mithuna ) intertwined in love around a lotus 
inset as in South Indian sculpture (Plate XV, fig. 1), and the duel between 
the natural enemies, the mongoose and the serpent {ahi-nakvla) (Plate XV, 
fig. 2)— all these afford at once a good study of animals and an appreciation 
of animal compositions so as to form decorative patterns and designs. Equally 
interesting are the purna-ghata motifs, such as one notices in Gupta archi- 
tecture and in ^a^anka’s coins and inscriptions (Plate VI, figs. 2 and 3), and 
corner brackets with the design of pumpkin offsets (Plate VI, fig. 4). Greek 
vases juxtaposed between foliage, lotus knobs as in Mahasthan, Bengal, 1 
and full-blown lotus between Greek acanthus (Plate XVI, fig. 5) and two 
rows of foliage (Plate XVIII, fig. 5) are also worth studying here as motifs . 
Lotus and lily among the flora and harhsas with bead -necklaces or foliage in 
their beaks (Plate XVIII, figs. 3, 4) and parrots on ant-hills, as at Paharpur, 
among birds (Plate XVI, fig. 7) have had a distinct thematic appeal to the 
local artists. 

Miscellaneous Scenes . 

Of special interest are some miscellaneous scenes. Such are — a monkey 
chief sitting on his haunch, profusely decorated and with the Yajhopavita 
marking his class, a monkey crawling on all fours in front of a man sitting 
on his haunch (Plate *XVIII, fig. 7), a monkey carrying a pot with holes 
recalling the story of the monkey with the good intention to serve but lacking 
the brain (Plate XIII, fig. 8), a monkey helping another monkey to climb 
a tree and pull down fruits (Plate XIII, fig. 7), Chakravartin Mandh&ti 
(of Mandh&tu J&taka) sitting and producing by a wave of his hand a shower 
of coins from the cloud region, a boy pulling out his leg with difficulty from 
the mouth of a reptile (Plate XI, fig. 3), and a tree spirit (Brahma-r&kshas) 
with fan-wise braided hair, patra-huri4alas in the ears and necklet of beads 
standing on the branch of a tree (Plate XII, fig. 1). A naked asoetio with a 


1 AJSJ., AJS., 1936-37, Plato XV, fig. e. 




228 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


fan 0 f palm-leaf under his arm shown on a plaque probably represents a 
Jaina ascetic on his charya after dikshd. Yet another plaque illustrates the 
story of the father and the son who to please the world carried the donkey 
between them on a pole in illustration of the moral that one cannot please all 
(Plate XI, fig. 2). 

An excellent group of corner brackets of terracotta material was gathered 
from this mound. The designs presented were stepped pyramids around 
squares, Greek vases with fillet bands (Plate VI, fig. 2), pumpkin offsets 
(Plate VI, fig. 4) and purna-ghata (Plate VI, fig. 3). An interesting collection 
of ornamental brieks, though mostly fragmentary, was also gathered. Among 
the designs presented on them are— lotus rosettes in a row (Plate XVIII, 
fig. 2) and within squares and circles, cyma recta , lotus petals within voluted 
lines and arched bands (Plate XVIII, fig. 1), stepped pyramids, serpent 
hoods, chess-board and scallops in horizontal courses, the last as seen in images 
of the Buddha of the Gupta period. Wedge-shaped bricks were also noticed 
here. 

Potsherds of pans, pot-rests and of broad cooking vessels were recovered 
in large numbers. Some of them show incised designs such as lotus petals, 
dentils, herring-bone, zig-zags, chevron and straight lines as in Plate III, 
figs. 10, 14 and 15. In addition to the bronfce votive Buddhas noted already, 
an axe-head, 6' x l£', heavily corroded, was also recovered. 

Both the quality and the quantity of the finds, the variety of the scenes 
displayed on the plaques and the variegated designs presented on the orna- 
mental bricks, cornice brackets and pottery would point to the existence 
from at least the eighth century A.D. of a Buddhist establishment in this 
locality. 

Kotbdri (Mound No. 9). 

To the west of Rupban-mura is Kotbari (Mound No. 9) which is supposed 
to contain the ruins of a fort. The diggings for bricks had been very heavy 
here resulting in the almost complete dismantling of the structures. One 
such structure exposed showed on plan a pyramidal temple with re-entrant 
comers of walls (Plate I, figs, b and c), and surrounded by rows of cells. 
Probably it was also a monastery. The area of the cells appears to be 300 feet 
each way while the central temple which was probably sarvatobhadra in plan 
is about 100 feet each way. Large-sized rectangular brioks, 14* x9'x 2£*, are 
profuse here. A few plaques were also reported from here but none could be 
recovered. One interesting plaque, however, came from somewhere nearby 
though the man who brought it could only declare it as from Lalmai hill. The 
subject of the plaque is a flying Vidy&dhara (Plate VIII, fig. 1) in the violent 
movement of flight mixed with dance, in which act the garland that he held 
in his hands snaps. The upper cloth, necklet, YajiU)pavita } a^adas^ brocaded 
under-garment and lotus boots are noteworthy deoorative features presented 
on this plaque which would at once classify it among the best productions of 
the P&la period. 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES ALONG MAIN AM ATI & LALMAI RANGES 229 

Salbanrdja’s Palace (Mound No. 11). 

About a mile to the south-east of Rupban-mura is Salbanraja’s palace 
ruins which are extensive and fortunately not quarried for bricks. Terracotta 
plaques, one of them representing a Kirtimukha, comer-brackets with stepped 
pyramid and chess-board designs and potsherds with dentils, herring-bone 
and trellis designs on them were recovered here. Local tradition assigns the 
ruin to the period of Queen Mainamati, the mother of Gopichanda. It iij 
supposed that in the centre of the ruins is a chapel for the worship of Hadi-pS, ■■ 
the Ouru of Gopichanda and his mother. 

Owing to the richness of the sites and the undoubted importance of the 
discoveries, the preliminary survey started last year is now being continued. 
The results achieved so far is the addition of seven more sites, all intact, to 
those already noticed. The area surveyed was along the Lalmai hills, and 
the country traversed was about 6 miles to the south of Kotbari, beginning 
from Kotbari (Mound No. 9). 

Hatigara (Mound No. 12). 

To the west of Kotbari (Mound No. 9), and close to it, is the first mound 
in the new series, roughly 150 yards X 150 yards, and about 40 feet high, 
called Hatigara mound (Plan XVII, mound 12), where traces of brick struc- 
tures were visible. As the mound is intact the nature of the remains cannot 
be determined. 

Ujirpura (Mound No. 13). 

Ujirpura is the name of another extensive mound (Plan XVII, No. 13), 
350 yards x 250 yards, which is a mile to the south-west of Kotbari. The 
remains entombed here are intact. Ordinary bricks of various sizes and pot- 
sherds, some with designs as at Anandaraja’s palace and Bhojaraja’s palace 
mounds, were also noticed. 

Pucca Mura (Mound No. 14). 

About one mile to the south of Ujirpura mound is a big mound, about 
50 feet high and 300 X 100 yards in extent, from which bricks and potsherds 
as at Ujirpura were picked up. A very high and extensive mound, called 
locally Jammura, lies a mile to the south-east of Pucca Mur& and attracts one 
by its height and extent. But neither brioks and potsherds nor any other 
signs of structures were visible on the mound. The mound is apparently of 
little archaeological interest. 

OMlamurd (No. 15). 

Yet another mound, small but promising, and called Ghilamurfc, was 
noticed 2| miles to the south-east of S&lhanr&ja’s palace (Mound No. 11). 
The area is about 125 x 100 yards. Pottery and brioks are profusely scattered 
as at Rupban-murft. On some potsherds, squares, herring-bone and such 



230 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


designs were noticed incised. A fragment from a stone image (only the head 
can be made out) was also picked up here, and this suggests that probably a 

temple is entombed. , . 

Chaudrikhola is the name given to a very high mound situate about a 
mile to the south-west of GhiiamurS. But nothing of interest was notioed 
on it. Adina and Madina are two other high mounds on a hill, a mile to the 
south-west of Jammura. Like Jammura and Chaudrikhola they are un- 
interesting to the archaeologist. Not even ordinary bricks were found there. 
A mosque now crowns the mound called Adina. Yet another high and preten- 
tious mound in this area, without however any archaeological vestiges in it, 
is Rajakhola, 1$ miles to the south of Chaudrikhola. The name is its only 
attraction. 


Rupbani Mura (Mound No. 10). 

Four miles to thfe south-east of Pucca Mura and l J miles to the south- 
west of Rajakhola lies an extensive mound called Rupbani Mura 400 X 
250 yards, and about 45 feet high. Bricks of various sizos and potsherds 
were visible on the surface. A stream called Subhachanir-chara (probably 
faubhaianaiichara) runs at the foot of the mound and a bath in it is considered 
by the local people as sacred. The mound is intact and is of sufficient 
promise. . 

Balagazir Mura (Mound No. 17). 

Balagazir Mura is an extensive (400 X 300 yards) though not high mound, 
3 miles to the south of Ghilamura, as the crow flies, and about a mile to the 
north-west of Lalmai Railway Station. Potsherds and bricks were noticed 
in profusion here as at Ghilamura. It is pleasing to note that the mound is 
intact. 

Chaniimurd (Mound No. 18). 

To the south-west of Lalmai Railway Station and about 2 miles south- 
east of Rupbani Mura (Mound No. 16) is a very high and extensive mound, in 
fact the highest in the area, being 60 feet high and about 500 x 200 yards in 
extent. This is called ChandimurS, after the name of Chajpdl for whom a 
temple is constructed on its top. There is also a temple for 6iva by the side 
of the temple for Chanel, and worship of the god and goddess is going on now. 
More than these shrines the archaeologist is attracted by the large number of 
potsherds and bricks found in the area as at Anandar&ja’s and Bhojar&ja’s 
palaces mid Rupban-mura mounds. Fossil wood abounds in this area. At the 
eastern foot of this mound is a tank from which were recovered some years 
ago two images of black basalt which are now worshipped in the temple of 
Cha^cjlf- One represents Mafljuvara, a variety of Mafijufoi Bodhisattva and 
an emanation of the five Dhyfini Buddhas (Plate XIX, o). All the monographic 
details that the SSdkancMnSld attribute to Mafljuvara are present. The lion 



231 


80MB THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION IN INDIA 

is his vehicle (vahana), the hands indicate dharma <habra-mudr&, while the 
left hand holds by its stalk a lotus on which is placed a book, the Prajfidpaia- 
raitd scripture. The five Dhv&ni Buddhas are shown in miniature in the 
background as also Vidyadharas hovering above with garlands in their hands 
and two attendant divinities, probably Jalinlkumara or Suryaprabha and 
Chandraprabha, one on either side of him. The place assigned to Manjuf’ri 
and his variant forms such as Manjuvara in the Buddhist pantheon is very 
high and he is considered in Mahayana to be one of the greatest Bodhisattvas. 1 
It is easy to recognize in the image the characteristics of Pala art and sculpture. 

The other image represents Surya with his iconography completely 
delinoated in the stele (Plate XIX, 6). Though similar to the Surya image from 
Pakilara near Mainamati described already (Plate IV) and probably also of the 
same period, the developed features of some of the motifs , such as the Kirtimukha 
above in the place of parasol, and Danda with sword in hand instead of club, 
the standing pose of the other eleven Adityas in miniature (in the background) 
and the profile view of the central horse in the group of seven horses that 
constitute Surya’s chariot, all point to a later phase of Pala art. 

It is hoped that when scientific excavations are possible after war the 
results so far obtained will be controlled and checked by future stratified data. 


SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION IN INDIA 
By 

Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, M.A., B.L., D.Litt., Bar.-at-Law 

India, like all ancient and civilized countries, has had a long history of 
education. A series of systems spontaneously took their rise in Indian life 
and were maintained in a flourishing condition by the people themselves, to 
be occasionally supported and organized by the State. India developed some 
noteworthy systems of education in different ages and different areas. The 
importance of education in civilized life was fully realized but there was 
hardly any theory of education. This theorizing, it must be remembered, 
is essentially r modern business; like grammarians and commentators, theory 
comes only after certain systems have already been in vogue. Sometimes in 
the modem age we find theorists propounding ideal systems of education like 
philologists concocting artificial languages such as Volapuk and Esporanto. 
In ancient times, however, there was no soope for theorizing but the instinct 
of the ancient Indian educationist was sound enough and through the inter- 
action of the time-spirit and the economic milieu India, like her peers — China, 
Greece and the rest,— built up her individual system of education, of which we 
have some definite knowledge from at least 1000 B.C. onwards. 


’* i B. Bhattctcharya, The Buddhist Iconography, pp. 15—17, 24-26; Plates XV— 6, c, d, 
XVI— o. 




232 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


The riddle of Mahenjodaro and Harappa still lies unsolved and conse- 
quently we have no knowledge of the kind of education which Indians in the 
oivilized city-states of the fourth and third millennia were receiving ; but some 
traditional system of education may be presumed from the elaborate system 
of writing such as we see in the undeciphered seals. 

Then we have the Aryan system which developed on the soil of India 
after the Vedic Aryans had established themselves in Northern India; and 
we get plenty of glimpses of the Aryan system in the Brahmanas , Upanishads 
and Ofhya Sutra texts. This was the age of the hermitage schools (guru- 
hulas or adramas), which were fully developed at least some centuries before 
the Buddha, and the spirit of which has even now persisted, although under 
quite different cultural and economic conditions, in the old-fashioned 
Brahmanical Sanskrit schools. Even in the present age we note a good deal 
of revivalistic attempts at getting back the old inspiration of these schools and 
something of their atmosphere or spirit in modem institutions like the 
Aryasamaj Gurukul, the Sanatan Dharma Rishikula and the Santiniketan 
School. I need not discuss at length the merits and deficiencies of this Vedic or 
ancient Brahman system. It was, to start with, an exclusive system, catering 
only for the well-bom boys of the proud Aryan castes — the twice-bom 
Brahmans, Kshatriyas and VaiSyas. True, here and there a liberal master like 
Gautama-Haridrumata may have accepted a boy like Satyakama Javala of 
un kn own paternity; but the system was, as a rule, closed to the 6udra. We 
need not however be indignant over this exclusiveness. One has to recall that 
the education dealt with the language, religion and culture of a people which 
were still alien to the mass of the non-Aryan speaking peoples of the country, 
forming the ranks of the 6fidras in Indian Society of the day. Yet, later on, 
with the Aryanization of the Sudras, we find the door of education not entirely 
closed to them although Aryan or Vedic lore remained the exclusive property 
of the twice-bom. A good many non- Aryans were admitted into the Aryan 
fold by the back-door, and were even transformed into Brahmans, Kshatriyas 
and Vateyas when there was en masse assimilation of these by entire tribes 
within an Aryan-speaking Brahmanical community. 

This old Brahmanical system of education had a feature to which modem 
theorists and experimenters are giving their enthusiastic support — it was an 
education entirely in the open. There was not much book-learning as books 
were yet to come; but there was the living transmission of sacred lore by 
‘word of mouth it was all gurumukhl vidyd in both ancient texts and in legends 
as also in thought and observation (that is philosophy and suoh branches of 
sdenee as existed in those days). The memory was disciplined as entire 
series of texts had to be got by heart; reasoning and powers of observation 
were also to he cultivated. All this went on with a thorough participation 
into the labour and relaxation of daily life ; the boys were to be active members 
of a priestly opnmmnity, living on the outskirts of the forest— they were, in 
a way, pioneers of the Aryan type of civilization in ancient India when the 
Aryans were spreading. The boys had to go into the forest to fetch fire-wood 



SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION IN INDIA 


233 


for sacrifice and for cooking. They had to tend the cows of the community 
and look after primitive agriculture along with their teachers and their servants. 
Above all, through their close contact with nature they were expected to 
develop their powers and build their character. Their daily routine was 
heavy — a round of early rising, cold bath and tending the fire and endless 
repetition and assimilation of the sacred texts. Hard life this indeed, but the 
boys emerged from this discipline which extended theoretically from their 
8th year to their 24th as in the case of Brahmans as leaders in both thought 
and action of a great community, a community that was shaping the destinies 
of humanity not only in India but also over a great part of Asia, and in the 
realm of the ideas it was a community which was of deep significance to the 
whole world. 

These schools in the open are once again in vogue in the west, whether 
in Germany or France or in America or in Russia, such experiments always 
command respectfully sympathetic interest. In any national system of 
education which we may build up in the future we cannot afford to neglect 
this ancient heritage of ours, the Airama schools of the ftshis. We should 
only remember that it was within the atmosphere of this system that the 
deathless Upanishads came into being in ancient India. 

As cities grew into importance these ‘forest schools’ became a thing of 
the past, but the spirit was kept up by the Brahmans in what may be called 
‘home schools’. They continued to teach their ancient Vedic lore to select 
groups of boys of their own community, the master housing the boys and 
feeding them with his own family and finding most of their expense. In this 
work the entire people — from the ruler onwards— supported the teachers, by 
giving them dakshinas or honoraria for their religious ministrations, for their 
opinions on matters of conduct and conscience, and by presents of other 
sorts, including landed property to maintain their schools. Later on, when 
the vogue for temples came in, these endowments of lands to Brahmans for 
maintaining temples and connected schools became a noteworthy feature in 
Indian life. As a result of this we have from post-Christian times the system 
of temple-schools, a fixed percentage of the income arising out of attached 
temple lands or from gifts made to the temple being set apart to maintain one 
or more Brahman teacher and a number of pupils. These private Brahmanical 
schools and temple-schools are living traditions even at the present day although 
these are no longer able to keep pace with our ‘ progressive ’ ideas. 

Another kind of educational institution developed, also out of the anoient 
forest schools, when during the middle of the first mille nnium B.C. big institu- 
tions were coming to be set up in the more important cities where eminent 
teachers were congregating and were attracting hundreds of pupils in various 
arts and sciences. Conspicuous among such institutions were those at 
Taksha£il& and at Benares and, doubtless also, in other important towns. 
We dp not know about their detailed organization and the nature of their 
work, but presumably there must have been some amount of State support. 



234 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


' whether from the ruling king or from the ruling aristocraoy, if the State was 
a republic. 

The later Buddhistic universities were just an extension of these large 
educational institutions, and in the development of the Vedic idea the cos- 
mopolitan Court and Capital of Kanishka in North-Western India had evidently 
a great deal to do. When Buddhism and Brahmanism spread in Central 
Asia and China and in the lands of greater India (South-Eastern Asia and 
Indonesia) it was inevitable that Central Asians, Chinese and Tibetans and 
people from Burma and Indo-China and the islands would like to study 
Indian religion and culture at the fountainhead in the mother country itself. 
Consequently, from early centuries of the Christian era right down to the 
Turki conquest of Northern India and the temporary dislocation of Indian 
cultural life, pilgrim scholars from Central Asia, China and elsewhere used to 
come to India and they found these centres of learning, which were veritable 
large-scale universities, ready for them. The description of Nalanda left by 
Hiuen Tsang and others will make any Indian proud of the organization of 
learning that had come into being in India at least fifteen hundred years ago. 

In the south, as we know from inscriptions of the Chola and other 
dynasties, education was equally well-organized, centring round the temples, 
which were the most natural seats of culture in a community with an essentially 
religio-philosophical outlook. 

The Hindu educational systems, therefore, in their spirit and organization, 
in both their simplicity and their elaboration, formed a worthy predecessor 
of the modern systems which have grown in our own times. The open air 
as well as vocational tradition behind the hermitage schools had been noted 
before, and this is a great heritage we have never abandoned — in both our 
Sanskrit schools (tols) and our humble village (pathaMlas ) . 

After the Turki conquest and the establishment of Moslem rule in India, 
the great Arabic and Persian learning of the new faith found a congenial 
home in India. The first Muhammadan King of Delhi, Qutb-ud-din Aibak, 
built a great mosque and minar or column at Delhi forming the oldest and 
one of the grandest monuments of Islam in our country. There was also a 
school attached to the mosque. As in the Arab lands and Iran, the mosque 
became a centre of higher culture and education. In Bengal the first Moslem 
school of which we have any record was the MfidrasS founded in 1313 A.D. 
at Tribeni by a Moslem warrior Zafar Khan who, according to tradition, so 
far Xndianized himself as to have even composed, in Sanskrit, a hymn in 
honour of the goddess Gangs, which as Daraph Khan’s hymn is still repeated 
by thousands of devoted orthodox Hindus. These Mfidras&s and schools 
attached to mosques, which grew in number with the growth of centuries, 
were meant mostly for young Moslems wishing to take up religion as a pro- 
fession. In the early centuries of Islam in India, there could not grow up a 
reputed seat of Islamic learning like the Colleges at Baghdad or the Al-Azhar 
at Cairo but nevertheless, with the lavish patronage of most of the Indian 
Moslem States, eminent Moslem scholars from outside— particularly Iran — 



SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION IN INDIA 


235 


found it worth their while to come to India and help in creating a tradition of 
Islamic scholarship in the country. Although no great institution like the 
Nizamiya College was founded by any Moslem patron of learning, yet at 
Lahore and Delhi, at Jaunpur and Golconda, at Bijapur and Gaur and else- 
where, and later, at Lucknow and Patna, Hyderabad and Murshidabad — in 
fact wherever there was a Moslem aristocracy or a strong Moslem community — 
centres of Arabian and Persian learning grew up. 

For the average Hindu who would be out of place in a mosque school, a 
system of Persian education was gradually developed mainly at the instance 
of the Hindus themselves. The Hindu was too cultured to ignore a new 
system of learning which was imposed upon his country. Moreover, he was 
practical enough not to neglect the cultivation of the new official language — 
Persian — which opened to him the avenue to employment in the Moslem State. 
So, around an Ustad, who was either a Moslem Mulla or a Hindu Munshi, 
developed all over Northern India a system of Malctabs outside the mosques, 
to which Hindus and Moslems alike would go for a secular education, mainly 
in the Persian language and literature. Many of these secular schools were 
maintained in the residence of some local magnate, Hindu or Moslem. He 
would pay the salary of the Ustad , primarily for his own sons, but incidentally 
for all likely young men in the neighbourhood as well, who usually got their 
training free. It was an extension of the old indigenous Pathaiald system, the 
bulk of the teachers’ income being found by one or more well-to-do individuals 
of the locality. 

This new Islamic learning was making some headway in the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries and already we find a mild protest against a Persian training 
denationalizing the Hindus. In Jayananda’s Chaitanya Mangal (middle of the 
sixteenth century) we read that among the evils of the Kali age are the 
following: Brahmans will read Persian, wear a beard, recite Persian verses 
and move out with a stick. But the Hindu community got over this exclusive 
attitude and in the eighteenth century we have evidence of Persian being 
immensely popular, though mainly as a bread-and-butter subject. This 
Persian training was not entirely barren of result in India. Leaving aside 
the modern writers of Persian in India whose name is legion, and to whom 
Persian was largely a cultural inheritance, we have a great many Hindus 
also excelling in both prose and poetry in Persian, including the great Ram 
Mohan Ray. Like Indian contribution to English literature, this has its 
significance in the cultural life of the country and. its history still remains to 
be told. 

The two systems — Sanskrit or Hindu, and Persian — Arabic or Moslem — 
although agreeing in their basic pattern, unfortunately could not come to 
any constructive rapprochement so far as the ordinary Hindu and Moslem were 
concerned. Of course, in the Court of Akbar and in the parlour of Dara 
Sikoh maulavis and mullas with their Persian and Arabic learning and Paints 
with their Sanskrit collaborated in translating a good many Sanskrit books 
into Persian, A Jai Singh of Jaipur during the first half of the eighteenth 



236 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


century translated Arabic astronomical treatises into Sanskrit and vice versa. 
And here and there a Moslem writer of Hindi or Bengali treated a Persian or 
Islamic theme in his mother tongue. But so far as the people in general are 
concerned, the two systems of intellectual culture unfortunately remained for 
the most part sealed books to each other. Through the medium of English 
and the Vernaculars we may now form a bridge over the gulf that has divided 
Perso- Arabic learning from Sanskrit. There should be a general movement to 
rectify the mutual exclusiveness of the Pandit and Maulavi or the feastri 
and the Mulla . The best thought of Persian and Arabic literature should be 
made available to Hindu youth and similarly the best thought of Sanskrit 
and Pali to the Moslem youth. Further, their interest in and study of the 
complementary culture should be encouraged in all possible ways. 

In Europe mediaeval system of Christian education through Latin similarly 
developed around their cathedrals and in their monasteries. It is thus a 
European variation of our mediaeval Sanskrit schools that had grown up around 
the temples in our holy places— Nadia, Benares, Conjeevaram, Nasik, Dwarka, 
and Hardwar. These mediaeval universities of Europe were slowly and 
most naturally modernized by the introduction of ‘natural philosophy’ or 
experimental science in addition to the Trivium and Quadrivium which 
formed the earlier curricula. By the time the English were established 
in India, education in Europe had entered its modern phase. Its outlook 
was more pragmatic, experimental and materialistic. The advantages of such 
an education were at once patent in European life with its orientation towards 
science that was now rapidly advancing. But things were different in this 
country. Indian life, ignorant and afraid of the new existence, was wistfully 
looking back to a glorious past that was gone for ever. The contrast between 
Europe and India in this respect is very great. It was a great pity that our 
Indian Sanskrit and Perso-Arabic schools in the temples and mosques and 
elsewhere could not also be modernized. 

Scienoe as a part of general learning came from Europe, and it came 
at first as an exotic plant, for which the hot-house of universities, teaching 
through English and organized mainly on Western pattern, was perhaps 
inevitable. But this exotic plant has taken root; scienoe has beoome 
naturalized in India in accordance with the needs of the modem age. It is 
time it were brought out of the hot-house of its English medium into the open 
air of training through the Indian languages. That is one pieoe of urgent 
reform which in national interest brooks no delay. 

Our new education must enable us to know ourselves to the fullest — 
our greatnesses and our deficiencies. There ought to be greater stress put on 
the necessity of universities helping our young men to understand the genuine 
needs of the country — not in a spirit of mere academic detachment but with 
the idea of being really serviceable to the great inarticulate masses to whom 
they, as inteUectapals, more than any other community, have an undoubted 
responsibility. It is not enough for our universities merely to give our 
young men a sound cultural or technical education and send them out into the 



TAK$A-StfTRA 


23ft 

world with badges of efficient study of some science or art conducted in a 
detached spirit. Something more is needed. Time has come when greater 
attention should be paid towards making these young men really useful to 
the country at large. Indian education must be nourished by the fundamental 
conceptions of Indian life and genius ; it must be based on a proper synthesis 
of the best that the East and the West can contribute. Never has been felt, 
more than in' India of today, the supreme necessity of training, by our univer- 
sities, in social and rural welfare — covering geography, agriculture, co-operation, 
industries, village economy, public health and other allied subjects of vital 
importance which go to the root of our national existence. What, indeed, 
could be a more effective eye-opener than the present political and economic 
debacle with its incidents of communalism, ministerial crisis, its profiteering, 
its administrative graft and jobbery, its evacuations, its ‘military needs’ and 
finally, the catastrophe of the present man-made famine coming as a sort of 
coup de grace of the act of God in the shape of floods and cyclones ? All this 
points to the necessity of turning out a generation of young men made of a 
sterner stuff — men who would combine in themselves character and efficiency, 
service and sacrifice, idealism and practical wisdom and, above all, bold self- 
confidence and unfailing faith in the Almighty. 


TAKSA-SUTRA 
(Science of Carpentry) 

By 

MahimahopIdhyaya Dr. Umesha Mishka, M.A., D.Litt., KivyatIrtha, 
University of Allahabad 

The great thinkers and seers of the past have not only thought over all 
the aspects of our life and have actually visualized them with their own clear 
insight but have also left behind them the true records of their mature 
experiences in the form of various Sastras. We know from the Chandogya 
Upani$ad (vii. 1. 2) and similar other sources of the various ancient sciences of 
our country, some of which are almost extinct and perhaps lost for ever and 
are now known to us only by their names. One of these forgotten sciences is^ 
the Science of Carpentry (Tatyaiastra). 

It is a fact that it is one of the living soienoes which guides the activities 
of our everyday life and yet we do not know anything about its existence. 
It was only in course of my studies on technical subjects that I came across 
certain references from whioh I conclude that there was at least some sf&tra- 
work on the Soienoe of Carpentry. 

This science is meant for the construction of houses and household pro- 
perties including carts, 1 ploughs and other implements with the help of wood 


* A Taiwan it distinct from A Rathak&ra, Figs Yqjurwda 8m XVI, 27. 




238 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


and bamboos where the assistance of a carpenter is indispensable. Not only 
for the secular purposes the science is very useful but also for the sacrificial 
needs. Even today we find that both for the performance of irauta and 
smarta rites we require the help of this science for the construction of the 
various ritualistic implements. 

It is very difficult to say anything about the authorship of this Tak$a- 
sutra, but it may be suggested that Taksan or Tak§aka, the architect of the 
gods, might have been very closely connected with this science. Nor are we 
able to say anything about the scope and the contents of this scienoe. Our 
knowledge of the topics connected with this branch of learning at present is 
either limited to the traditions preserved amongst the grhasthas of the villages 
who construct their houses and make their household articles with wood and 
bamboos and also have to get their sacrificial implements made with the 
help of a carpenter or to certain scattered references found in the irauta and 
gfhya Mitral. But in no case these references help us to conclude that there 
was any sutra work on this science. No trace of this science or of any work 
on it could be found even in the Samaranganasutradhdra of Bhoja. 

However, in course of my studies I have found the following references 
which later writers have called Tak§a-sutras , and with a hope that some day or 
other these references may give a clue to unearth the lost science, I place my 
information before the scholars. 

1. Ire (are ?) 1 bhagne indrabdhurbaddhavyah — Meaning — when the spoke 
breaks indrabdhu 2 should be tied. 

2. Pdyasam ca bhojayitavyah — Meaning — as an expiation for the failure 
of the functioning of the spoke a Brahmana should be fed on rice cooked in 
milk. 

3. Alaukikam laukike nangam — Meaning — that which is meant for non- 
worldly purposes cannot form part of mundane needs. 

These are the only three sutras 8 which I have found so far. Of these, 
again, I am not quite sure about the second ; for I have not got any direct 
support 4 as to its being a sutra from any source. But as it occurs in the 
same context along with the first with which it is also connected I have put it 
here along with the two sutras. 


1 In the #gvtda (I, 32. 15; I, 141. 9; V, 13. 6; V, 58. 5; VII, 20. 14; VIII, 77. 3; X, 78. 4) 
the word is Ara, while in other texts it is Ara. ( Vide Tattvacintdmani, Pratyak*a, Maftgala v&da, 
p. 27, Bibliotheca edition.) 


• This word has been explained by Mathur&n&tha Bhatt&c&rya in his Rahaeya on fclie 
Tattoa&nt&maxii as 4 Lauhakdkah' . 

* Vide T attvaoinidmani, pp. 27-28 and almost aU the commentators on it; Sctbara - Bh8$ya 
on the Mbndfksdsutra, VI. 2. 1 7 along with almost all the later writers on the above sfttra. 

4 While c omm enting on the Mimdihsdsutra, VI. 2. 17, Sahara says— 


Wi »r*fv 







kampilya 

By 

Dr. Kamta Prosad Jain, D.L., M.R.A.S. 

Kampilya was the capital of Southern Pancala. From the time of the 
Jataka and the Mahabharata Pancala became permanently divided into two 
well-defined kingdoms, viz. Daksina Pancala with Kampilya as its capital 
and Uttara Pancala with Ahicchatra as its principal town. The name of 
Kampilya (Pali Kampilla, Vedic Kampila) is not as old as Ahicchatra. Kampila 
appears to have been mentioned in the Yajurveda Samhita which applies the 
epithet ‘Kampllavasini’ to a woman who was perhaps the king’s chief queen, 
the Kampila of the epithet obviously standing for the town of that name, the 
Kampilya of later literature. 1 The exact interpretation of this passage is 
very uncertain. Weber and Zimmer consider Kampila as the name of the 
town known as Kampilya in later literature and the capital of Pancala in 
Madhyadesa. 

Cunningham identifies Kampilya with Kampil on the old Ganges between 
Budaon and Farokhabad. 2 * According to N. L. Doy it was situated at a 
distance of 28 miles north-east of Fatgarh in the Farokhabad district. 8 South 
Pancala included the upper half of the Doab between the Ganges and the 
Jumna. 4 * * * The point which is in favour of Cunningham’s identification is that 
the Jaina Vividhatirthakalpa definitely locates it on the Ganges.® It is situated 
on the old Ganges and is only 5 miles distant from the railway station of 
Kaimganj (B.B. & C.L.Rly.). There was a highly artistic tunnel (ummagga, 
i.e. sudafiga) dug out from the Ganges to the royal palace at Kampilya.® 

Kampilya was an ancient city of India. According to the Adikanda 
of the Ramayana (sarga 33) king Brahmadatta used to live in this city. 
The Mahabharata informs us that Kampilya was the scene of the svayambara 
of Drupada’s daughter, Krsna or Draupadi, who became the wife of the five 
sons of Pandu. Drupada’s palace is pointed out as the most easterly of the 
isolated mounds on the banks of the BurgaftgaJ The Visnupurana (chap. 2) 


i Vedic Index, i, 149. 

* Ancient Geography, p. 360; Uvdeagddasdo, ii, 106. 

* Geographical Dictionary, p. 33. 

* Cunningham, Coir w of Ancient India, p. 79. 

* Jataka , II, 329 foil. According to the Mahdummagga Jdtaka, the mouth of the greater 
tunnel was upon the bank of the Ganges. The greater tunnel was dug by 60,000 warriors and # 
the lesser tunnel was dug by 700 men. The entrance into the greater tunnel was provided with 
a door 18 hands high, fitted with machinery, so that one peg being pressed, all were closed up. 
The tunnel was built up with bricks and worked with stucco, it was roofed over with planks and 
besmeared with cement and whitened. In all there were 80 great doors and 64 small doors. 
There were some hundreds of lamp-cells. On either side there w ere many chambers. Clever 
painters made all kinds of paintings in the tunnel. The tunnel was well adorned and it looked 
like the mote-hall of the gods (Sudhamma). 

* p. 50; cf. Mahabh&rata, I, 138, 73: 

Mdkandim-atha Gangdyds-tire janapadayutarp \ 

So 'dhy&vasad dinamandh Kdmpilyafi-ca purotiamam fl 

* 1 Mah&bhdrata, Adiparva, Chap. 94, pp. 181-82. 



B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


240 

anti the Bhagavatapurana (chap. 22) point out that Kampilya, son of king 
Harya£va, was celebrated as Pafic&la. Among the hundred sons of Nipa of 
the Ajamlda dynasty Samara is mentioned as the king of Kampilya. 1 Aooord- 
ing to the Jaina Mahapurana, the country of PaficSla was created by Indra, 
and 5§abha, the first Tirthafikara, came and preaohed his religion there. 2 
Of the five sons of Bahyasva, one was named Kampilya and the town came 
to be known after him. ( Bhdgavata , 25, 32-33.) 

P&Uini refers to Kampilya as an ancient city of India. 3 It was the 
place which was hallowed by these five auspicious incidents in the life of 
Vimalanatha, the 13th Tirthafikara who was a son of king Krtavarman by his 
queen Somadevi: the descent, the nativity, the coronation, the initiation and 
the Jinahood from which circumstance the city came also to be known by the 
name of Panca-Kalyanaka. 

Kampilya is claimed as a city where Arsamitra, the disciple of Kaundinya, 
who in his turn was the disciple of the Mahagiri teachers of the Laksmihara 
Caitya of Mithila, came to reside two hundred and twenty years after the 
demise of Mahavira. The same city is claimed as the place where the Jaina 
saint Gardabhali renounced the world and attained liberation. It is also 
claimed as a place where prince Gagali, who afterwards became the king of 
Prsti-campa, was converted to Jainism by Gautama. The Tirthakalpa also 
claims it as the place of which the powerful king, Durmukha, became a 
Pratyeka-Buddha. Kampilya was known as the city of which the king 
Dharmaruci was able to carry his whole army to Kail through the air by 
virtue of his piety, when the Lord of Ka4I picked up a quarrel with him for 
the alleged fault of having honoured an image of the Jinendra. 4 * 

It is believed that the renowned astronomer Sri Var&hamihira was bom 
at Kampilya which was also the birth-place of Kavi Caturbhfija Mi&ra who was 
the celebrated author of the Bhavacintamai^i, a commentary on the Amaru- 
&ataka. 6 

Jaina literature mentions Kampilya as an excellent city and it has been 
compared with the celestial city known as Amaravati. It was vety beautiful 
and free from defects. It was a very rich town, full of gold. 6 Many rich 
people used to live there. &re$thi Pinyaka Gandha, a leading merchant of 
K&mpilya, had an immense wealth. 7 Kon^a Koliya, who was a disciple of 
Tirthafikara Mahavira and who paid homage to him when he visited K&mpilya, 
was a rich and learned man. 8 Once 6re§thi Bhava^a of Kampilya lost all his 
m er chandise while on sea; but he afterwards made a good fortune at Taxila. 
He spent lavishly in building many Jain temples at 6atrufijaya Ttrtha. 9 


3 ViftMpur&oa, IV, p. 19. 

3 Jin*sm&c&ry», Mahdpvrdpa, Indore Ed., pp. 568 and 681. 

3 PiqW K&iktojtU, 4, 2, 121. 4 VMdha&rthakalpa, p. 50. 

4 Code, The £4ffar Library Bulletin , pp. 69-74. 

4 Hari fepa, Kathdkofaj Noe. 115 and 104. 

7 KathShofa, 104. 

9 


9 Uvfcagadae&o, 6. 




KiMPILYA 


241 


The kings of Kampilya were famous for their wealth, prowess, bravery, 
piety and justice. King Harisena was so powerful that he conquered the six 
continents of the world and spent much for religious and charitable purposes. 1 * * 

When Tfrthafikara R$abha and Vahubali renounced the world, kings of 
Kampilya accompanied them and took the vows of a iraimna* The ladies of 
Kampilya were equally famous for their beauty and morality. Ki n g Jaya of 
Kampilya had a beautiful daughter named Madanmanjari by his queen 
Gunamala. He had a curious crown which king Pajjota of Ujjain wanted to 
have from him but he refused it. Pajjota got angry and attacked Kampilya, 
but he was defeated and taken prisoner. He afterwards won the heart of 
Madanmanjari and married her. King Jaya became a Jaina iramana and 
practised severe penances. Later he attained Nirvana. 8 Pratyeka Buddha 
Sambhuta, who flourished at Kampilya, was a great philosopher and religious 
preacher. 4 * 

Pinyakagandha, 6 Kadarapifiga 8 and king Bhima 7 who belonged to 
Kampilya are mentioned in the Jaina texts as persons of bad character. 

Kampilya was a sacred place of the Jainas. AtiSaya Tirtha was the 
birthplace and tapobhumi of &ri Vimalanatha, the 13th Tirthafikara. Vimala, 
son of Krtavarman, renounced the world and practised penances at Sahasramra- 
vana, which was situated clpse to the town of Kampilya. 8 He afterwards 
attained Perfect Knowledge (Kevalajftdna), 

King Simhadhvaja and his queen Vapra were devout Jains, but the king had 
another consort named Laksaml, who had faith in the Vedas and Brahmanas. 
Queen Vapra used to celebrate the Jaina festival of Astdnihkd by taking out a 
Rathayatra. Laksami induced the king to stop it. Vapra was very sorry on 
account of this. Her son Harisena was afterwards successful in making the 
Rathayatra celebrated with great pomp. 9 Even to this day this is an annual 
Jaina function at Kampila, although there are no Jains there. The Jainas 
of adjoining towns of Mainpuri, Farrukhabad and Kaimganj bring their 
Rathas and celebrate the festival. 

On the northern side of the town, just on the bank of old Ganges, is situated 
the temple of Rame^vara. In it there are many underground cells where 
once the yogis lived. It is also known by the name of ' Siddhapitha’. One 
Kavi To§anidhi lived in it and a ‘ Doha * composition of his is preserved on the 
eastern wall of the temple. It runs as follows 

‘Tanika na l&ye vera suni Drupada sut& ki deva | 

KaisI k&na mi dai, dai hamari vera || 

Besides Kavi To§a some other yogis and Kavis are said to have lived 
In this temple. 


1 Haripoa, Kath&koqa, 33. 

1 Meyer, Hindu Tales , p. 140. 

ft Harisena, Kath&Jcofa, 104. 

7 Bhaffavatf-drddhandh, Harifepa, KcUhdko^a, 115. 

9 Harifetya, Kathdkofa, 33. 

16 


8 H arivafnJapurdfui, 18, 160. 
4 Uttaradhyayarumitra, 13. 

• Hari^a, Kath&kofa , 82. 

8 Horwamtopurdw, sarga 60. 


242 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Close to the Rame^vara Temple is the Kapila Kuti which is said to be 
the place where Kapila R§r performed penances. Near it there is the DraupadI 
Kunda. To the south of Kapila Kuti is the famous temple of Kale^vara. 
Many broken images of Matsya, Caturbhuja and other Jain TirthaAkaras are 
found there. 

There are two Jaina temples at present existing at Kampil, one 
Digambara and the other Svetambara. The Digambara temple is a very old 
building — the oldest portion of it is now buried under the ground, which 
once contained the Caranapadukas. It seems that the present temple was 
built on the site of the old temple during the early mediaeval period. There 
are about a dozen images of the Jinas, only two of them bear no inscription, 
and seem to belong to early years of the Christian era. The inscriptions 
found on the pedestal of the ten images may be read thus : — 

1. Vimala : Vik. Sam. 1122. 

2. Mahdvlra : ‘Samvat 1211 Jetha sudi dasaml Sahu .... tasya putra 

Salidatta Bharya Dosa pranamanti.’ 

3. Candraprabka: ‘Samvat 1440 Varse Vai6akha sudi tija 6ri Mula- 

samgha BhattarakajL’ 

4. Pariva : ‘Samvat 1479 Varse VaLSakha sudi 10 chandravasare $ri 

Mulasamgha.’ 

5. Pariva: ‘Samvat 1522 Vaisakha sudi 3 . . . 

6. fisabha: ‘Samvat 1545 Varse Vaisakha sudi 10 ehandra dine 6ri 

Mulasamgha Sarasvati gachche Balatakara-gane kundakundan- 
vaye Bhatt&raka 6ri Jinachandradeva Barahiya-kulodbhavo sa 
Lakhe bharya kusuma tayo putra sahu Mun .... tesam madhye 
Sahu Arjuna tasa bharya Madatana Arjunanedam Adipurusa- 
bimba satpujya tirtha karapita.* 

7. Arahanta : ‘Samvat 1549 varse VaiSakha sudi 3 Sri Mulasamghe 

Bhattaraka Jinachandra Achhapura Palivala Vinda pranamata.’ 

8. Pariva: ‘Samvat 1957 Vaisakha Krasna 2 chandravasare Digambara 

Muni Kundakunda charanopadesat Bhogamanagare Darbar! Lai 
Banarsi Dasa pratisthapitam. , 

9. Vimala: ‘Samvat 1960 Vaisakha krasna 2 Suvarnaprasta-nagare Sri 

Muni Kundakunda gurupade^at Palivala idam bimba Vimala 
natha.’ 

The Svetambara temple, which is one of the best specimens of Indian 
architecture, is of later origin. It was built in Samvat 1904 Vikrama and its 
main shrine contains four marble images of the Tirtha&karas with precious 
stones on them. 

We invite the attention of the archaeologists to many mounds, scattered / 
images and old temples at modem Kampil, which require close examination. 


t6m 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 

By 

Mr. Tapo Nath Chakrabarty, M.A. 

It is not possible with the scanty and meagre data furnished by the 
inscriptions of Bengal to give a complete picture, fair in all its details, of the 
life of women in Hindu society in Bengal during a period of more than seven 
hundred and fifty years beginning from the year 113 of the Gupta era, that 
is to say, 432-33 A.D., the date of the Dhanaidaha copper-plate inscription of 
Kumaragupta I, or earlier still from the fourth century A.D., the date, according 
to H. P. Sastri [Ep. Ind., Vol. XIII, p. 133], of the Susunia Rock inscription 
of Chandravarmman, and ending with the Muslim invasion of Bengal in or 
about 1200 A.D. The information supplied by these inscriptions scattered 
over a period of nearly eight hundred years are no doubt of great interest and 
authenticity for the reconstruction of the social and religious history of the 
Province before the establishment of Muslim rule. But they suffer from the 
fact of being scrappy and disconnected. Consequently a large space is left 
for our simple guess work or imagination. An attempt has been made in the 
following pages to put together some of these isolated and piecemeal threads 
of information about women drawn from the field of epigraphy. The epigraphic 
materials are sometimes supplemented by a few additional and interesting 
side-lights thrown by contemporary or subsequent literature. The geographical 
boundary of modem Bengal does not seem to have been the same in all ages. 
Its political boundary, as it appears from these inscriptions, seems not unoften 
to have comprised portions of modem Behar and Assam ; for we find reference 
to larger administrative units like Dandabhukti, &rmagarabhukti, TIrabhukti 
and Pragjyotishabhukti. A few parallels or analogous informations drawn 
from the contemporary inscriptions of Assam have therefore been introduced 
in the course of this survey. The broad period of nearly eight centuries over 
which the inscriptions are spread is taken as a whole and in drawing inferences 
it has not been possible to follow a strictly chronological order. 

It may be pointed out in the beginning that many of the traditional 
ideas and institutions among orthodox women in modem Hindu society in 
Bengal, most of the social practices and customs among our womenfolk which 
we call the paraphernalia of a bygone age, are alike found in previous Hindu 
society in Bengal along with instances of present-day practices like inter-caste 
marriage. The most conspicuous example of a union of the latter type is 
furnished by an inscription of the middle of the seventh century A.D., viz. 
the Tipperah copper-plate grant of King Lokap&tha. King Lokanatha of 
this record seems to have been a feudatory ohief and this inscription, according 
to R. G. Basak, belongs to the period of anarchy and confusion in Bengal 
which followed the death of emperor Harshavarddhana and continued up to 
the time of the establishment of royal authority by Gopala I, the founder of the 
P&la dynasty jn Bengal [Ep. Ind., Yol. XV, pp. 301ff.]. King Lokan&tha is 
spoken of in verse 9 of this record as a ‘Karaga’, i.e. the member of a mixed 



244 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


caste according to Manu. The verse in question has been rendered as follows: 
* Thus reflecting King JIvadharana relinquished battle and gave away to that 
Karana (i.e. Lokanatha) who obtained a royal charter (patta) his own territories 
(vishaya) along with his army.' [Ibid., pp. 305ff.] In one of the Faridpur or 
Ghagr&hati copper-plate grants a caste-name, Karanika, is mentioned (line 15). 
As to the date of this inscription it may be pointed out that one of these 
grants is dated in the fourteenth regnal year of King Samacharadeva, who, 
according to Pargiter, may be placed earlier than Harsha in the first quarter 
of the seventh century A.D. [J.A.S.B. (N.S.), Vol. VII, p. 500]. Pargiter 
points out in this connection that Karanika is evidently a word formed from 
‘Karana’ which was the name of a mixed caste that had the occupation of 
writing, accounts, etc. Hence Karanika apparently meant a member of this 
caste. Pargiter is inclined to think that this caste was probably akin to the 
Kayastha caste. [Ibid., pp. 501-502.] The Brahma^as and Karanas are 
mentioned with due respect [cf. fea (Kara)-nabrahmanamananapurvvakam — 
lines 20-21] in a later inscription, viz. the Ramganj copper-plate inscription 
of Mahamandalika I^varaghosa, who is supposed to have been a vassal king 
under the suzerainty of the Pala dynasty of Bengal. We find a similar state- 
ment (e.g. Sakaranan prativasinafi Kshetrakaram^cha brahmanamanana- 
purvvakam) in the Khalimpur copper-plate inscription of Dharmapala [Ep. 
Ind., Vol. IV, p. 250]. Mr. N. G. Majumdar [Inscriptions of Bengal, p. 156, 
n. 2] also opines that Karanas were probably people of the Kayastha caste. 

In the above-mentioned Tipperah copper -plate grant, the great-grand- 
father of Lokanatha’s father is described (in verse 2) as sprung from the family 
of the sage Bharadvaja and the great-grandfather and grandfather of his mother 
are, in verse 6, called ‘dvija-varafl’ and ‘dvija-sattamafi’ respectively; but his 
mother’s father is in the same verse described as a ‘para£ava’. The verse in 
question, namely verse 6, has been rendered as follows: ‘Of whom the 
mother’s (Gotradevi’s) father’s grandfather was the prominent Brahmapa 
named Sthavara; the respected (maternal) great-grandfather was the chief 
Brahmana called Vira; the grandfather was the parafova Ke6ava, virtuous 
and able, held in high esteem by the good (satam-abhimatafl), who, being 
placed in charge of the army (bala-gana-praptadhikarah), was in touch with 
the King, a famous man.’ 

It is clear thus that although the first few ancestors, both paternal and 
maternal, of Lokan&tha were of pure Brahmana origin, his maternal grand- 
father Ke^ava could not claim such a pure origin for himself, for he is called 
‘p&rafova’. R. G. Basak, therefore, concludes that the Brahmin father of 
Kefova might have married a 6udra woman and the offspring of such a 
union was therefore known as paraSava. It is evident, therefore, that such 
‘asavarpa’ or unequal marriages were prevalent in Hindu society in Bengal 
in the seventh century A.D. From the description of Ke4ava, as we find 
in this inscription, it may be inferred that in the then Hindu society of Bengal 
a p&ra£ava was not regarded as a mean member of the community because he 
had very little to grumble or suffer for his impure or mixed origin. Thus 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 


245 


KeSava, the para6ava, seems to have occupied an important and influential 
position, for he was in charge of the royal army and was held in high esteem 
by the good. His daughter Gotradevi and his wife A^t&yika (verse 5) were 
alike deemed respectable, for otherwise Gotradevi ’s son, that is, Lokanatha, 
could not become a feudatory chief. According to Manu and other subsequent 
law-givers, a Brahmana had also the right to marry a girl of any of the three 
inferior castes like Kshatriya, Vaisya or &udra. The right of a Brahmin to 
have a non-Brahmin partner is also upheld in a later law-book, which is a 
product of Bengal during the early part of the fifteenth century A.D. This 
is the work of the well-known smrti writer, Brhaspati Mi£ra, the courtier and 
minister of Sultan Jalaluddin or Jadu. [See Sukumar Sen, Prachln Bangla 0 
Bangali, p. 42.] 

It is needless to point out in this connection that as mothers Hindu 
women have all along enjoyed an honourable position in society. That is 
why King Lokanatha mentions in his copper-plate grant the names of his 
mother Gotradevi and her mother Astayika. The name of the Brahmana 
lady, Suvachana, wife of Tosha6arman, daughter of Brhaspatisvamin, and 
mother of Pradoshasarman, the chieftain or mahasamanta of Lokanatha, is also 
mentioned in this grant. As pointed out by R. G . Basak, Bana’s Harshacharita 
furnishes another instance of an orthodox Brahmin marrying a 6udra wife 
during the seventh century A.D. According to Harshacharita, Bana’s father, 
Chitrabhanu, was a Brahmana, well-versed in the Vedic lore and is said to have 
kept the sacred fire. Rajadevi, Bana’s mother, is also spoken of as a member of 
the Brahmin caste. There is, however, an allusion in the first chapter of the 
same Harshacharita, which shows that Bana’s father had another wife, a 6udra 
lady, by whom ho had two sons, Chandrasena and Matrisena, who are aptly 
described as — ‘bhratarau para^avau’. [Ep. Ind., Vol. XV, pp. 305-6.] The 
traditional ideals of Indian womanhood, namely, unflinching devotion towards 
her husband, tenderness and modesty, grace and serenity, piety and chastity, 
affection and cordiality, and above all, the will to live and let live are alike 
reflected in these inscriptions. [For an interesting account of Indian woman* 
hood see my paper — ‘A Retrospective Study of Indian Womanhood’ in the 
Calcutta Review, December, 1939.] 

In the Monghyr copper-plate inscription of Devapala (verse 9) we are 
told that King Dharmapala of the Pala dynasty of Bengal married Rannadevi, 
the daughter of the Raatrakuta King Parabala, who was an ornament of his 
line, with the ostensible object of attaining household life [of. 6ri Parabalasya 
duhitub Kshitipatini Rastrakuta-tilakasya | Rai^adevyah panir jagrhe 
grhamedhina tena || ]. In verse 10 of the same inscription queen 
RannadevI is described as* representing the best ideals of Hindu womanhood 
of that age. The profusion and depth of her qualities, the moral fervour 
and exemplary nature of her conduct, made her, so to say, the guiding angel 
of the royal household. By her own excellence she outstripped others and 
would put into the background other ladies of the royal harem. An incarnation 
of purity and other feminine virtues, she would be looked upon with respect 



246 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


by people who considered her to be an embodiment of the fortune goddess, 
the crown and glory of her husband and the presiding deity of the royal house- 
hold. [Cf. Dhrtatanuriyam Lakshmih sakshat kshitir nu foriripl kimabani- 
pateh kirttimurttahthava grhadevata | Iti vidadhati 6uchyachara vitarkavatih 
prajah prakrtigurubhir ya suddhantam gunairakarodadhah || ] A married 
Hindu lady with such proverbial devotion towards her husband, pristine 
purity of character and elegance of conduct, is fit to be a worthy mother of a 
worthy son. So she had the mighty King Devapaladeva as her son, who was 
like a pearl bom inside the crust of an oyster. [Slaghya pativratasau mukta- 
ratnam samudra-^uktiriva | $ri Devapaladevam prasanna-vaktram suta 
masuta || — verse 11 of the Monghyr C.P. of Devapala, in Gauda-Lekhamala.] 
In verse 10 of the Nalanda copper-plate inscription of Devapala [Monograph 
No. 1 of V.R. Society, p. 26] we have the same picture of Rann&devl, the 
mother of King Devapala : ‘That pure-souled lady rose above the other members 
of the royal seraglio by reason of her inherent noble qualities. “ Is she an 
incarnation of the goddess of Fortune, is s^ the Earth goddess that has 
N assumed a visible shape, is she an embodim'/jift of the King's fame or the 
tutelary deity (of the royal household)’ 5 — such was the deliberation on which 
she kept engaged the subjects (of the king). 5 A good and faithful partner, 
who was alike with her husband in all respects, was thus considered to be the 
crown and glory of family life. A relation of love and amity, peace and 
good-will, was thought to be the basis of family life and the essence of con- 
jugal partnership. [Cf. ‘Maitrim Karunyaratna-pramuditahniayab preyaslm 
sandadhanah samyak-sambodhividya-sarida-malajala-kshalitajfianapankab | 
jitva yah kamakari-prabhavamabhibhavam 6a6vatlm prapa 6antim sa 6riman 
lokanatho jayati dasavalohnya^cha Gopaladevaft || — verse 1 (lines 1-5) of 
the Bhagalpur copper-plate inscription of Narayanapala.] Sahadeva, a 
‘vajivaidya 5 or ‘veterinary physician, 5 is the writer of an eulogy (pra^asti) 
describing that the temple of Janarddana was built by Visvaditya at Gaya 
during the reign of King Nayapala. This fact is recorded in the Kranadv&rika 
Temple inscription [Gauda-Lekhamala, pp. 110-20; J.A.S.B. (1900), pp. 190- 
96] wherein it is stated that this work of Sahadeva [verse 19] should endure 
and be the cause of such feelings as love and amity, serenity and joy with 
which a loving husband entertains his beloved lady. [Cf . ‘ Vajivaidya-Sahadeva 
niruktih tat pra^astiriyamastu nitantam premasauhrda-sukhaikadharitri- 
sajjanasya hrdaye ramapiva ’.] As in all ages, conformity in taste and 
outlook is the basis of social relation and the cardinal principle of harmony 
in conjugal life. A wife was thus to be a replica of her husband’s tastes and 
desires, alike in heart and soul. Thus Ichchh&devi, the wife of Garga, the 
minister of King Dharmapala, is represented in the third verse of the B&dftl 
Pillar inscription as being a replica of her husband’s inner will. [Cf, 
‘ Patnfchchhft nftma tasy&sldichchhevanta-rvvivartinl | Nisargga nirmmala- 
snigdhfi kfetiAchandramaso yath& || 5 ] She had the mild qualities and the 
soft beauty and dalliance of the partner of the moon-god. [G.L., pp. 77-78, 
f*n,] A peaceful and happy family life with a faithful and devoted Wife 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OP BENGAL 


247 


who is alike in all respects with her husband has been the traditional aim of 
married life in Hindu society. So one should have a partner like oneself 
(atmanurupa). Ralladevi, mother of Kedaramifoa and wife of SomeAvara, the 
minister of King Devapala, is described in verse 10 (lines 10-11) of the Garuda 
Stone Pillar inscription as being a like partner for her like spouse. [Cf. 
‘Siva iva karam J§ivaya Haririva Lakshmya grhasramaprepsufi I Anurupaya 
vidhivat Ralladevyah (variant readings are Taraiadevy&h and Ratnadevyah) 
sa jagraha || ’] An ideal wife is a source of repose in household life. By her 
sheltering care, genial manners and pleasant conduct she proves herself to be 
a messenger of peace, a harbinger of light and life. The virtuous lady Pai, 
the consort of the respectable Brahmin scholar Yudhisthira and mother of the 
celebrated 6ridhara, is, therefore, described as being a veritable source of 
repose of her husband’s heart (chitta-vi^rantih). A woman of infinite beauty, 
she was in fact the home of right conduct (6ila), nobility of heart (audarya), 
tranquillity and grace (6ri). As the ideal partner of her spouse, she gave him 
no cause of annoyance or dissatisfaction and was in fact the cause of her hus- 
band’s repose and integrity of mind. [Paiti dharmmapatnl dhlravarasy&sya 
chitta-visrantih | A(a)sldasima-kantifi 6ilaudarya6ri (6ri) yam vasatifi (| — 
verse 24 (lines 40-42) of the Kamauli copper-plate inscription of Vaidyadeva.] 
A devoted wife is to all intents and purposes an embodiment of her husband’s 
delight and satisfaction. The charm of her body and the magic qualities of 
her head and heart are alike responsible to bring about this desired end. The 
Kamauli copper-plate inscription [verse 6, lines 7-8] speaks of Pratapadevi, 
the consort of Bodhideva and the mother of the illustrious Vaidyadeva, as 
being an incarnation of the spirit of joy and satisfaction of her husband. A 
lady of exquisite beauty, she was the resting place or the pivot of glory and 
spiritual advancement in her family. [Cf. ‘Asya Pratapadevi patni dharmma- 
rddhi-kirtti-visrantih asidasimakantih santoshasyakrtib patyuV-] 

Fickleness of character or conduct is always condemned on the part of 
women in Hindu society. Steadfast devotion towards husband, steadiness 
in thought and action and sobriety in speech and conduct are alike needed for 
a lasting union or a durable relation. A barren family life is something 
unwelcome for a Hindu woman. A woman should not, therefore, be fleeting 
like the goddess of Fortune or covet a childless fate like that of Sat! (or the 
goddess Durga), the daughter of Daksha. Babba, the wife of Kedara MiAra, 
is, therefore, not likened to Lakshmi or Sati. She is spoken of as having no 
parallel. [Cf. ‘Devagramabhava tasya patni Babbabhidhabhavat | Atulya 
chalayA LakshmyA Satya chapya [napatya] ya || ’ — verse 16, lines 17-18 of 
the B&dfil Pillar inscription ; G. L., p. 82, f.n.] The highest thing of glory for a 
Hindu wife is her reputation of being a proverbially devoted consort. It is 
the best badge of honour for a woman, the most admirable trait of her character 
in the estimation of people. RajjekA, the mother of Viradeva, enjoyed suoh 
reputation. The GoshrAwa inscription (verse 4, line 5) accordingly records 
that her name became a proverb for all men and women of her age. [Cf. 
Lokab pativratakathA-paribhAvan&su samkirttanam prathamameva karoti 



248 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


yasy&b.] Indragupta, the father of Viradeva, is described as shining like the 
crystal moon for being united with a woman of such remarkable excellence 
and purity. [Kajjekaya dvijavarah sa gun! grhinya yukto raraja kalaya- 
malayS- yathendub — verse 4, line 5.] Because of such parents, the son 
was conscientious in outlook from his very birth. [Cf. Tabhyamajayata 
sutab sutaram viveki — verse 5, line 6.] In the Deopara inscription [Inscrip- 
tions of Bengal, pp. 47 and 52] of Vijayasena we have a similar description of 
YafodevI, the ‘great queen* of Hemantasena. She was a store-house of 
loveliness and, owing to devotion to her husband, acquired wide, eternal and 
bright fame. She gained the heart of the three worlds by her (beautiful) 
form. [Cf. Maharajni yasya svaparanikhilantabpuravadhusiroratna^reni 
kiranasaranismeracharana | Nidhib kante(b) sadhvivratavitatan!tyojjvalaya6a 
Ya^odevi nama tribhuvanamanojfia krtirabhut || — verse 14, line 14.] 

According to the ideal of that age it was natural to expect that a son 
would imbibe the good qualities of his parents and the purity and chastity of 
the mother would thus be reflected in the character of her son. [Cf. ‘Nirmmald 
manasi vachi samyatah kaya-karmmani cha yab sthitab such! rajyam&pa 
nirupaplavam pitur bodhisatva iva saugatam padam* — lines 18-19 of the 
Monghyr copper-plate inscription of Devapala.] A good son ennobles his 
paternal and maternal lines alike by his good deeds. In verse 14 of the 
Ghoshrawa inscription, Viradeva is thus described as being the cause of the 
elevation of both the families of his father and mother through his own glorious 
deeds. [Cf. ‘Yena svena yaSodhvajena ghatitau vamSabudlchipathe * — 
line 17.] A good daughter is also an object of glory for her parents. By her 
adorable traits, the purity and integrity of her character, she calls up the 
prestige of the family of her husband and the families of her father and mother. 
Lajja, the queen of Vigrahapala I, is thus likened to the river J&hnavi, the 
supposed consort of the sea. Bom of the Haihaya race of which she is called 
the ornament, she became through the force of her character an emblem of 
purity, a chastening example in the families of her parents and husband. 
[Cf. Lajjeti tasya jaladheriva Jahnukanya patni babhuva krta-Haihaya- 
vam4abhusa yasyab 6uclnni charitani pituscha vam^e patyu^cha pavana- 
vidhib paramo babhuva || — Bhagalpur copper -plate inscription of N&r&yaQa- 
pfiJa, verse 9, lines 15-16.] By producing a worthy son, a woman is thought 
to enhance the family prestige of her husband. Babb& Dev!, the wife of 
Kedara Mi6ra, is, therefore, likened to the illustrious Devaki, the mother of 
the mythical god Krshna, who had Ya^oda or the glorifying energy as his 
foster-mother. [Cf. ‘Sa Devakiva tasmat yasodayS svikrtam patim Laksh- 
my&b I Gop&la-priyakaraka masuta purushottamam tanayam || ’ — B&d&l Pillar 
inscription, verse 17, line 18.] We have a similar description of T&r&, in 
verse 31, of the N&landa copper-plate inscription of DevapSla [Monograph 
No. 1 of the V.R. Society, pp. 24 and 31]. ‘Just as from M&yfi was born the son 
of 6uddhodana (i.e. Buddha), the conqueror of the god of Love, or K&rttikevA, 
who delighted the, hearts of all the gods from 6iva and Uma, so also from 
her (Tara) was bom his (Samaragravira^) son B&laputradeva ; before whose 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OP BENGAL 


240 


lotus-like footstool a host of kings bowed down. He was a past master in 
lowering the pride of all the lords of the Earth.’ [Cf. Mayayamiva Kamadeva- 
vijayi fiuddhodanasyatmajab Skando nanditadevavradahrdayab Sambhoru- 
mayamiva | Tasyanta[sya] narendravmdavinamat padaravindasanah 
sarvvorvvlpatigarvvakharvvanachanah Sri valaputroh bhavat || ] A worthy 
son is looked upon as an embodiment of the virtues of his parents, the outcome, 
so to say, of good actions performed by the mother during her previous life. 
[Cf. ‘ Purvva-purvvajanu rjjanmakarmmapakadabhut sutastasyaitasyam dvija- 
dhlsa (6a) — pujyab 6rI6ridharah parah’ — Kamauli copper-plate inscription of 
Vaidyadeva, verse 25, lines 42-43.] 

A mother contributes a great deal towards the formation of the character 
of her son and as such she has a special claim to his esteem. As mother she 
is fondly associated with her children and in the genealogical accounts given 
in most of these inscriptions the name of the mother is usually mentioned in 
connection with that of her son or daughter. An instance of the mention of 
the mother’s name in connection with that of her daughter, as pointed out 
already, is furnished by the Tipperah copperplate grant where we find the 
name of Astayika, the mother of Lokanatha’s mother Gotradevi. Sometimes 
the son is introduced through his mother and takes after his mother’s name. 
Thus Madanapala is called the son of MadanadevI in the Manahali grant of 
Madanapala (verse 18, lines 25-27). [Cf. ‘Tadanu Madanadevl-nandana 
schandragaurai6charitabhuvana-garbhah pramsubhih kirttipuraih | Kshiti 
macharama-tata stasya saptavdhidamnlmabhrta Madanapalo Ramapalat- 
majanma || ’ — G.L., 158.] It appears from these inscriptions that in all 
cases of gifts of land in the form of charitable endowment the object is stated 
to be the enhancement of the religious merit and the glorification of one’s 
ownself and his parents. [Cf. matapitroratmanaScha pupyaya6obhivrddhaye 
in Damodarpur C.P. No. 3 and later inscriptions like Baghaura Image Inscr.] 
The mother is thus given a share of the religious merit and glory of her son 
or daughter as the case may be. As mothers therefore, women enjoyed an 
unique position in the estimation of their sons and daughters. In most of the 
land grants, moreover, in the customary list of persons and officials who are 
made aware of each and every detail of the proposed endowment of land in 
which their formal consent is solicited (Cf. matamastu bhavatam), mention is 
made of the rajfil or queen. [Cf. Belaba C.P. of Bhojavarman, line 29; 
R&mp&l C.P. of Srichandra, line 18 and so on.] This shows that women had 
no mean position since the queen is duly informed of the condition,' object 
and nature of the proposed grant of land and is cited among the witnesses who 
ratified the gift by their consent whether taoit or express. 

• Sometimes parallels are introduced in these inscriptions to depict the 
character of women. This shows that men and women of that age were very 
fond of such illustrations which were mainly drawn from the field of popular 
literature like the epics and the Puranas. The ideals of womanhood depioted by 
such epio and Pur&^ic characters may be supposed to represent the best public 
opinion of the time and as such they had a special appeal to the imagination 



260 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


of the peOple. In verse 6 of the KhSlimpur copper-plate inscription of 
Dharmapfila, Deddadevi, the queen of Gopftla I, is accordingly likened to 
Rohi^i, the consort of the moon-god ; Svaha, the wife of the fire-god; Sarw&pl, 
the wife of Siva; Bhadra, the queen of Kuvera ; Pauldmi, the wife of Indra and 
Lakshmi the consort of Vishnu. [Cf. 6itamteriva Rohipihutabhujab Svaheva 
tejomdheh Sarwaniva Sivasya guhyakapater Bhadreva Bhadratmaja | Paulo- 
nnva Purandarasya dayita Sri Deddadevityabhfit devi tasya vinodabhu 
rmuraripor Lakshmi riva Kshmapatefi || ] Srikafichana, the mother of Sri- 

‘ C w? a m d t 1 h \ Wife ° f Trail0kyachandr ®’ is also described in the same way : 
As the Moonlight (lady) of the Moon, Sachi of the Conqueror (i.e. Indra), 

Gaun of Hara and Sri of Hari, so also was Srikafichana, charming like gold 
(Kafichana), the beloved of that (King) whose authority was acknowledged 
(by all) [Cf. Jyotsneva chandrasya Sachiva jishnorggauri Harasyeva 

Harenva Snb I Tasya pnya kafichanakantirasichchhri-kafichanetyafichita^asa- 

nasya || — Rampal copper-plate inscription of Srichandra, verse 6 lines 

10 ^ 12 ^-k S j dbhaVa ’ the Wife of Dhavalaghosa and the mother of Kvaraghosa 
is described in the same manner. ‘His wife Sadbhava by name was a second 
Bhavarn (wife .of Siva) .in appearance. She was as much devoted to her 
husband as Sita (herself) and resembled Padma, the wife of Vishnu ’ TCf 
Bhavamvapara murttya Site(va) (pati)vrata | Sadbhava nama tasyabhud- 
bharya Padmeva Samginah II -verse 4, lines 7-8, of the Ramgunj copper- 
pkte inscription of Isvaraghosha.] We have a similar description owLaTvi, 
the chief queen of Vijayasena, in verse 10 of the Naihati copper-plate inscrip- 
tion of VaUalasena. ‘The chief queen of this lord of Earth wL Vilasadevi 

wZ? V 8 b "-°? i6 fema,e apar “> ** - Lakshmi was the 

a?L) W U Cf a padmT (t 5 6 g0d) ^ ^ y0UDg — °° his 

r a S ‘ Va) - [Cf - Padma layeva dayita purushottamasya Gauriva vala-rajani- 
pirasa VilSsadeti || ]** PradhanamahieIli i a gad«varasya suddhantamaulima- 

of Afim^lCrtbTc^H “ 80me ° f ^ contem P° rar y inscriptions 
- T C0pper -P late No - 1 of Indrapala [Padmanath 
Bhattacharya Kamarupasasanabah, pp. 120 and 127] we have a similar 
d^mption of DurJabha, the queen of PurandarapSla. She was a like « 

iti of the^T H 8 t a m r ° f thG g0d lDdra ’ the « odde8S &v& of Sambhu 
Batrof the Cupidgod (Madana) Lakshmi of Hari and Rohipi of the Moon-god.’ 

Rohinfva V& K h T-l dve ^ va ^ amb ho Rati(h) Smarasyeva Hareriva Srifi | Si 

hiplva Kshanadakarasya tasyanurfipaprapaya babhfiva || —verse 14] 

In the second copper-plate inscription of the same ruler [Ibid., pp 137.38] 

Arund^ti the wife of the sage Vafirfh. for her purity of character and h 
point ofhohness to the river Gafiga. [Cf. Patni Silai rarandhativ&sit | Anurft 
dheti kulinfi Gafi^vfip&takalikalusha || -verse 23.] In DharmiaX’s 

ST 1 [/ f ’ PP> 160 ' 61] Hara ^ V— iSSt e 

Brahmin lady £ljik4 are described as being like the goddess P&rwati the 
wife of Siva. The beautiful lady Chheppfiyikfi i 8 said to have been noted for 



WOMEN m THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 


251 


her devotion to husband and as such she was like Lakshml. [Cf. verse 18 of 
the second copper-plate grant of Ratnap&la, Ibid., p. 114.] Ladies are also 
represented as mothers of ideal offspring. Thus in the copper-plate inscription 
of Harjjaravarmma (verse 11), JivadevI, the mother of Harjjaravarmma, is 
described as being like Kunti, the mother of Yudhisthira and Subhadra, the 
mother of Abhimanyu. [Ibid., p. 52.] Similarly in the Nidhanpur copper- 
plate inscription of Bhaskaravarmma (verse 12), Yajnavatl, the mother of 
Mahendravarmma, is likened to the sacrificial wood which produces fire. 
[Ibid., p. 29.] 

Some of the customary beliefs and conventions in Hindu society present 
themselves before our view when we make a careful study of the inscriptions of 
Bengal. An instance of this kind is supplied by the Rampal copper-plate 
inscription of 6richandra. In verse 4 of this inscription, we have an interesting 
explanation as to the origin of the name of Suvarnnachandra. 4 As his mother 
had a desire, due to the longing (natural to a pregnant woman) of seeing the 
disc of the rising moon, on a new moon day, and as she was satisfied by (having) 
“a golden moon” (namely, her son, comparable to the new moon in beauty ) y 
people gave him the name Suvarnnachandra. [Cf. Da[r6e]sya mata kila 
dohadena didrkshamanodayichandravimvam | Suvarnnachandrena hi toshiteti 
suvarnnachandram samudaharanti || ] It appears thus that the physical 
beauty of their children was a matter of great concern for the mothers. 
It may be noted, as pointed out by N. G. Majumdar (Inscriptions of Bengal, 
p. 7, f.n.), that it is a common belief even at the present day that if a pregnant 
woman sees the disc of the rising moon on new moon days her issue becomes 
as beautiful as the moon. 

Practice of charity on auspicious days like the eleventh lunar day (ekadasl) 
or the last day of a month (samkranti) was thought as at present to be specially 
efficacious. Bestowal of gifts on the occasion of a lunar or solar eclipse seems 
alike to have been a common practice especially among the womenfolk in 
Hindu society. The Kamauli copper-plate inscription of Vaidyadeva records 
the gift of land by paramamahe^vara-paramavaish^ava-maharajadhlrS-ja 
parame^vara -paramabhattaraka Oilman Vaidyadeva [lines 47-48] during the 
fourth year of his victorious reign [line 53] to a Brahmin named 6ridhara, 
who was an inhabitant of the Varendra country [lines 37-46]. The land in 
question was situated in Kamarupamandala belonging to the Pragjyotishapura 
bhukti [lines 48-49] and the gift was made during the last day of the month 
of Vai£&kha on an auspioious eleventh lunar day. [Cf. Etasmai 6asanam 
prad&dvaidyadeva — KshI [kshi] tisvarab I VaiSakhe vishu[va]tyancha svargar- 
tham hariv&sare II —verse 28, line 46.] According to the Bangadh copper- 
plate inscription, the village of Kuratapallika in the Gokalikamandala in the 
Ko^varshavishaya of Pun^ravarddhanabhukti was similarly given to a 
Brahmin named Kfshty&ditya £armm& by King Mahipala I on the last day of a 
month, the grant being made by the King after his bath in the holy waters 
of the Ganges. [Cf. Ki9$aditya6armma$e vi6u(shu)va- samkr&ntau vidhivat 
GaAg&y&m sn&tvft 6&sanikrtya pradattohsm&bhib— lines 47-50.] The 



252 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Amg&chhi copper-plate inscription of Vigrahap&la III (line 24) speaks of a 
similar gift of land to a Brahmana during the twelfth or thirteenth year of 
his reign by King Vigrahapala, son of NayapAla. According to Kielhorn 
the gift was made on the occasion of a lunar eclipse after taking bath in the 
Ganges. [Gauda-Lekhamala, p. 122, f.n.] The Barrackpur copper-plate 
inscription of Vijayasena similarly informs us that four patakas of land belong- 
ing to the village of Ghasasambhoga-bhattavada in the Khadivishaya of the 
Paundravardhanabhukti , yielding an income of two hundred kaparddaka- 
pura^tas [lines 21-34], were given to a Brahmana named Udayakaradeva- 
Sarman [lines 37-39]. The grant was made as fee for the performance of 
Homa in connection with the Kanaka -Tulapurusha-Mahadana (i.e. the great 
gift of a golden Tulapurusha) ceremony of the Maha-mah&devi (‘the great 
great-queen’) Vilasadevi during a lunar eclipse, within the palace at Vikrama- 
pura [lines 39-43]. The Naihati copper-plate inscription also speaks of the 
gift of a golden horse (i.e. the performance of the Hemasvadana ceremony) 
by the same queen Vilasadevi, mother of Vallalasena, during a solar 
eclipse (verse 14) on the banks of the Ganges. As a fee for the per- 
formance of this ceremony the village of Vallahittha in Uttara-Ra^ha in 
Vardhamanabhukti was given by her son Vallalasena to the preceptor 6ri- 
vasudeva6armman [lines 37-54]. The Tarpandighi copper-plate inscrip- 
tion (line 44) speaks of the gift of a golden horse and chariot (cf. hemaSvaratha- 
mahadanacharya). The Sahitya-Parishat copper -plate inscription of Vi6va- 
rupasena speaks of the grant of eleven plots of land to the Brahmana, the 
Avallika-pandita, Halayudha6armman. Two of these plots are said to have 
been given away on the Uttarayanasamkranti day of the thirteenth regnal 
year. Three of these plots are said to have been granted on the occasion of a 
lunar eclipse observed by the queen-mother (line 52). Two of these plots 
were granted by the prince (Kumara) Suryyasena whose birth -day was thus 
celebrated. Another plot was similarly given by Kumara Purushottamasena 
on the Utthanadvadagi day in the fourteenth regnal year (lines 57-58) [Inscrip- 
tions of Bengal, pp. 141-42]. The Ramganj copper-plate inscription of 
ISvaraghosha also records the grant of a village to a Brahmana named Bhat^a- 
Nibboka^arman. The donor is said to have made the gift after having bathed 
in the fiver Jatoda on the last day of the month of Margga&rsha (lines 31, 33). 

From the Paharpur copper-plate inscription of the Gupta year 159 (i.e. 
478-79 A.D.), it appears that pious gifts of land were sometimes made con- 
jointly by married couples in Hindu society. The inscription in question 
records the following facts. [Ep. Ind., Vol. XX, pp. 63-64.] N&tha-6armm&, 
a Brahmaijta and Rami, his wife, approached the District Offioer (fcyuktaka) 
and the City Council headed by the Mayor (Nagara-6re$thl) at Puijflravardhana 
with the request that in accordance with the prooedure prevalent in the 
looality, they might be allowed to deposit three din&ras in return for one and 
a half Kulyav&pas of land distributed among four different villages, to be 
endowed in perpetuity for the maintenance of requisites of the worship of 
Arhats such as sandal, incense, flower, lamps, etc. and for the construction of 



WOMEN IN THE EAftt/Sr iNSCHlTTIOftS 6 f BENGAL MS 

a resting-plaoe at the Vihara of the Jaina preceptor Guhanand! at Vata-Gohali. 
Their prayer was granted and land was sold for the aforesaid purpose. The 
donation of a Brahmana couple for the worship of Jinas, as recorded herein, 
is very interesting for it shows the Bpirit of religious toleration among the 
people of this period. The Aphsad inscription of Adityasena informs us that 
a temple of Vishnu was made by Adityasena while a matha or monastery 
was made by his mother $rimatidevl and a tank was excavated by his queen 
Kxwriadevl [R. D. Banerji, Bangalar Itihasa, Part I, p. 117]. Images of gods 
were also made through the munificence of pious ladies. The most con- 
spicuous example of an image of this class is the well-known DhulbadI ^arwa^I 
image. The accompanying inscription [Ep. Ind., Vol. XVII, p. 360] shows 
that the image of the goddess Sarvvagl, one of the forms of DurgS, was the 
pious work of Mahadevi Prabhavati, queen of Deva-Khadga. One of the 
bronze images found at Kurkihar dated in the 19th year of King Vigrahapala 
(i.e. Vigrahapala II or Vigrahapala III) bears the inscription Dulapavadhu- 
Pekhokaya’ (line 3) [J.B.O.R.S., Vol. XXVI, pp. 35-38]. A similar 
bronze image found at Kurkihar, bearing the date year 3 of the victorious 
reign of King Vigrahapala, is said to have been the pious work of Tikuka, son 
of Dulapa. [Cf. ‘ dovadharmo- ’yam pravara-mahay ana -jaina pramopasaka- 
Dulapasutab Tikukasya’. (Vide ante.)] The name of the mother is also 
mentioned in an image installed by her son. The Keoar Vishnu image is 
said to have been the work of Vangoka, son of the couple Sayoga and Anuyami 
[Ep. Ind., Vol. XVII, pp. 353ff.]. Besides such pious works of charity by 
women we have instances, according to the literary tradition, of women taking 
initiation and engaging themselves in occult religious practices. The Charya- 
padas, the earliest specimens of Bengali literature, bear ample testimony to the 
practice of Tantric Buddhism in Bengal. The Saha j a -y ana or Sahajiya and 
Vajra-yana types of Tantric worship seem to have been not unknown among 
the people of Eastern Bengal, the seat of government of the Chandra kings. 
Mayanamati, a lady of the Chandra family, is thus said to have been the 
disciple of a Tantric saint. She is said to have acquired great psychic powers 
and the name of her son Gopichandra is oelebrated in popular ballads called 
4 Gopichandrer Gana \ 

The Ramayai^a and the Mahabharata seem to have enjoyed a very wide 
popularity among the masses in Bengal. Men and women of all ranks seem 
to have heard with reverenoe the reoitation and exposition of the texts of 
these epics. The Badal Pillar inscription (verse 24, line 25) and verse 33 of 
the Deopara inscription of Vijayasena mention the name of Valmiki, and 
the Ramayai^a though not expressly mentioned by name is clearly indicated. 
[Cf. Atilomaharsha^eshu Kaliyuga-V almiki- janmapi^uneshu | Dharmmeti- 
hasaparwashu punyatma yak Srutirvvyavr^ot || ] The Manahali copper- 
plate grant of Madanapala reoords the gift of land in Halavarttama^ala in 
the Ko^varshavishaya of Pau^avardhanabhukti to a Brahmin named 
Varvara Sv&ml (line 44). The gift in question was made by paramefivara 
paramabhattfixaka mahfir&j&dhir&ja Srim&n Madanap&ladeva, son of parama- 



264 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


saugata mahifrajadhiraja Ramapaladeva (lines 31-32), during the eighth 
year of his victorious reign (line 58). The grant of the aforesaid land was 
made as a fee to the above-named Brahmin scholar for recitation and exposition 
of the texts of the Mahabharata written by Vedavyasa at the instanoe of 
Chitramatikadevi, the chief queen or favourite consort of Madanapala. [Cf. 
4 $rfvate6vara svamiSarmmane pattamahadevI-Chitramatikaya Vedavy&sa- 
prokta-prapathita-Mahabharatasamutsarggita dakshinatvena bhagavantam 
Buddhabhattarakamuddisya sasanikrtya pradattohsmabhib ’ — lines 42-40.] 
The queen of a Buddhist ruler would thus have no scruple to hear from a 
Brahmin scholar the tales of the Great Epio. The Deopara inscription of 
Vijayasena (verse 4) refers to the Great Epic as 4 the honey-stream of beautiful 
stanzas, which the son of ParaSara (i.e. Vyasa) had caused to flow to please 
the ears of mankind . . . ’ [Cf. 4 Suktimadhvlkadharah Paraiaryyena vi£va6ra- 
vanaparisaraprinanaya pranltab’ — Inscriptions of Bengal, p. 46.] 

A passage in the Manahali copper-plate inscription of Madanapala seems 
to point out that women were sometimes employed as nurses for rearing up 
children in well-to-do families. Gopala III is here described as a baby in 
arms playing on the lap of his nurse. [Cf. Dhatri-palana jrmbhamana- 
mahima karpurapamsutkarairdevah kirttimayo nija [ x ] vitanute yah 
Sairiave Kriditam — verse 17, lines 24-25.] 

Monogamy seems to have been the ordinary custom followed in Hindu 
society though polygamy was not unknown especially among the princely 
class or well-to-do persons. Mutual jealousy among rival co-wives appears 
to have been the traditional rule in cases of polygamy. [Cf. Sapatna-^unyam 
in line 23 of the Monghyr copper-plate of Devapala.] There were instances 
again where the normal rule would not work. In verse 9 of the Bangadh 
copper-plate inscription of Mahipala I, we have the picture of an ideal wife 
trying to win the heart of her husband through the magio power of her warmer 
attraction without incurring the displeasure of his co-wife. [Cf. 4 Yam svaminam 
rajagunairanunamasevate oha[rutara]nurakta | Utsaha-mantra-prabhuSakti- 
Lakshmih prthvim sapatnlmiva silayanti |) 9 — lines 19-20.] In verse 11 of 
the Ghoshrawa inscription, we have similarly the picture of an ideal husband 
loving his wives equally without any kind of partiality. [Cf. ^rimadvih&ra- 
parihara-vibhushitahgya | Udbhasitopi vahu-Kirttivadhii-patitve yah sMhu 
s&dhuriti sadhujanaib pra^astah.] Nevertheless, as in all ages, there was the 
ideal of a peaceful family life with a single wife. [Cf. 4 6rima(n Gop&la)deva 

4ohirataramabane rekapatnyfi ivaiko bhartta f| ’ — verse 8, line 13, 

of Amgaohhi copper-plate inscription.] Numerous instances of polygamy, 
however, may be gathered from these inscriptions. The Belftva copper-plate 
inscription of Bbojavarman (verse 12) informs us that M&lavyadev! became 
the chief queen of Samalavarmman though his seraglio was full of the daughters 
of many kings. Malavyadevfs daughter was Trailokyasundar! and her son 
was Bhojavannman. [Inscriptions of Bengal, p. 23.] The Bhuvanesvar 
inscription of Bhat^a-Bhavadeva informs us that Govarddhana married a lady 
Sarasvati by name (verse 11). Govarddhana is said to have accepted as his 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 


256 


second wife SSngoka, the adorable and pious daughter of a Vandyaghatlya 
Br&hmana, who was a jewel among ladies (verse 13). 

As at present, widowhood was regarded as the most tragic incident 
in the life of a married woman in Hindu society. In the Nalanda copper- 
plate inscription [Monograph No. I of V.R. Society, pp. 24 and 31], Bang 
Devapala is described as — ‘the preceptor in the initiation of the wives of all 
his enemies to widowhood*. [Cf. Samasta^atruvanitavaidhavyadikshagurum — 
verse 33, line 63.] Before the establishment of royal authority by Gopala I 
there was a period of anarchy in Bengal when, according to Taranath, the widow 
of one of the departed chiefs would rule every night the person who had been 
chosen as king. A woman, the moment she became a widow, would naturally 
be shorn of all kinds of luxury and enjoyment. As at present, she would in 
the first instance forfeit her right to adorn herself with the vermilion mark in 
the partition of the hair of her head. In verse 17 (lines 24-25) of the Manahali 
coppor-plate inscription of Madanapala, Kumarapala is described as effacing 
with a playful hand the vermilion marks on the heads of his enemies* wives 
and thus causing their widowhood. [Cf. Pratta(tya)rthi-pramadakadambaka- 
Mrabsindura-lopakrama-krida-patalapanireshasushuve Gopala murwibhujam.] 
The use of vermilion by married ladies was thus a common custom in Hindu 
society. It may also be deduced from contemporary literature. Thus the 
fifth stanza of a work called Adbhutasagara [Muralidhara Jha’s ed., Prabhakari 
Co., Benares, 1905, pp. 1-4], which is ascribed to Vallalasena and which gives a 
poetical account of the Senas, speaks of the heads of enemies’ wives bearing 
vermilion marks. [Cf. Yasyanghrifi patibhaikshyakakuviluthadvidveshinari- 
sirabsindurotkaramudrito janalipirnirmuktiyantram dvisham.] Govardhana 
Acharya, the court-poet of Kang LakshmaijLasena, also speaks of the 
hair on the head of a lady giving the idea of a heart rent in twain 
by the vermilion mark. [Cf. Bandhanabhaj o ’mushy afi chikurakalapasya 
muktamanasya | Sinduritasimantachchhalina hrdayam vidirnameva || ’ — 
Sukumar Sen, Prachin Bangla 0 Barigali, p. 51.] Collyrium seems to have 
been used as an eye-paint by fashionable ladies. The Chittagong copper- 
plate inscription of Damodara (verse 5) gives a figurative description of the 
. fame of Damodara. * Although by his bright fame he absolutely removed the 
blackness of the world over which was showered the collyrium particles from 
the eyes of the wives of his enemies, his (stock of) fame was never exhausted. 
[Cf. Yasyaita(d) yaSasojjvalena bhuvanam nishkalikam kurwata 6atrustrijana- 
lochanfifljanakanas&ram na tat feshitam.] Fashionable Hindu ladies seem 
alike to have used rouge or some such paint for the decoration of their body. 
[Cf. 6atruvanita-prasadhana-vilopi-vimalasi-jaladharah — line 14 of the 
Bhagalpur copper-plate inscription of Nftraya^ap&la.] Camphor is often 
alluded to and was probably used in toilet by ladies. [Cf. ‘Medasvi-Klrtti 
ramarendra-vadhii-kapola-karppura-patramakari sa kumarap&iab ’ — verse 16 
of the Manahali copper-plate grant of Madanapala.] Floral wreaths, which 
form the simplest type of deooration even to this day, were alike in vogue 
among fashionable ladies of that age, Ladies would thus use garlands around 



256 


B. 0. LAW VOLtJME 


their neck and floral wreaths to oover the tresses on their head. [Cf. ‘Siddha- 
stri^amapi sirassrajeshvarppitah Ketakinam patrapldafi suchiramabhavan 
bhmga-sabdanumeyah ’ — verse 16, lines 23-24, of the Bhagalpur copper-plate 
inscription of NSrayaiiapala.] The Deopara inscription (verse 1) holds before 
us the picture of a bashful lady trying to cover her nudity with the help of 
the garlands around her neck at the removal of her breast-cloth. [Cf. 
VakshomSuka haranasadhvasakrstamaulimalyachchhatahataratalayadipabha- 
sah | Devyastrapamukulitam mukhamindubhabhirvvlkshyananani hasitani- 
jayanti fSambhofi \\ ] In the Edilpur copper-plate inscription of Kegavasena, 
we find mention of ladies adorned with smiling flowers. [Cf. Udbhinnasmita- 
manjariparichita dikkaminih.] 

Seclusion of women from public view seems to have been the usual custom 
in Hindu society. In verse 7, line 12, of the Edilpur copper-plate inscription 
of Kegavasena we are told that King Vallalasena carried away the fortune 
goddesses of his enemies on palanquins supported by staffs made of elephant's 
tusk, from the battlefield, which was made impassable on account of a stream 
of blood. [Cf. ‘Yasyayodlianaslmni gonitasariddufisancharayam hrt&b sam- 
saktadvipadantadandagivikamaropya vairigriyafi ’.] We have reason, there- 
fore, to believe that respectable ladies would be carried on a litter while going 
from one place to another and would not as a rule expose themselvos before 
the passers-by in public thoroughfares. In the palaces of kings we have 
references to inner apartments meant for ladies of the royal household. The 
Madhainagar copper-plate inscription (verse 9) of Lakshmapasena speaks of 
Ramadevi, queen of Vallalasena, as the crest-jewel of the royal harem. [Cf. 
antafipuramauliratna.] In verse 23 of the Edilpur copper-plate inscription 
it is stated that when Kegavasena passed through the city, the ladies of the 
city ascending on the tops of skyscraping houses would be gazing upon his 
beautiful appearance. [Cf. Amhyabhraihlihagrha^ikhamasya saundaryyalek- 
ham pagyantlbhifi pnri viharatah pauraslmantinlbh ifi . ] 

From the description given in verse 10 of the Calcutta Sahitya-Parishat 
copper-plate inscription of Vigvarupasena, we may well imagine the picture of 
fashionable maidens especially married ladies looking bright and gay with the 
exuberance of their dress and toilet in the evening. The day's task being 
over the night was presumably the time for merry-making and enjoyment. 
References have already been made to ablution bath performed by men and 
women alike in the waters of rivers like Gahga or Jatoda. Similarly we find 
mention of tanks and lakes where ladies used to take their bath. The 
Bhuvanegvar inscription of Bhatta-Bhavadeva (verse 26) refers to such a 
tank in the Ra^lha country. The surface of its water is said to have been 
filled with the reflections of lotus-faces of beautiful damsels engaged in bath. 
[Cf. Yen&k&ri jalS6ayafc parisarasnatabhijatahganS vaktr&bjaprativimba- 
mugdhamadhupl, etc.]’ Large tanks were often excavated in the vicinity of 
temples by pious donors so that men and women might take their bath and 
visit the sacred shrine. Thus the Mahabodhi inscription reoords that during 
the 26th regnal year of King Dharmap&la (line 7) Kegava, son of the stone- 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 


257 


mason Ujjvala, set up an image of four-faced M&hadeva (line 3) and excavated 
a large tank at the expense of three thousand dramma coins (line 6). The 
Deopara inscription (verse 29) tells us that King Vijayasena excavated a large 
tank in the vicinity of the temple of Pradyumnesvara. Citizens’ wives with 
musks on their breasts are described as plunging themselves into its water 
for taking their bath. [Cf. jalamagna-paurangana-stanainamadasaurabho- 
chchalitachancharikam sarab— verse 29, lines 26-27.] In the Tejpur copper- 
plate inscription of King Vanamala of Assam we ha ve a similar description 
of the river Lauhitya or Brahmaputra. [Cf. Majjadvilasinikuchakalasa- 
tata^lishtamadapankavilasugandhambhasa vesanganabhiriva nanabharana- 

sobhitaprakatavayavabhirvalakumarikabhiriva Kvanatkihkinibhib 

varastribhiriva chamaradharii^Ibhi etc., Padmanath Bhattacharya, op. 

cit ., pp. 63-64.] Fashionable ladies were thus in the habit of using musk and 
other aromatics like camphor, sandal, etc. for their decoration. [Cf. Karpurai- 
riva puri(tam) malayajakshodairivalepitam — verse 8 of Krshnadvarika 
Temple inscription.] The use of camphor is already referred to and we have 
reference in the Deopara inscription (verse 31) to the use of sandal powder. 
The same inscription also speaks of heavenly damsels with saffron lines on 
their breasts (verse 12) indicating thereby the use of red paints by ladies. 
[Inscriptions of Bengal, p. 52, n. 5.] 

The existence of courtesans is also attested by the evidence furnished 
by these inscriptions. In verse 9 of the Edilpur copper-plate inscription of 
Ke6avasena and verse 10 of the Calcutta Sahitya-Parishat copper-plate 
inscription of ViSvarupasena, we find mention of the dulcet music arising from 
the anklets worn by courtesans in the evening [cf. Sayam vesavilasinljanaraijan- 
mafijlramanjusvanaib]. Kings and wealthy people thus soem to have enjoyed 
the sight of dancing courtesans. There are references moreover to the employ- 
ment of ‘devadasis’ or female attendants in temples and shrines. These were 
the dancing girls engaged in the service of the deity of a temple and as such 
formed a musical choir. The Bhuvane6var inscription of Bhatta-Bhavadeva 
(verse 30) speaks of the temple of the god Harimedhas (i.e. Vishnu) being 
endowed by King Bhavadeva with hundred damsels having eyes like those 
of young deer, who created the delusion that they were celestial nymphs 
taking rest on earth. These maidens are described as being the meeting-hall 
of music, dalliance and beauty. [Cf. Etasmai Harimedhase vasumativisranta- 
vidyadharivibhrantindadhatib 6atam sa hi dadau saranga^avldrsab I 
Dagdhasyogradrsa dr&aiva diAatib kamasya samjivanam kara-b kamijanasya 
sangamagrham sangitakeliSriy&m || ] The Deopara inscription of Vijayasena 
(verse 30) similarly informs us that the temple of the god Pradyumnesvara 
was provided with hundred beautiful females the oharms of whose body 
were enhanoed by the wearing of jewellery. [Cf. Ratnalamkrtibhirvvi^eshita- 
vapub &obh&b fetam subhruvab.] From the epithet— 4 Padmavatichara^a- 
ch&ragachakravartl * some scholars are led to believe that Padmavati, the 
wife of the celebrated poet Jayadeva MiSra, was before her marriage a member 
of a choir party engaged in the service of a temple, 

*7 



258 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


The Deopara inscription of Vijayasena (verse 31, line 28) refers to 
variegated silk cloth [cf. Chitrakshaumevacharmma]. The Amgachhi copper- 
plate inscription of Vigrahapala III (verse 8) speaks of variegated garments 
shining with the lustre of precious stones [cf. ratna-dyutikhaohita-chatub 
sindhu-ohitram6ukayab]- The use of girdles or waist-chains by ladies may 
also be inferred from the use of such images as — ‘nanambonidhi-mekhalasya 
jagatah* [Badal Pillar inscription, verse 15], ‘chaturjjaladhimekhal&m 
mahim’ [grants of Sasanka, p. 121 of Indian Culture , Vol. IX, No. 1] and 
‘,bhupithamavadhi rasanabharanam ’ [Badal Pillar inscription, verse 13, 
line 14]. The use of bracelets may also be guessed from the use of such 
images as — *yavat kurmmo jaladhivalayam bhutadhatrfm vibharti’ [Ghoshr&wa 
inscription of Viradeva, verse 16, line 18]. The Naihati copper-plate inscrip- 
tion of Vallalasena (verse 8) gives the following description of Vijayasena : 
‘From the necklaces of the deer-eyed ones (i.e. ladies) of his enemies who were 
roaming in forests, pearls dropped and were strewn over the earth being 
marked by the collyrium mixed with the tears from their eyes. ’ These pearls 
were picked up by men of the Pulinda tribe mistaking them to be gunja seeds 
for their wives might be pleased with necklaces of even gunja seeds. [Cf. 
Bhramyantinam vanante yadari-mrgadrsam haramuktaphalanichchhinna- 
klrnani bhumau nayanajala-milat-kajjalairllanchchhitani | Yatrachchinvanti 
darbhakshatacharanatalasrgviliptani gunjasrag-bhusha-ramya-ramastanakala- 
Saghana&esha-lolah Pulindah || ] The simplicity of women’s dress in rural 
areas and lonely forests thus stood in strange contrast with the rich ostenta- 
tion of citizens’ wives and daughters. The simple lotus -ear-ornament is 
referred to in verse 27 of the Bhuvane6var inscription of Bhatta-Bhavadeva 
[cf. Lilavatamsotpalam]. The Deopara inscription of Vijayasena (verse 23), 
an eulogy composed by the poet Umapati-dhara, gives a faithful picture 
of society when it deals with the effects produced by the charity of the king. 
‘Through his grace the Brabmapas vorsed in the Vedas have become the 
possessors of so much wealth that their wives have to be trained by the 
wives of the townspeople (to recognize) pearls, pieces of emerald, silver 
coins, jewels and gold from their similarity respectively with seeds of cotton, 
leaves of 6aka, bottlegourd flowers, the developed seeds of pomegranates 
and the blooming flowers of the creepers of pumpkin-gourd (Beninkasa 
Oerifera).’ [Cf. Muktab karppasavijairmmarakatasakalam 6akapatrairalabu 
pushpai rupyani ratnam parinatibhidurairkukshibhirdda^imanam | Kush- 
man^lvallannam vikasitakusumaih kafichanam nagaribhib 6ikshyante yat 
prasSdfidvahu vibha va j usham yoshitab 6rotriy&n&m || — ^Inscriptions * of 

Bengal, pp. 48 and $4.] In verse 31 of the same inscription mention is also 
made of string of sapphires (mahanilaratnakshamala) and lovely pearls 
besides emeralds. 

The simplicity of ordinary women is also evident from contemporaiy 
literature. Mention has already been made of lotus-ear-ornament. There is < 
also evidence to believe that ordinary women, even respectable ladies of the 
highest Br&hmin caste, would use ear-rings made of green palm leaves. This is 
*7* 



WOMEN IN THE EARLY INSCRIPTIONS OF BENGAL 


259 


evident from the following description of Dhoyl, the author of ‘ PavanadQta * : 
4 Gangavlchiplutaparisarah saudhamalavatamso yasyatuchchaistvayi rasa- 
mayo vismayam Suhmadesab I Yatra srotrabharanapadavim bhumidevanga- 
nanam talipatram .navasaSikalakomalam yatra yati || * There are lots of 
references to the cultivation of betel-nuts [line 52 of Edilpur copper-plate of 
Ke^avasena, Madanapada copper-plate of Vi^varupasena, line 45, etc.] but 
there is no direct mention of the practice of chewing betels. It appears from 
a passage written by Govardhana Acharyya that in backward rural areas the 
advanced modes and ways of fashionable civic maidens were thought to be 
the most unwelcome things for women to follow. [Cf. ‘ Rjuna nidhehi charanau 
parihara sakhi nikhilanagaracharam | Iha dakinlti palilpatih katakshehpi 
dandayati || *] The contemporary poet Parana gives a description of poor 
village women. The peasants have gone to the fields leaving their homes at 
dawn and their women are hastily coming home after finishing their business in 
the village mart before their husbands* return. [Cf. Etasta divasantabhaskara- 
drso dhavanti pauranganah skandhapraskhaladam^ukanchaladhiiivyasanga- 
vaddhadarah | Prataryatakrshivalagamabh iy a protplutya vartmachchhido 
hatta krashyapadarthamulya kalana vyagranguligranthayab II ] An account 
of an average well-dressed Bengalee woman is given in the following lines: 
‘Vasafi sukshmam vapushi bhujayoh kanchani changadasrir malagarbhab 
surabhimasrnairgandhatailaih 4ikhandab I karnottamse navasasikalanirmalam 
talapatram ve6ab kesham na harati mano Vangavarangananam || * With 
this we may compare the description of the mild decoration of village women 
as given by Chandrachandra : ‘Bhale Kajjalabindurindukirapaspardhi mrna- 
lankuro dorvallishu salatuphenilaphalottamsascha karnatithih | Dhammillasti- 

vadhuvargasya vesagrahab || * [Sukumar Sen, op. cit pp. 51-55.] 

The cultivation of classical Hindu music by men and women alike seems 
to have attained a high degree of excellence during this period. In a work 
called Sekiubhodaya wonderful musical feats are ascribed to the female artists 
of Bengal. The most conspicuous among them was Vidyutprabha, the 
daughter-in-law of the well-known actor Gangoka whose verses are recorded in 
the Saduktikarnamrta. She is said to have charmed the audience by her 
musical feats in the court of King Lakshmanasena. Another remarkable 
female artist of that age was Padmavatl, the wife of the poet Jayadeva Mi6ra, 
the author of Gitagovinda. Along with her husband who was also a musician 
of repute, she received honours from King Lakshmanasena by her superb 
musical display before the assembled audienoe in the royal court. Budhana 
Mi&a, the celebrated musician of Orissa, who came for a musical duel to the 
court of Lakshmanasena, was thus put out of countenance by Jayadeva and 
his wife. [Ibid., pp. 46-47.] 

In the field of oottage-industry, namely, spinning, weaving and embroi- 
dery, we owe a great deal to the efforts of women in Bengal. Bengal has 
always been noted for her textiles. The fine muslins of Dacca have at a 
later age given her an undying fame. Her jute and cotton fabrics were 




260 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


largely in vogue throughout the length and breadth of Northern India. In 
Varparatnakara of Jyotirisvara, a work of the fourteenth century A.D., we 
find mention of some of these fine garments of Bengal like ‘Megha-udumbara’, 
‘Laksmivilasa’, ‘ Dvaravasini ‘Silahati’, ‘G^ngeri’, etc. The use of fine 
garments was especially confined among womenfolk who would themselves 
make threads of cotton for this purpose. This is clear from a verse of 
6ubhafika : ‘ Karpasasthi prachayanichita nirdlianairotriyapam ye^am 

vatyapravitatakutf prangananta vabhuvuh | Tatsaudhanam parisarabhiivi- 
tvatprasadadidanim kridayuddhachchhidurayuvatiharamuktah patanti II ’ 


NEKKHAMMA 

By 

Dr. P. V. Bapat, M.A., Ph.D. 

1. There is a long-standing difference in views among scholars as regards 
the Sanskrit rendering of the Pali word ‘nekkhamma’. Prof. Bendall, the 
Editor of l&ksasamuecaya, adds a note on that word (p. 306) that in spite 
of Rhys Davids and Oldenberg (Vin. Texts i. 104, n. 1) who seem to mis- 
understand Itivuttaka, para. 72, nekkhamma seems to be connected with 
kram and not kama. Bumouf interpreted it as ‘naiskarmya’ (Lotus, 334). 
Rhys Davids and Oldenberg have, on the other hand, maintained that the 
Pali word ‘nekkhamma’ is neither ‘naiskarmya’ nor ‘naiskramya’ but ‘nais- 
kamyab Let us further examine this word and see if wo can throw new light 
on the interpretation or the historical changes in the interpretation of this 
word. 

2. Early Canonical Texts . — If we go to the first four Nikayas, or to 
the earliest Pali texts like the Suttanipata, we find that the word ‘ nekkhamma * 
is used as contrasted with the word ‘kama’. We find, over and over again, 
the famous expression ‘ kamdnam adinavam okaram sankilesam nekkhamme 
ftnisamsam pakasesi’ (D. i. 110, Ambatthasutta ; i. 148, Kutadantasutta; ii. 41, 
Mahapadanasutta; Vin. i. 18; M. i. 379, Upalisutta). Similarly, other uses of 
the word in expressions like kama-vitakka and nekkhamma-vitakka (M. i. 115; 
Iti. 82), or in expressions used as contrasted with kama (M. iii. 130; A. iii. 245), 
or in the following lines from the Suttanipata— 

kamesu adinavam disva nekkhammam datthu khemato (Sn. 424) 

k&mesu vinaya gedham nekkhammam datthu khemato (Sn. 1094) 
leave no doubt whatsoever that the word was used as opposed to kama. In 
fact, in some passages like the Itivuttaka 61, D. iii. 275, we find that the word 
is even defined as ‘kamanam etam nissaranam yadidam nekkhamma^n’: 
nekkhamma means escape or deliverance from kama. So also in Patisam- 
bhida i. 46-47, we have ‘nekkhammena kamacchandassa pahSnam * ; i.e., by 
nekkhamma, one destroys the passions of life. 



NEKKHAMMA 


261 


3. Later Canonical Texts. — Gradually, 'it appears, the word came to 
have a wider meaning. Vibhanga 86 says that all good things are included 
in the category of nekkhamma (Sabbe pi kusala dhamma Nekkhamma-dhatu). 
Nekkhamma came to be interpreted in the sense of renunciation or going away 
from worldly life. In Buddhavamsa ii. 130, we have 

Nekkhammabhimukho hohi bhavato parimuttiya. 

In Cariyapitaka (2. 4. 1 and 2) also we read 

Bhavam disvana bhayato nekkhammam abhinikkhamim 

* * * * 

Sa pi vatte anapekkha nekkhammam abhinikkhami 
where the idea is of going into a life of renunciation. We further notice that 
the word came to be used as a technical term in the sense of paramita, per- 
fection of one of the ten virtues or good qualities, which came to assume more 
and more importance in Buddhism along with the growth of Bodhisattva- 
doctrine in Mahayana Buddhism. Nekkhamma or a life of renunciation 
came to be accepted in Pali texts as the third Paramita, although in Maha- 
yanism it did not assume that rank. All the same, the life of renunciation 
was commended and it was always preferred by a religiously-minded person 
to a life of the world. In fact, it came to be recognized as an essential thing 
for the attainment of enlightenment. See, for instance, the following verse 
from Buddhavamsa (2. 128): 

Nekkhamme paramim gaccha yadi bodhim pattum icchasi. 

Thus in these late canonical works, the word seems to be used as opposed to 
a ‘life in a house’. 

4. Post-canonical Texts and Commentaries . — This change in the inter- 
pretation is further confirmed by post-canonical texts and commentaries. 
In Nettipakarana 53, and Milinda 285, we find ‘Cha gehanissitani somanass&ni’ 
given as opposed to ‘Cha nekkhammanissitani ’. Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhi- 
magga (3. 128, Prof. Kosambi’s Devanagari edition) also says: ‘Nekkhamma- 
ajjhasaya ca Bodhisatta gharavase dosadassavino’, ‘The Bodhisattas whose 
heart is set upon nekkhamma see defects in their residence at home’. The 
Commentaries also reveal a tendency to interpret the word as ‘an escape’, 
though they are careful to show that it is an escape from ‘pleasures of the 
world For instance, the Commentary on the Maj jhima, sutta No. 19, explains 
(MCm. ii. 79) nekkhamma-vitakka as kamehi nissato nekkhamma-patisdm- 
yutto vitakko. Further, it is said in the comment on the same sutta (MCm. 
ii. 82): nekkhamman ca kamehi nissatam sabbam kusalam. In another place 
(MCm. iv. 197), we read nekkhammena explained as kamato nissataguijena — 
kamato nissatgune thitena puggalena. MCm. iv. 158, as well as MCm. iii. 171 , 
explain nekkhamma as kamato nikkhantassa sukham. In all these cases 
escape from kama is emphasized. But, side by side with these explanations, 
we also find as the explanation of nekkhamma ‘renunciation’. DCm. ii* 
471-73 (on Kiitadantasutta) says : nekkhamme anisamsam pakasesi, pabbajjdya 
gmiam pakasesi ti attho. Similarly, ACm. iv. 204 also says : nekkhamme cittam 



262 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


pakkhandati ti pabbajjdya cittam arammanavasena pakkhandati. Here the 
word 4 pabbajja’ clearly occurs. 

It has been already remarked above that ultimately the word came to 
include all good things (sabbe pi kusala dhamma). So it was also used in the 
sense, as suited each case, of anagamimagga : 

‘Ettha nekkhamman ti anagamimaggo adhippeto. So hi sabbaso 
kamanam nissaranam. ’ The Commentary on Dhp. 272 gives the same explana- 
tion as anagamisukha of nekkhamma. In other contexts, it is also interpreted 
as nibbana : ACm. iii. 242 (on A. 147) and Vimanavatthu Commentary (p. 348) 
interpret the word as Nibbana (Nibbane khemabhavam disva). In another 
place, it is interpreted as Nibbana as well as the Path leading to Nibbana : 
Nibbanan ca nibbanagamin ca patipadam kheman ti disva (SnCm. on 
Sn 1098) ; or, in the sense of First Trance : 

Idha nekkhammam nama asubhesu patbamajjhanam (ACm. iii. 321). 
Later commentaries such as on Dhammapada further extend the scope of this 
word. See, for instance, the following : 

Nekkhamman ti kilesupasamam nibbanaratim pana sandhay’etam 
vuttam (Cm. on Dh. 181) 

where the word seems to include even the delight in Nibbana which allays 
corruptions. Here it rejects the interpretation of ‘pabbajja’ (ettha pabbajja- 
nekkhamman ti na gahetabbam). 

Dhammapala also in his various commentaries refers to different inter- 
pretations. For example, in his comment on Therigatha 339, he explains 
nekkhamma as pabbajja as well as Nibbana (pabbajjam nibbana^m yeva 
pihayami, patthayami). In his commentary on Cariyapitaka (2. 4. 1-2), 
he explains the word as three-fold (tividha) — (i) nibbana, (ii) quiescence and 
insight (samatha and vipassana) as means for the attainment of Nibbana, and 
(iii) a life of renunciation as the means for the attainment of samatha and 
vipassana. 

So we see that even in Pali sources, the word began to change its conno- 
tation from the time of later canonical texts, such as Buddhavamsa, Cariya- 
pitaka, Vibhanga, and through the early commentaries where the interpreta- 
tion is based upon the antithesis of kama as well as upon the fancied derivation 
from a similarly sounded root nikkhama (niskram), it finally came to be 
interpreted in the sense of all good things such as pabbajja, anag&mimagga, 
nibb&na, samatha and vipassana and the delight in nibb&na. 

5* Buddhist Sanskrit Texts.r— It must be noted that in Buddhist Sanskrit 
text®, the Pali word is rendered as ‘naiskramya’. Mahavastu (iii. 42) has the 
following stanza: 

Spr$ayam naiskramya sukham aprthagjanasevitam 
Bhiksu vi^vasamapadye aprapte asravaksaye. 

This stanza like the corresponding verse of Dhammapada (272) has nothing 
to show the interpretation in which the word was understood at that time. 
But mark the following passage which corresponds to the oft-repeated Pali 
passage quoted above in para. 2 (that from Ambatthasutta of the Dighanik&ya) : 



NEKKHAMMA 


203 


D&nakatham, 6ilakatham, svargakath&m, punyakatham, punyavip&ka- 
katham, kamesu bhayam, okaram, samkile^am, naiskrcmyamifam- 
savyavadanam sampraka^ayati. (Mahavastu iii. 357.) 

Here there is no doubt that the word ‘naiskramya’ corresponds to the Pali 
‘nekkhamma’ and that is used, as in the Pali passage, in opposition to 
kama, that is to say, in the same sense as ‘naiskamya \ See also the following: 

Naiskramyam anuvarnayanti kamesu dosadar^inah (Mahavastu, i. 107, 
1. 3) where the antithesis between kama and naiskamya is quite clear. 

Another stanza from the same work suggests a similar contrast: 

Suro ca bhavati drdhavrata apramatto na kamabhoge suratim janeti 
naiskramyato bhavati adinacitto chore tva jalam jinacetiyesu 1 

(Mahavastu ii. 392.) 

* Whosoever offers a net to the shrine of the Conquerors becomes a hero, of 
firm vows, watchful, finds no delight in pleasures of the world and is not cast 
down because of ‘naiskramya’. ‘Here also we note the contrast between 
enjoyment of pleasures and naiskramya. In A6vaghosa’s Saundarananda 
xii. 21, also, 

Adya te saphalam janma labhodya sumahams tava 

Yasya kamarasajnasya naiskramyayotsukam manab, 
the contrast between kamarasajna and naiskramya is suggested. 

So it will be seen that in spite of the form of the word ‘naiskramya’, the 
idea implied by the word is the same as ‘ naiskamya \ 

It is also interesting to note that Dr. N. P. Chakra varti in his L’Udana- 
varga, p. 266, gives, as the Sanskrit equivalent of the Pali expression ‘nek- 
khammupasame rata* (Dhp. 181), ‘naisk(r)am(y)opa6ame ratah ’, where V 
is put in brackets. 

As opposed to this sense of naiskamya, we equally find, as in the non- 
canonical Pali texts like the Milinda, Netti, Visuddhimagga, that the word 
is used as contrasted with ‘house’ or ‘a life in a house’. Mahavastu i. 173, 
13 reads 

Napi ye dharm&h grha^ritas te naiskramyairita iti desayami; napi ye 
dharma naiskramya^ritas te grhafoita iti de6ayami. 

Here we see that the word is contrasted with ‘ house ’. In this very sense, the 
word is used in several passages in Lalitavistara. We hear of ‘ naiskramyak&la ’ 
(Lefmann’s ed. of Lalitavistara, pp. 196, 199, 219, 220). We also read of 
‘naiskramyabuddhi’ (p. 170) and ‘naiskramya-mati’ (p. 184). 

We do not, however, find that the Sanskrit texts give other various 
interpretations as in Pali texts. Perhaps, the very orthographical form of the 
Sanskrit word restricted the interpretation to ‘a life of renunciation’. We 
have seen that it was based upon a fancied derivation from the root ‘nigkram*. 

6. Tibetan renderings . — Let us see what light is thrown upon this subject 
by Tibetan renderings. In the Tibetan translation of the Udanavarga xxi. 9, 
we have first two quarters of a stanza corresponding to the first two quarters 


1 ru ‘ ^ikf&samuccaya, SOS. 


264 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


of Dhp. 181, and we have an expression corresponding to ‘Nekkhammupasame 
rata*. The Tibetan rendering of the same is: 


nes-hbyun ii la dgali-pa dan 

§-ar 


niskramana upasama 


ratah 


Jaschke in his Tibetan-English Dictionary, p. 148, gives two interpretations of 
nes-tibyun, which all appear to be later. His interpretations are (i) deliverance 
from the round of transmigration , and (ii) knowledge of one’s self, which all 
appear to be secondary or of third remote and do not appear to bo supported 
by etymology. In Mahavyutpatti (Sakaki’s edition, No. 6444), the Tibetan 
rendering of ‘kamesu narskramyam ’ is given as ‘hdod-pa-las spagspa 
which literally interpreted means ‘going away from 
desire’. Another rendering is also given. It is ‘hdod-pahi las spans-pa 
which means ‘abandonment of desired things’. In 6755> 
the word naiskramya is rendered by ‘nes-par hbyun-pa which of 

course corresponds to nissarana as said above in the Tibetan rendering of 
Dhp. 181. In 7554, also, it has been rendered by ‘hbyun-pa (^ «). Thus it 
will be seen that here also the interpretations waver between ‘abandonment 
of desire’ and ‘renunciation or going out of one’s house’. 

7. Chinese sources . — Let us now turn to Chinese sources. In the Chinese 
version (Madhyamagama 32. 95. 7, Ch’angchow edition of 1911) of Upalisutta, 
No. 56 of the Majjhimanikaya, we clearly have the words ‘wu yu’ ^ 
which mean ‘without desire’, used for the word^nekkhamma’ in the passage 
which corresponds to the one quoted above at the beginning of para. 2. In 
the version of the Ambatthasutta (2. 21) of the Dighanikaya, vol. i, it is 
translated by ch’u yao ms (Dirghagama, Suchow edition, 1887, 13. 22a. 10). 
The same Chinese rendering is also found in the Chinese version of the 
Kfitadantasutta (Dirghagama 15. 25b. 1). In the Chinese version of the Maha- 
pad&nasutta (D. ii. 41), it is rendered by ch’u li mil ‘going out’. The 
same rendering is also found in the Cie-t’o-tao-lun (4. 26. 10; 4. 3b. 1; also 
see my ‘Vimuttimagga and Visuddhimagga’, p. 44), the Chinese translation of 
Upatissa’s Vimuttimagga. Upatissa is further very explicit about the inter- 
pretation of this word. He clearly points to the two interpretations: 
(i) ‘leaving the house and practising good things (kusala) ; and (ii) being away 
from desires of sense ’. In another place (8. 76. 4) where the word 4 nekkhamma’ 
is used as one of the ten paramitfis or perfections, the Chinese rendering 
is merely Ch’u Prof. P. C. Bagchi in his ‘Deux Lexiques Sanskri t 
Chinois’, vol. ii, p. 480, gives only ch’u ^ as the Chinese rendering of 
nikkara, which is evidently niscara, that is to say niakrama. In the M&hH - 
yina work ‘ DaSabhflmika-stitra ’ (1. UU), we come across the word ‘naigkra- 
myacari ’ for which the different Chinese renderings given by translators oi 



NEKKHAMMA 


265 


successive periods from the third to the tenth century A.D. are enlisted by 
Rahder in his Glossary* (p. 96). It is interesting to note that none of the 
renderings given there can be interpreted to mean ‘without desire’. Most 
of them seem to favour the interpretation of renunciation or leaving one’s 
house. 

8. Etymology,— Childers in his Pali-English Dictionary (p. 264, col 1) 
has a note on this word, in which he discusses the etymology of it. He refers 
to both the etymologies of the word, one derived from kama and the other 
from niskram. He decides in favour of the latter, because he finds an insuper- 
able difficulty in the aspiration in the word nekkhamma to allow him to derive 
it from naiskamya. The form in that case should have been, he argues, 
nekkamma and not nekkhamma. But on closer examination of similar 
words, it will be found that no difficulty is really to be felt. For, it is the 
peculiarity of the Pali-Prakrits that we have the aspirated sounds in several 
Prakrit words where the original Sanskrit words do not justify any. Compare, 
for instance, Cariyapitaka, 2. 6. 6: 

Dhanikehi bhito tasito pakkhanto’ ham mahanadim 
where the word ‘pakkhanta’ corresponds to Sanskrit ‘prakranta’ and still 
we have the aspiration in the Pali word. So also we should note the Pali 
word ‘khanti’ ‘liking’ (ayam amhakam khanti, this is what we like), which 
stands for the Sanskrit word ‘kanti’ ‘liking’ from the root kam, to like, to 
covet. See also note on p. 117 of my book ‘ Vimuttimagga and Visuddhi- 
magga’, in connection with nikkhanti or nekkhamma. Compare also the Pali 
form ‘sakkhati’ which is found side by side with ‘sakkoti’ from the Sanskrit 
root 6ak to be able. For other examples of this peculiarity in Pali, see 
R. P. Chaudhari’s article on ‘The Philology of Pali Language’ in the Indian 
Historical Quarterly, vol. xviii (1942), p. 361. 

To prove that the word naiskramya is used for nekkhamma in the sense 
of dispassionateness (naiskamya), we have the following lines from the Maha- 
vastu i. 293: 

Ye yuktayoga manasa succhandasa miskramyino Gautama-^asanasmim 
which corresponds to the first two lines of Suttanipata 228: 

Ye suppayutta manasa dalhena nikkdmino (vl. nikkhdmino, nikamino) 
Gotamasasanasmim . 

Here it is proved beyond doubt that the word nikkhamino or nikkamino oi 
nikamino is rendered by naiskramyino. So when there is an actual use oi 
this word, in an important^ Buddhist Sanskrit text, all imagined difficulties 
are cleared away. 

9. Conclusion. — Thus from the foregoing, we conclude (i) that the earlj 
canonical texts use the word nekkhamma in its primary sense of dispassionate- 
ness (naiskS-mya) ; (ii) that in later canonical texts it came to be used in the 
secondary sense of ‘renunciation, or leaving one’s house’; (iii) that in post- 
canonical Pali works and Pali Commentaries this later interpretation came tc 
be not only confirmed and accepted but a tendency to connect the word alsc 
with nikkhama (niskram) is noticed with the result that in commentatoria 



266 


B. 0. LAW VOLtTBTB 


explanations the word is connected with both k&ma as well as nikkhama; 
(iv) that when Buddhist Sanskrit works were translated from the Pali-Prakrit 
orig ina ls or when they came to be written in the original, the real etymology 
of the word was forgotten and the Buddhist Sanskrit word ( naiskramya based 
on a fancied derivation from niskram came in vogue; (v) that the word came 
to be extended to all good things (kusala dhamm&) including renunciation, 
the state of being an Anagami, nibbana, or the way leading to nibbffina such 
as that of samatha (quiescence) and vipassana (insight), or even the delight 
in nibbana; (vi) that although in later Buddhist Sanskrit works the meaning 
seems to be restricted to ‘renunciation’, the old Buddhist Sanskrit works 
like the Mah&vastu and Saundarananda show that the old interpretation of 
the word in the sense of dispassionateness (naiskamya) still lingered on; and 
(vii) that finally the word nekkhamma as an equivalent of naiskamya can also 
be philologically explained. 

Thus it will be clear that an attempt on the part of some scholars to 
interpret a word or an expression in mere reliance upon Buddhist Sanskrit 
works, without referring to Pali-Prakrit originals, is bound to fail. One example 
of this kind has been already dealt with by the present writer in his article 
on ‘Tayin, Tayi, Tadi ’ in D. R. Bhandarkar Commemoration Volume (pp. 249- 
258) ; a second in another article on £ Saptanga-supratisthita ’ in the projected 
volume in commemoration of Prof. Radhakumud Mukerjee; and a third is 
shown here in this volume, also a commemoration volume, in honour of the 
celebrated scholar Dr. B. C. Law. 


HYDRO-ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDIA 

By 

Mr. G. Kuriyan, Head of the Department of Geography, University of 
Madras, and Mr. V. P. Kannan Nair 

The characteristic feature of hydro-electric development in South India 
is its recency. Except the Sivasamudram plant in Mysore which was opened 
in the beginning of this century, all the others have sprung up during the 
last twelve years. Since 1930, there has been a phenomenal development of 
power generation in South India, and if the war had not interfered, the position 
today would probably have been even better. 

The total installed capacity of the hydro-electric installations, including 
those under construction, now stands at 183,200 kW, of which 102,000 is 
in the province of Madras, 72,000 in Mysore and 9,000 in Travancore. By 
extending these schemes when necessary, Madras can produce 146,750 kW, 
Mysore 131,200 kW and Travancore 30,000 kW, thus giving a grand total of 
307,950 kW. 

The Sivasamudram plant, the first of its kind in the East and the power 
behind the industrial progress of Mysore, was opened in 1902. Assisted by 
Krishnaraja Sagar and the Shimsha station, it is now in a position to produce 



HYDBO-BLECTBIO DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDIA 


267 


42,000 kW. Further, Mysore has in addition the Jog fall project under 
construction. In Madras, the Pykara and Mettur schemes with a total 
capacity of 81,260 kW are now in working condition. The former was opened 



Relief Map of South India 


in 1932 and the latter in 1937. It is interesting to realize that Mettur com- 
bines irrigation with power generation. The Papanasam scheme of the Madras 
Government is still in the construction stage 1 and seeks to utilize a fall of about 


i It hat, however, commenced operation tmoe August 1944. 





268 


B. C. LAW VOLTTME 


. ,i a „f +Vm Tambrapami river by the construction of the 
» fet m of T«™»» l~»~ • M of 

Tambraparm dam. The > ram ^ ^ ^ ^ 

the Mudrapuz a, a n through a tunnel and leads it into a 

frcm tt. weir ot Staor (W® >■ mter „ w ^ ^ 

SSSST Cii • po- »— -rj 

headof about 1,«90'. The station waa started m lMOa^gmeratea b.MOkW. 

Tb. main geographic! M» which conditio, tl^ d ^^ ^byd ro. 
electric power generation are topography and rainfall. The mountains of 
South India fringe the west and east coasts, with the plateau between them 
sloping gently eastwards. The Western Ghats are much the more important 
because of their greater height and their unbroken nature. In South India, 
three well-marked areas of mountain topography stand out prominently. 
They are: (i) the Nilgiri hills and the western ranges of the Mysore plateau; 
(ii) the Anamalai, Palni and Cardamom hills; and (iii) the Vizagapatam 
Agency tracts. The rivers that rise from these regions flow through regions 
of very rugged topography before they reach the plains, with the result that 
there are numerous falls and cataracts in their mountain courses which favour 
the development of power. 

The distribution of rainfall at a power site is of fundamental significance 
in its choice. The upper reaches and the slopes of the Western Ghats, from 
where the main rivers that are harnessed for electricity rise, have a longer 
wet season than anywhere else in India. It extends from June to December, 
comprising the period of the south-west monsoon from June to September and 
the retreating monsoon from October to December. The so-called dry season 
is only of five months’ duration, from January to May, but even this is often 
interrupted by thunder showers, which are likely to be heavy in the extreme 
south-west. The main season of rains is during the period of the south-west 
monsoon which brings about 100 to 150* of rain and sometimes even 200*, as at 
Peermade. 2 The north-east monsoon begins in October and the Cardamom 
hills in the south and the higher parts of the Western Ghats intercept them 
to give a subsidiary maximum of rainfall in October. The wet season in these 
regions is prolonged in both the directions, a pre-monsoon rainfall in April 
and May and a post -monsoon rainfall in October and November. 

The reliability of rainfall is of greater significance than the actual amount 
of rainfall itself. The coefficient of the reliability of rainfall at any place 
can be roughly determined by the ratio of the average rainfall of the 
ten driest years on record, to the mean annual rainfall. On the West Coast, 
Nilgiris and the Agency tracts, this ratio is very high and is approximately 0*8. 
This is due partly to the heavy rainfall in these regions, partly to the extended 
season of rains and partly also because the rainfall is as a result of both the 
monsoons. Bombay, on the other hand, receives all its rain during the season 
of the south-west monsoon; the peculiarly favourable conditions of rainfall 


2 In a few favoured ritee, the rainfall may be well over 400' ae at Mukurti ridge station 
in the Nilgiris, or, at Lakkidi, near Vayitiri in Malabar. 



HYDRO-ELEOTEIC DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDIA 


269 


give South India decided advantages over Bombay and this is reflected in the 
storage requirements for hydro-electric development. 8 Even in Madras, the 



Rainfall Map of South India 

rivers show seasonal variation of discharge, e.g. the Pykara river— 20,000 
cusecs in July and 15 in May. In order to keep the hydro-electric plant 

* The storage per kilowatt of capacity in million cubic feet for the Pykara plant is 0*08 
while it is 0*24 in the case of the Andhra Valley Power Supply Co., 0* 21 in the Tata Hydro-electric 
Power Supply and 0*19 in the Tata Power Company, Ltd. Thus the storage requirement* of 
South India are only f to } of what they are in Bombay. 




270 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


working throughout the year, the discharge curve should be straightened out 
The usually adopted device known as monsoon storage is to store the excess 
monsoon water in a reservoir and let it out by a regulated sluice, so as to 
give a uniform continuous discharge throughout the year. It is obvious 
that where the wet season is prolonged, the dimensions and hence the cost 
of the storage reservoir need not be so large as in a place with a shorter wet 
season. Even the Pykara which has not the best features of rainfall distribu- 
tion in comparison with the Pallivasal or Sivasamudram projects is very much 
better than any of the hydro-electric schemes in Bombay. 



Hydro-electric Power versus Coal and Oil 


On the basis of slope and rainfall which are the geographic factors that 
delimit the occurrence of water power, South India may be divided into 
three regions. The Anamalais, the Nilgiri hills and the western parts of 
Mysore plateau are the most favourable regions; the Cardamom hills and the 
Palnis come next, while the Vizagapatam Agency tracts are the least favoured. 

It is not every potential water power site that is worthy of development. 
Certain economio factors also play a determining rdle. The most important 



Map of India showing developed Power 


The amount of power generated is approximately proportional to the volume of the cube : 
A unit cube of tide represents 100 kW of installed capacity. Coal and oil energy are con- 
verted into kW yean by taking 6 tons of coal and 4'S tons of oil respectively for 1 kW year. 

Cube marked coal stands for ooal power. 

h oil „ oil „ 

Circled oube stands for water power. 




HYDRO -ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDIA 


271 


of them are: (1) the absence of competition from other sources of power in 
the area, (2) the nearness of market for the hydro-electric power, and (3) the 



Availability of Water Power 


wealth of the market. It is well known that South India has neither eoal nor 
oil. Thermal electric plants depending on imported coal, or oil, are working 
in South India in a few areas which have the advantage of location near a 




272 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


port, to which the fuel can be cheaply transported. War conditions have 
made the availability of both coal and oil very difficult and many of the 
power stations like those of Madras are finding it necessary to curtail their 
supplies to the consumers. How much better it would have been if the capital 
of the Province was linked to Mettur ! And indeed, hydro-electric power 
comes to within a stone -throw of the city of Madras. Probably vested 
interests were too dominant. Even in times when the prices of oil and coal 
are normal and transport charges have not had the terrible gallop towards a 
peak that is characteristic of war-time conditions, it is found that hydro- 
electricity is generally cheaper than thermal electricity. Actual figures show 
that the total annual cost per kilowatt hour of output in a hydro-electric plant 
in South India is much less than in a thermal electric plant. But it must be 
admitted that the initial cost of construction of the water plant is very high 
and especially so, as there is need for storage reservoirs. This however is, as 
has been shown, at a minimum in South India. There are other mitigating 
factors like the availability of cement (at Madhukarai) and iron (at Bhadravati) 
which reduce the cost of construction of reservoirs. Major Sir Henry Howard, 
the wizard of electricity, has estimated that hydro-electric installations in- 
cluding the cost of high tension transmission should not exceed Rs. 1,000 per 
kilowatt of installed effective capacity at high tension distributing points. 
The unit cost of the Madras undertakings are well below that figure. 

South India has a rich and near market for power. The Pykara power is 
used mainly in the cement works at Madhukarai, the textile mills at Coimbatore 
and the tea factories in the Nilgiris, not more than 70 miles away from 
Glenmorgan. The chief consuming areas in Mysore are Kolar and Bangalore, 
at distances of 90 miles and 60 miles respectively from the generating station 
of Sivasamudram. It is these advantages which have resulted in these schemes 
yielding very good profits, generally more than 8% (for Pykara 8*4% in 
1940-41). The Pallivasal power is being utilized at the Sassoon mills and the 
aluminium works at Alwaye, at a distance of about 60 miles. 

Political factors are of significance in the development of hydro-electric 
schemes. Three governments, the Province of Madras and the Indian States 
of Mysore and Travancore, are developing their resources independently of one 
another. From a geographical point of view it would be more healthy and 
more desirable if all the resources are pooled together. Thus the Pykara, 
Mettur, Sivasamudram, and Shimsha plants and the Jog project could be made 
into one grid serving the central areas of South India while the Pallivasal 
scheme and the projects of Papanasam and Periyar when completed could 
form another network to supply the needs of the southern areas. It is clearly 
cheaper for South Kanara to get its power from Jog falls rather than from 
Pykira. South Travancore can get its power from Papanasam and a transfer 
of the same quantity can be effected from Pallivasal to South Malabar. This 
is one more of the many instances where political factors have retarded healthy 
developments on geographic lines. The Mysore government at present is 
contemplating its own grid interconnecting Jog falls, Sivasamudram and 



HYDBO-ELECTBIO DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH INDU 


273 


Shimsha at Bhadravati. The Madras Government has its own scheme with 
six hydro-electric and three thermal electric plants. The ultimate aim of the 
Madras Government is to maintain an economic balance between indigenous 
water power and imported thermal electric power. The Travancore govern- 
ment has its own scheme . 4 

Industrialization of South India was terribly slow in the years before the 
development of the hydro-electric power schemes and the supply of cheap 
electric power has been closely followed up by rapid industrial progress in 
many parts of South India, especially in Mysore State, Coimbatore and 
Travancore. The 45,000 kW of power generated in Mysore is distributed 
among (1) the mining industries (20,000 kW), (2) the textile mills (about 
14,000 kW), and (3) the miscellaneous industries (more than 10,000 kW). 
The characteristic feature of the market in Mysore is its variety and the 
smallness of each unit. Except a few large concerns, the bulk of them employ 
less than 200 labourers. The Mysore government has generally fostered the 
growth of small scale industries wherever possible by providing small blocks 
of power at cheap rates. Power is supplied to small agriculturists for pumping 
purposes at 6 pies per unit, the lowest rate in India. The power demand in 
Mysore for agricultural pumping purposes is growing up at an estimated 
rate of 1,700 h.p. per year. 

Coimbatore district has witnessed, since 1930, a remarkable industrial 
development in the wake of Pykara power. The chief consumers of power in 
1941 were: (1) the textile industry (26,000 kW); (2) the cement works 
(3,500 kW) ; (3) tea factories (3,900 kW) ; (4) agricultural purposes (10,000 kW) ; 
(5) licensees (20,000 kW); (6) miscellaneous (4,400 kW). At the time of 
the commencement of the Pykara, there were eight textile mills, all of 
which soon closed down their steam or oil engine plants and changed over 
to the government hydro-electric supply. By 1940, 33 mills were connected 
to the Pykara system and 4 more were under construction. Many existing 
mills increased their power demands. ‘But for the availability of cheap 
hydro-electric power, there would not have been such a rapid development in 
industrial load. Further, the government policy regarding loans for conversion 
and construction, which enabled money to be advanced to both old and new 
mills for the purchase of the electrical equipment and machinery, was also 
responsible for the large and rapid increase in the number of mills erected. 
The low rates for power with the guaranteed maximum charge of 0*66 anna per 
unit, the security of supply and the service features of the government power 
system, all make for an appreciated supply and rapidly growing demand/ 5 
Much of the success of the Pykara is certainly due to the grand commercial 
policy adopted by the Madras government under the guidance of Major Sir 
Henry Howard. The availability of vegetable and mineral raw materials in 
the neighbourhood of Pykara has also been responsible for its growth. The 

4 Since writing this, I understand from Major Sir Henry Howard that a scheme has already 
been sanctioned to link the power systems of Madras and Travancore. 

* Administration Beport for the Electricity Dept., Madras, 1937-38, p. 4. 

I* 



exteaskra W , 

effected within 6 yews of its moopwon. Mmy , 

in the vicinity of Coimbatore, which ^ "»*»» the 

Chester of South India. The use of etoctridty h a 

todthjr depart™ ft°» *> «■»"“. T» * T 

the theory that the peasantry in India is atww to the introduction of any 

.M* S ***■ J» »»* - Jto «. 

^fSsrri-CSiS-i'US S » 

1940-41 there were as many as 2,200 agriculture] pumps using Pyiara 
power/ Again, the development of power at Mettur saw the growth of a 
textile mill and an electro-chemical factory at Mettur itself and the develop- 
ment of cement works at Dalmia Nagar. The Mettur project also has been 
a profitable concern yielding more than 5% on capital outlay within the 
first four years of its origin. 

Pallivasal power has contributed very largely to the industrialization of 
Travancore. Power is being used for several industrial purposes like the 
aluminium factory, textile mills, tea factories, the ceramic factory, Cochin 
harbour works, etc. and for agricultural purposes like the dewatering of the 
Kuttanad region. On a capital outlay of more than 150 lakhs the net profit 
has been less than 2 lakhs. The yield has thus been much less than that of 
Pykara or Mettur, but in a few years, there is every prospect of the profits 
mounting up. 


Mr. G. Sundaram estimates that Madras has a minimum of 250,000 kW 
of power which under favourable circumstances can go up to nearly 500,000. 
Mysore has another 200,000 kW and Travancore another 100,000 kW. South 
India has thus a potential total of more than 750,000 kW. 

At one time, S. India which had neither coal nor oil was condemned as 
the one province which had no hopes of industrialization, but the rapid develop- 
ment of water power has, however, opened up a vista of possibilities, thanks to 
Sir C. P. Bamaswamy Aiyar, the founder of the Schemes and Major Sir 
Henry Howard, the person responsible for their execution. Hydro-electric 
power is not well developed in Bengal, Bihar, C.P., Assam and Hyderabad 
because of the occurrence of coal, or oil, in these provinces and the consequent 
inability of water power to compete with thermal electric power. 

India is in the same position as that of J apan and Italy. Japan’s resources 
in coal and oil are no better than that of India, but Japan’s developed water 
power is about four million h.p., more than five times that of India. India’s 
potential resouroes in water power are much greater than that of Japan’s. 
The Indian labourer is just as intelligent as the Japanese labourer, and is in 
addition, cheaper. India has an abundance of raw materials like iron ore, 
cotton, jute, etc. which Japan sorely needs. Further more, India has one of 
tine largest home markets in the world. If Japan can become industrialised, • 
there is no reason why India should lag behind. For India, the road to 

salvation lies in industdalizaticm and development of power is the sine qua 
S6m 



rafcA eras Am totots m as mm ismi 2ii 

non of industrial progress. This war is the golden opportunity for our develop- 
ment and let us hope that it will not be thrown away but utilized to the fullest 
extent by all the industries, by so organizing and developing themselves that 
they will be able to hold their own, in the cut-throat competition that is bound 
to be the most significant feature of the post-war eoonomic depression. 6 


VILLAGES AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

By 

Professor Dr. P. K. Acharya, I.E.S., M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt. 

It is intended to show from an analysis of the details concerning villages 
and towns described in the standard architectural text, the Manasara-Vdstu- 
Aastra} that India has known the art of living here on earth, well and happily, 
and that she ignored no aspect of life in building up a civilization that has 
endured for some three thousand years. 

The villages are classified under eight plans indicated by their titles. 
They are called Dandaka, Sarvatobhadra, Nandyavarta , Padmalca , Svastika , 
Prastara, KdrmuJca, and Chaturmukha, the plan being based on the layout 
or general shape of the settlement . 2 The town ( nagara ), which is stated to 
be especially associated with the king or his representative ruler, that is, which 
serves as the administrative headquarter or the seat of government , 8 varies 
in accordance with its importance and size and the rank of the ruler residing 
therein. Thus with regard to town-planning the bases of classification are 
manifold. As business centre towns are called Rdjadhdni i Nagara , Pur a, 
Nagarl, Kheta , Kharvata , Kubjaka , and Pattana* The town unit intended to 
serve as defensive fortress is divided into another eight groups known as 
&ibira, Vdhinlmukha , Sthaniya, Dronaka , Sarhvidha or Vardhaka , Kolaka , 
Nigama , and Skandhavdra . 6 As military bases the town unit is distinguished 
as Oiridurga (hill fort), Vanadurga (forest fort), Jaladurga (water fort), Batha - 
durga (chariot fort), Devadurga (invincible divine fort), Pankadurga (marshy 
fort) and Miiradurga (mixed fort). 


• This paper is adapted from the dissertation submitted by Mr. V. P. K. Nair to the 
University of Madras for the Diploma in Geography Examination. All the maps have been 
drawn by him. 

1 As published by the Oxford University Press, 1984, Vol. Ill (Text), Vol. IV (Translation), 
Vol. V (Illustrative Plates). 

2 Manas&ra, Chap. IX, 1-4, compare Evam ch&shtavidhamgrfimam tat-tad-rupena Sahjfutam. 
2 Bhupatln&m ohapi sarvesh&m astragr&hy&di-hram&t vakshye samk$?ipya nagarasya 

tu lakshmaiyam (Mfinas&ra, X, 1-2). The royal order is divided into nine classes comprising 
Chakravartin, mah&r&ja or adhir&ja, narendra or mahendra, p&rshnika, paftadhara, mapflftlefla, 
•pattabh&j, pr&h&raka, and astragr&hiA (M. XL, 2-5). 

« M&nas&ra, X, 37-40. 

* IWd„ X, 40-42. 




276 


B. C. I^W VOLCWI 


Aflcoitiinjf to this standard text there is not much difference between a 

*1 . »nd . fort. All M fortflW **** [** * *««. 

“£» P 4 fort i. but » town prim-p^jr moult to sure as . nuhtuy camp 
Thus there is no fundamental difference of the rural and the 


far the defence. 


urban population of the modern time. The Amenities of life have been Almost 
impartially distributed as is clear from the details supplied in the text and 
illustrated in the Plates . 1 


The Dandaka (lit. stick, staff) derives its title from its straight rectangular 
plan. Like most of the plans it is surrounded by the ditch and rampart. 
Within, it is divided into eight main blocks by three roads running from north 
to south, one street from east to west bisects the whole area. There is another 
broad road running along the surrounding rampart. Roads are furnished 
with foot-path on one side. There are temples of Siva and Vish#u for public 
worship. The block assigned to the Brahmans are further divided into 
five quarters by smaller streets or lanes. People of other castes are housed 
in other blocks. 

The square plan called Sarvatobhadra has openings or outer gates (bhadra) 
on all (sarvatas) four directions. The whole area inside the surrounding 
ditch and rampart is divided by two main roads crossing in the centre into 
four main blocks which are further divided into numerous smaller quarters 
of various sizes by straight roads and lanes. At the central crossing there 
is a Brahma temple or a public hall which is surrounded by similar structures 
erected at the comer of the four main blocks. Common tanks are dug in 
all inhabited quarters. Caste- wise allotments are followed here also. 

The Nandyavarta is an enlarged (lit. repeated, dvarta) rectangular plan 
of pleasant (nandya) look and convenient residence of a large population. 
The area inside the ditch and rampart is divided by twelve main roads into 
twenty-five main blocks some of which are further subdivided into smaller 
quarters. Apart from caste-wise allotment people of various callings, viz. 
tailors, fishermen, blacksmiths, basket-makers, washermen, police, priests, 
royal dancers, physicians, clerks, etc. are housed in their own quarters. Publio 
temples, tanks, gardens, etc. are placed in all convenient quarters. 

The Padmaka plan derives its title from its lotus (pudma)-shaped layout 
which is shewn not only by its ditch and rampart but also by the shape of the 
four main blocks flanked by the two main roads crossing at the centre where 
a public hall is allotted. The main blocks are further subdivided into some 
thirty-two quarters where people of different callings and structures for various 
uses are allotted. 

The SvaeUka (lit. auspicious, cross-like) plan shows a pleasant layout 
by the two m ai n roads crossing at the centre and by the four main wings. 
It is at once pleasing and convenient although looks complicated as in a 


1 Architecture of Miaae&ra, Vol. V, Plates XV-XXV. 


VILLAGE8 AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


277 


modem congested town. As in the three previous so also here allotment 
has been made for the royal residence and quarters for the king’s ministers 
and his offices in addition to the general population of various castes and pro- 
fessions and faith. Here eaoh of the four wings has its own roads and lanes, 
its common halls, parks and tanks. Agahilapattana, the old capital of 
Guzerat, was built according to this plan. 1 

The Pra8tara (lit. expanded) plan is like the Nandydvarta , a rectangular 
one divided by sixteen broad roads into some thirty-six blocks. It also contains 
the royal palace in addition to the usual quarters for the inhabitants of various 
categories. 

The Kdrmuka (bow-shaped) plan justifies its title by its half-circle out- 
line which is divided into four triangular blocks by three arrow-like broad 
roads which are orossed by three other semicircular roads and one straight 
road running east to west as the diameter of the half-circle. It looks charming 
and admirably suits a river- or seaside situation. In conformity with its 
situation it is a commercial place and its population are mostly business men 
and it has allotted prominent places for markets and godowns, and police. 
Public temples are placed at the central quarters easily accessible from all the 
twenty-eight quarters. 

The Chaturmukha (lit. having four faces) is a very beautiful rectangular 
plan. The four roads running sidewise from the middle of a side of the main 
rectangle and terminating at the middle of its right and left sides form another 
parallelogram. The main four roads from the middle of the sides of the 
main rectangle meet at the side of the central plot which is allotted for the 
residence of the Brahmans, the priests and the main temple. There are 
twelve other main roads, which together with the other eight roads have formed 
some forty-eight quarters that have been allotted for the usual purposes 
including the royal residence. 

Of the town units Rajadharii (lit. the oity with the king’s palace in it) 
would be a suitable designation for several of the village schemes wherein a 
royal residence has been included. This common epithet applicable to all 
the towns and several of the villages is, however, distinguished in accordance 
with the rank of the royalty, which is divided into nine categories, whose 
residence is the most distinguishing feature of the settlement. In outline 
the special plan elaborated under the title Rajadhdnt corresponds in many 
respects to the village scheme called Chaturmukha . Thus the four main roads 
running from the middle of the four sides of the rectangular plan terminate, 
not by crossing each other as is the case in some other plans, but at the middle 
of the four sides of the central rectangle in the centre of which is built the 
main temple surrounded by public parks. Another rectangle surrounding 
the central one contains at the four corners, covering the central rectangle, 
the royal palace in the North-west, quarters for royal priests and State officials 


1 HemachAndra in bis Sanskrit* DvyWraya (1. iff.) describes it in detail. 




278 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


in the South-west, Brahmans in the South-east and the public halls in the North- 
east. The immediately outer quarters of this large rectangle are allotted to 
people of royal blood and Kshatriyas, ministers, nobles, Vai^yas (traders), 
markets and physioians. Beyond these are the quarters for guest-houses 
( sattra ), schools, colleges, police, weavers, tailors, servants (6udras), washer- 
men, milkmen, oilmen, weapon-makers, recreation grounds, public tanks. 
Behind working classes, are placed at the rear side fishermen, hunters, black- 
smiths and others. Barracks for soldiers and guards are allotted to the 
boundary lines against the surrounding rampart beyond which is the usual 
ditch. There are more than twenty-four main roads and some sixty quarters 
referred to in the Rajadhani plan. 

The next three town -units known as nagara, nagari , and pura are basically 
the same. The title ‘nagara * is associated with towns with masculine epithets, 
such as, Rama-nagara, and ‘nagari’ with those bearing feminine designation, 
such as Kaii-nagari. These units may or may not be the administrative head- 
quarters together with the royal court. Similarly Pura implying ‘ residence’, 
such as Lava-pura (modem Lahore), may be a commercial and residential city 
without a special significance. 

The Khefa is a special plan with a distinct geography and features. As 
the title Rani-kheta of the Almora district shows such towns are hill-stations 
built at the tope, valley or bottom of a hill. Although it may be built in any 
shape according to available space, the one illustrated in the text looks almost 
like the Karmuka plan built facing a river or sea, with this difference that the 
half circumference of a circle is divided into five sides of a half decagon. But 
the arrow-shaped three main roads and three covering roads divide the whole 
area in the same way into some fifteen blocks wherein the quarters of the 
usual population are allotted. 

The epithet of the next plan, Kharvata (lit. dwarfed) is no longer in the 
original form available but the titles like Khurja in United Provinces, 
Khajuraho and others appear to be its derivatives. The plan illustrated is a 
circular one originating from a central temple, as London has grown surround- 
ing the St. Paul’s Cathedral. It has eight diagonal roads terminating at the 
circumference of the central circle and four main circular roads. There are thus 
twenty-two blocks in addition to the central circle where the public temple 
and surrounding open parks are built. When it is built in a forest there need 
be no provision for the ditch, the rampart alone serving the purpose of defence. 

The Kubjaka plan is bodily illustrated by the remains of the old city of 
Kanya-Kubja, the modem Kanou j in the United Provinces. It is an ordinary 
rectangular plan, with the hump originating from a central half-circle in the 
shape of the Khefa plan. It is a royal oity with the king’s palace, courts, 
and all other appurtenances (appendices). As illustrated, there are some 
sixteen main roads and some thirty-two main blocks allotted to various usual 
purposes. 

Of the military camps known as 6ibira , Vakinimukha, Dronaka , Vardhaha, 
Kdalca , Nigama and Skandhdvam, one water-fort, a Dronaka fortress, and a 



VILLAGES AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


279 


fiibira encampment together with the details of fort gates are illustrated in 
the accompanying plates. The water-fort is an island triangular in shape and 
is connected with one or more harbours, containing some twenty-four blocks 
surrounding a central circular one. Much attention is devoted to a scientific 
disposition of soldiers and guards. 

The Dronaka fortress is a quadrangle with two unequal sides. It is 
connected with harbours and sewers as purely military camps but contains a 
civil population and also the king’s palace. 

fcibira is a rectangular military camp. It also contains the king’s tent 
at the centre. It is divided into four rectangles, one containing the 
other. Speoial attention is devoted for the protection of the king who appears 
to have been the commander-in-chief of the army. Allotment of quarters 
for soldiers and barracks signifies its military feature. 

The brief outline as given above and the plates of the villages and towns 
as enclosod will permit the inference of a common feature for all these settle- 
ments. ‘Each village or town is surrounded by a wall made of brick or stone. 
This rampart in case of a fortified town is at least twelve cubits (eighteen feet) 
in height and its thickness at the base is at least six cubits (nine feet). Beyond 
this wall there is generally a ditch broad and deep enough to cause serious 
obstruction in the event of an attack on the village or the town. There are 
generally four main gates at the middle of the four sides and as many at the 
four comers. Inside the wall there is a large street running all round the 
settlement. There are generally two other large streets, each of which connects 
two opposite main gates. They intersect each other at the centre of the town 
or the village where a public temple or assembly hall is generally built. The 
whole area is thus divided into four main blocks, each of which is again sub- 
divided into many blocks by streets and lanes which are always straight. 
The two main streets crossing at the centre have houses and foot-paths on one 
side of the street. The ground-floor of these houses on the main streets 
consists of shops. The street which runs round the village or the town has 
also houses and foot-paths only on one side. These houses are mainly publio 
buildings, such as schools, libraries, guest-houses, etc. All other streets 
generally have residential buildings on both sides. The houses high or low 
are generally uniform in make. Drains follow the slope of the ground. Tanks 
and ponds are dug in all inhabited parts, and located where they can con- 
veniently be reached by a large number of inhabitants. The temples for publio 
worship, as well as the public commons, gardens and parks are similarly 
allotted. People of the same caste or profession are generally housed in the 
same quarter. The dimensions of the smallest units are about 100 by 200 
and the largest town unit 7,200 by 14,400 dandas. 

The details of the art of building villages, towns and houses were system* 
atically embodied for the first time in the avowedly architectural treatises, 
although the building operation must have been in existence long, long before 
these treatises were composed. The standard text, Mdnasara, wherefrom 
some details have been quoted above is strikingly similar to the treatise known 



280 


B. C. LAW TOLtnOB 


as the architecture of the Botuan architect Vitruvius of approximately 25 B.C 
The editio primps of Vitruvius’s treatise was first printed at Borne in or 
about 1486 A.D. The unique position of this treatise is clear from the fact 
that since its first appearance in the fifteenth century there have been till 
1807 forty-two editions of the work, seventeen editions being in Latin, eleven 
in Italian, two in Spanish, six in French, four in German and two in English. 
Thus the European architecture which developed in various countries since 
the fifteenth century was largely influenced by this treatise. In its present 
complete form the Mdnasdra was first published in 1934, although in 1834 it 
was quoted by Earn Raz in his Essay on Indian Architecture. In Appendix I 
of the writer s Dictionary of Hindu Architecture some two hundred archi- 
teotural texts have been referred to, most of which appear to have been 
indebted to the standard text Mdnasdra!- And in Chapters II and III of the 
writer’s Indian Architecture * direct quotations from this text by several 
popular architectural treatises and direct influence upon general Sanskrit 
literature dealing with architectural matters have been elaborated. Thus 
although it had not so many regular editions as Vitruvius is honoured with 
the influence of Mdnasdra in shaping the Indian architecture, since at least 
the first centuiy of the Christian era, cannot be denied.* But, on the other 
hand, as we will show later on, the prescriptions of Mdnasdra reflect the condi- 

T 6 ° btaiDed during th ° of Mohenjodaro (B.C. 3250- 

2750) of the Vedas (B.C. 2500-1000), of the Epics (B.C. 1000-500 A D 1 
including the Buddhist (B.C. 500-300 A.D.) and the Purfipas (300-1200 A D ) 
The present Mohenjodaro area is ‘a long narrow strip of land between 
the main nver (Indus) bed and the Western Nara loof. There are stated 
to have been several cities, one being superimposed upon the other The 

rema ^K° f . t u he Uppenn08t cit y were hid by the mounds. The actual area 
covered by the mounds is now no more than about 240 acres. Originally the 

site of Mohenjodaro must have been much more extensive than it is today 
and have formed a more closely connected whole’. 3 

as E^sVst^wV <there l8 u & main r0ad ’ de8ignated the excavator 
as East street which runs across the site from east to west. There is another 

tong street, but less important as the thoroughfare of the city, which crosses 

Ewt stawt at nght angles and thus runs from north to south and is designated 

“ SLTi J?° m tt T 8e tW ° l0Dg 8treets as weU as from ^ short sections 
, m ° ther PartS ° f the 8ite ’ ifc is eTident ‘hat the city was 
, teraected by long streets or approximately straight thoroughfares mainly 

OTumted north to south or east to west. The main thoroughfares are aU 
below the level of the buildings erected alongside of them’. The extent of 
ground covered by this city at successive periods is not definitely known 
but it u, clear that once it must have extended well beyond the existL limto.’ 
ir o Marshall asserts that ‘the c ity must have been surrounded by walls'. 

» Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, pp. 749-804. ' 

* Ibid 89 ™. 99 ’ VMM {Potion of the Miiuwir* in Literature). 

* Ibtd., Ghap. V, pp, ’ 



TOLA0E8 AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


2S1 


The layout of the whole city of any of these periods or strata is thus 
missing from the acoount of Sir John Marshall and others. A picture may, 
however, be reconstructed by joining up the various sections or areas as 
described by them. The city would thus look of irregular shape, like the 
Dromka fortress of the Mdnasara’s plans, the longer side in some cases being 
from north to south, and in others from east to west. The streets and lanes, 
however, are nearly straight. By the intersections of these the city is divided 
into different blocks. The central part appears to have been occupied by some 
public building or the great Bath. Each block contained a number of buildings 
for the residence of the people of the same profession as the quarters of the 
washermen indicate. There appears to have been an extensive arrangement 
for drainage — a peculiarity which is strongly emphasized in the Manasara 
and other failpa-idstras. The general city plan, including even the irregularity 
of sides, will also correspond to some of the plans elaborately described in the 
Architecture of Manasara . 1 

No such remains of the Vedic villages and towns have been yet discovered. 
But from the references like Pura-bhit (destroyer of cities) the existence of 
some kind of town is clear. Besides, mention is made of ‘a sovereign who, 
exercising no oppression, sits down in this substantial and elegant hall built 
with a thousand pillars' and of residential houses with such pillars as are said 
to be vast, comprehensive and thousand-doored. 2 Mitra and Varava are 
represented as occupying a great palace with a thousand pillars and a thousand 
gates.* References to such extensive structures will also indicate the exis- 
tence of big cities. 

‘The view of Zimmer and others after him (Vedic Index of Macdonell 
and Keith, I, 538-540), that Vedic India knows of nothing more solid and 
complex than the hamlet, like the early Germans and Slavs who had no castle- 
structures and town-life, is an extreme one ; for it is now realized as a basic 
fact that the Vedic Indians, like Iranians, Hellenes, and Italians, were super- 
imposed upon an earlier civilization Thus it becomes quite 

reasonable to find in prithvi, urvi } fatabhuji, airmmayx and dyasipurs the massive, 
extensive, hundred-walled, stone-built and iron-protected forts. It is un- 
necessary to assume forced explanations to discover in them mysteries of 
myths and fancies of metaphors/ The archaeological remains discovered at 
Mohenjodaro and other places should corroborate this view. 

In the great Epics, the Rasmyana and the Mahabhdrata , the layout 
of big cities has been fully described. 

* The great city of Ayodhya built on the banks of the Sarayu was twelve 
Yojanas (96 miles) in length and nine Yojanas (72 miles) in breadth, the 

houses of which stood in triple and long extended rows the streets 

and lanes were scientifically disposed, and the principal streets well-watered* 
It was filled with merchants of various descriptions, and adorned with 


* Architecture of M&nas&ra, Vol. IV, Chaps, IX, X, pp. 68-98. 

* Wilson’s Rigveda, II, 813, 179; compare R.V., II, 41, 6; V, 62, 6; VII, 88, 5. 

* A.V. 12; ix, 8. 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


282 

.taAnoe of jewels; difficult of mm, SM slkfd. tm*., tMOd 
rth garie®, and grove, of mango tows, surramded by » top «id mpmvbk 
moat; and completely furnished with arms. It was ornamented with stately 
gates’ and porticos, and constantly guarded by archers. . . . Ayodhya thus 
fortified by gates and firmly barred, was adorned with areas disposed in regular 
order, and abounding with a variety of warlike weapons and with artifices 
of every kind, charioteers, cannons (iataghni, capable of killing a hundred at 
a time), crowded with elephants and horses. It was beautified with temples, 
gardens, bathing tanks and spacious buildings full of inhabitants. It was 
embellished with magnificent palaces, the domes of which resembled the tops 
of mountains. The houses therein formed one continued row, of equal height, 
resounding with the delightful, music of tabor, the flute and the harp .' 1 * * Such 
copious description of numerous other cities is available in this earlier Epic. 

The later Epic, Mahabharata , also supplies descriptions of some hundreds 
of cities. Mr. Hopkins * who has made a special study of the Epics and the 
Puramas specially in respect of the town-plan has made a masterly summary 
which may be quoted with a great advantage. ‘We may examine the general 

plan of a Hindu city It had high, perhaps concentric, walls 

about it, in which were watch-towers. Massive gates, strong doors s protected 
chiefly by a wide bridge moat, the latter filled with crocodiles and armed with 
palings, guarded the walls. The store-house was built near the rampart. 
The city was laid out in several squares . 4 * The streets were lighted with 
torches . 6 The traders and king’s court made this town their residence. The 
farmers lived in the country, each district guarded if not by a tower modelled 
on the great city, at least by a fort of some kind. Out of such fort grew the 
town. Round the town as round the village was the common land to some 
distance, later converted into public gardens, as we see in the Mvdra- 
rakshasa . The city gates ranged in number from four to eleven and were 
guarded by squads of men and single wardens • Door-keepers guarded the 
courts of the palace as well as the city gates* 

‘ In the city special palaces existed for the king, the princes, the chief 
priests, ministers, and military officers. Besides these and humble dwellings, 
the larger houses being divided into various courts (as the Vasantasena’s 
mansion referred to in the Mfkhchha-lcatiha having seven courts each with a 
gate house), there were various assembly halls, dancing halls, liquor-saloons, 
gambling halls, courts of justice, and the booths of small traders with gold- 
smith's shops and the work places of other artisans. The arsenal appears to 
have been not far from the king's apartments. Pleasure-parks abounded. 


1 Stftmtya#*, L 5. 5-17. 

* 13, pp. 175, 176. 

4 Mahibhirata, XV. 16. 8; the king left Haetinapur by a high gate. 

4 The Bibb, meommaods six squares but R&mAyana (II. 48. 19) mentions four only. 

6 Mbh., 1 £81^86; Bisn&ya?*, VI. 112. 12. 

• Eleven 0^'QUm. Up., V. 1); Nine (Varaha,p. 52, 5), RimSyiqtn (VI. 98. 7>| four 
[Act VI, 




VILLAGES AND TOWNS IN ANCIENT IN DU 


283 


The royal palace appears always to have had its dancing hall attached.' The 
above descriptions from the Epics which were the source of the classical liter- 
ature tally with those quoted from the architectural standard text of Marmara 
which also corroborate the picture of villages and towns of the Buddhist 
period drawn by Rhys Davids from the canonical works and the Jatakas. 1 

‘In the Buddha’s time and in that portion of northern India where the 
Buddhist influence was most early felt ... the arrangements of villages/ 
says Rhys Davids, ‘were practically similar. We nowhere hear of isolated 
houses. The houses were all together, in a group, separated only by narrow 
lanes. Immediately adjoining was the sacred grove of trees of the primeval 

forest Beyond this was the wide expanse of cultivated field, usually 

rice field. Villages are described as uniting of their own accord to build 
mote-hills, and rest-houses, and reservoirs, to mend the roads between their 
own and adjacent villages and to lay out parks.’ 2 * 

Regarding town-plans ‘we are told of lofty walls, ramparts with but- 
tresses and watch-towers; the whole surrounded by a moat or even a double 
moat, one of water and one of mud. But we are nowhere told of the length 
of the fortifications or of the extent of the space they enclosed. It would 
seem that we have to think not so much of a large walled city as of a fort 

surrounded by a number of suburbs From the frequent mention 

of the windows of the great houses opening directly on to the streets or squares 
it would appear that it was not the custom to have them surrounded by any 
private grounds; there were, however, no doubt, enclosed spaces behind the 
front of the houses, which latter abutted on the streets. 5 8 

The extant and the exact measurement of some plans are, however, 
available. The fortress, Girivraja, four and a half miles in circumference, is 
said to have been built by Maha-Govinda, the architect. Bimbisara is stated 
to have built the capital city of Rajagriha which was three miles in circum- 
ference. ‘The stone walls of Girivraja are the oldest extant buildings in 
India. 5 Mention is also made of the cities of Ayodhya, BarapasI, Kampilla, 
Kosambl, Madhura, Mithila, Sagala, Saketa, ^ravasti, Ujjayini, Ve6ali and 
others. 4 

These traditions of the highly conservative Indo-Aryan community 
continues today despite several cultural onslaughts since the fifth oentury 
before Christ. The class-wise distribution of quarters in our present villages 
and towns still continues ; the surrounding ditches have disappeared but their 
mark is represented in many old settlements by the dry drains, and the remains 
of old ramparts can still be seen in many instances. 

Certain details specifically mentioned in the Epio and Buddhist accounts 
deserve special notice. It is stated that ‘houses were never built in isolation'. 
This indicates the fundamental nature of Aryan oulture; the Aryans nnliltft 

1 See for details the writer’s Indian Architecture, n, pp. 9-16. 

8 Buddhist India, pp. 42, 45, 49; compare J&taka, I, 199. 

8 Buddhist India, pp. 64-65. 

4 Vim&navatthu, Commentary, p, 82 ; see writer’s Hindu Architecture, p. 9, note 2. 



B. 0. LAWVOHM* 

284 

* characteristically social brings; they oould noTer and 

the non- Aryans were Jt ^ oniy t he primitives who were grossly 

nowhere live singly an *1 ^ oallous. Thus a primitive man would not 
selfish and abnormal y c ^pect he is lower than an animal whioh 

care even for his own c > j j offeprings. It is, therefore, that 

1- - •W* ££ t P MMb. impulse for «x»*y, the 

" il'SrXX . The Indo-Aryene, e. the otw 

CTZ. heies 8 »*■» “ d m »" d “ * 'f? ,he 

animals in herd but in an organized form when they left their original home 
anovni, niima tft and soil. This fact should explain why the houses 


for Aryan residence were never built in isolation. 

It is therefore but natural that ‘villagers united of their own accord* 
to build mote-hills for their safety and security, rest-houses for guests, reser- 
voirs for common use and benefit, and to mend publio roads and lay out 
common parks for the comfort and convenience of the whole society. 

Similarly, the ‘watering of the roads’ and ‘ providing street-lights’ would 
indicate clearly a state of civic sense which is lacking even today in many 


settlements. Both in village schemes and town -plans the drainage system 
and the orientation of residences to get the maximum benefit of the sun and 
the wind have been emphasized : the hygienic value of these matters in con- 
nection with villages and towns can hardly be overestimated. In such thickly 
populated areas the benefit of straight roads for free ventilation of air and 
sun is obvious. The device of having foot-paths and shops on one side of 
thickly populated roads and keeping the other side open and free of conges- 
tion is a highly scientific one, and may be imitated wherever feasible with 
great benefit even at modem cities. The houses of uniform height in the 
same locality provide equal facilities and advantages for the whole population 
in addition to satisfying the aesthetic need of a civilized community. The 
most natural and mutually convenient practice of housing people of the same 
profession and equal economic level in the same quarter or block is not only 
homogeneous but also preventive of inevitable clash and disharmony. 

Mr. Havel who studied Indian civilization in close quarter for a lifetime 
asserts that ‘the most advanoed science of Europe has not yet improved upon 
the principles of the planning of the garden cities of India based upon the 
Indian village-plan as a unit’ .... ‘It will probably be a revelation to 
modem architects to know how scientifically the problems of town-planning 
are treated in these ancient Indian architectural treatises. Beneath a great 
deal of mysticism, which may be scoffed at as pure superstition, there is a 
foundation of sound common sense and scientific knowledge which should 
appeal to the mind of the European expert.’ 1 


1 E. B. Havel; Indian Civilization, pp. 7-8. 




A FEW THOUGHTS ON HINDI LITERATURE 

By 

Pbof. Lalita Pbasad Sukul 

I 

Hindi literature came into existence as early as about the eighth oentury 
A.D. and it goes without saying that Hindi language as such must have come 
into existence muoh earlier. On the basis of some couplets of the Siddhas 
discovered in Nepal and on some other cogent evidence K. P. Jayaswal has 
fixed the date of Hindi, developed as an independent language, as the sixth 
century A.D . 1 After a thorough scientific analysis now the linguists are 
almost unanimous that in the said couplets it was the early form of Hindi 
evolved from the ApabhramSa stage. 

If we look at this vast literature of twelve hundred years, produced in 
the vast area of Hindi -speaking people, which extends from the borders of 
Western Bengal to the eastern fringe of the Punjab and from the Tarai of 
the Himalayas up to the upper boundaries of the Vmdhyas (covering the 
modern provinces of Bihar, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, North- 
western Province, Rajputana, Malwa, Central Provinces, Central India Agency 
and greater part of Eastern India Agency States and parts of Chota Nagpur), 
it will not be difficult to see that the intellectual contribution of the people 
inhabiting them has been quite in keeping with the standard of the rich 
heritage of its past. 

The true estimate of a literature is made primarily on the basis of its 
quality ; and of course the quantity and variety also do oount. The literature 
of each oountry has its own plan of development according to the cultural 
and social background in which it has to grow and thrive ; and yet there are 
certain universal laws that control generally the intellectual working of man 
as much as his physical or the spiritual. This is the basis on which the genuine 
greatness of a literature is tested. 

In spite of the racial and national differences, which have separated 
one group of man from the other, there are certain common aspects which 
entitle men to be called human beings ; and such elements find their expression 
in the fundamental emotions of love and fear, anger and hatred, pathos and 
laughter. Primitive or civilized human life has been nothing but a chain of 
experiences of the above emotions through its various activities; and literature 
is a record of the same. 

II 

Now, if we carefully go through the whole of Hindi literature, we find it 
fulfilling all the demands of a great literature. In antiquity it has a unique 
position of its own as compared with the literatures of any other modem 
Indian language; and in vastness, variety, and bulk it is incomparable. Hindi 


l See his address as President of the First Bihar Hindi S&hitya Sammilanee- 




286 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


being the mother tongue of a large number of people had, of oourse, many 
advantages over other sister languages. We know how important a r61e 
tradition plays in preparing the congenial atmosphere for the intellectual 
working of man without which no great achievement in this direction is 
possible. And Hindi, being the language of an area 1 of the greatest and 
perhaps the most glorious of literary, oultural, and social traditions, had the 
ground already prepared to receive the marvellous intellectual contribution of 
its genius, endowed with the sacred mission of unfading brilliance and appeal. 
One of the most remarkable factors in the creation and growth of Hindi litera- 
ture is that almost from the very inception it has had the advantage of being 
created by those who were inspired thinkers, and who came with some divine 
mission to deliver to the suffering humanity. They did create immortal 
pieces of art planned on the most scientific basis, but none of them was an 
effort towards ‘art for art’s sake’: rather upon them art had dawned itself 
to reveal the divine message of redemption and to flood the world with the 
light of knowledge, and dispel darkness. They offered solutions to the eternal 
questions of humanity, which are to be solved over and over again and yet 
they remain unsolved. 

Ill 

Surdas, one of the greatest singers ever bom — sitting at the ‘ Shree Nath ’ 
temple as its chief singer — composed thousands of ‘ Padas ’ devoted to the 
worship of his deity — ‘Bala Krishna’. In his Sursagar he has narrated the 
story of Bhagavat Puram in general. But the tenth skandha, which is the 
biggest and the best, is devoted entirely to describing the most captivating 
pranks of the child Krishna and the other important portion of the same, 
generally known as the ‘ Bhramar Geeta\ describes the Viraka of the Gopls 
separated from Sri Krishna after he had gone to MathurA. The first portion 
gives the most vivid description of a child, specially of his physical and mental 
tendencies and activities. The fondness of the parents for the child and the 
ever vigilant care and anxiety of the loving mother with which she tends the 
child are the topics very ably dealt with by this bom-blind great singer. The 
note of unfailing appeal underlying the innocence of a child and the touches 
of the filial fondness which are eternally engrained in human heart, have 
imparted a perpetual grace to the poetry of this great singer. 

Mother Yashoda persuades the unwilling child (Krishna) to drink a little 
more milk: 

(i) lit inr wt vtft i 
X X X X X 
inf nfi Tft writ, ftnft ^ i 
anus $ arat aroff Cur i 


1 4 This area lias been the heart of the most ancient Hindu culture ; and even after the advent 
of the Mohammedans it was only here that the Islamic culture thrived, and ultimately got inter- 
fused with the ancient Hindu culture. '—Hopkins, 



A FEW THOUGHTS ON HINDI LITERATURE 


287 


gfn iJtai wirft ^ i 

‘ w*: ’ fitfe gis tun wutrr *ff «ur sw 9 9f? » 

(2) Shn slut ^ i 

wnc jftftf £9 fan vfc *rr «r*rj % t 
g; 9i9rfa 9W 9ft Wt stff % ^ wfft i 

*GT?3 flTn *99199 «fhpr WTfarw wt *jt n 

^iwt from tif(nifn^>r jm ttzt i 

ijx ^rm fNRifwg 9te 

tfcn wft vm 9ft wt#h 

The innocent efforts of the baby to tease his mother Yashoda have been 
well portrayed : 

wr* wit jftfH jNt jHit i 
Pint *k wT 9T9T *T9 wsrc wt ihn g 
wf? wf? 9iT9 WWfal ^ t 9TF 9i^9T I 
£C 9ilj f»rf9 WT3J WWT t flT^lft 9fl» 9?t ^9T I etc. etc. 

That ever-present imitative faculty inborn in an intelligent child with 
its fun and joy has found its due expression in the vision of the poet; and 
with his superb artistic scenes he has chosen the occasion of 'taking the meal* 
to reveal it in verses : 

W W* ^ qrffari I . 

*§t< 3[ ^ncfn Qio^d i 

X X X X X 

*3T*r ^ Hnr?r ^ftr i 

X X X X X 

vm TO ^3 TO *r *fw\ | etc. 

That the indignation of a sensitive child at the teasing remarks of a senior 
brother or elderly companion has ever been the occasion of an innocent 
fun of human life. Even this does not escape the poet’s notice, and he paints 
the scene to remind us of the eternal homeliness of life through ages gone by : 

(1) SW *ftfT TOR faRflpft 

*fNT 3HRf TOT* » 

9TTT 9T#f ICfT % wt 9^ 9fr *ng I 
X X X X X X 

Jlft 99J jfte ?pT 9W uw 91^9 I 
jpnft tNw i9W 9 tc fafc 99^*9 i 



288 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


*rt i 

ifa* *F§ ft* *r%u ejfii wff*4fa jjfa 9fa ^ l etc. 

(2) grtnr ww$tt*m rihn i 

^rfr rftfr ^r?r #ir uwfir fawf *m $ut v 
*fNT *tu tjjt *w%* *rt ^vwt hn i 
fwvt *f % b 

^r w^ft wvf ^ *?, *r* *fa ^ fan j 

t% *fr w* tfTfr fiwm uv wf fwtar r etc. 

Out of innumerable beautiful* Padas 9 of equally high merit it was difficult 
to choose, yet there is hardly any interesting aspect of child-psychology that 
has not been touched by this great singer Surdas. 

Now the question arises whether it was for the mere fancy of the subject 
that the poet chose it or for some higher purpose ? Surdas, being a disciple 
of Vallabhacharya, belongs to the cult of Krishna worshippers in which 
Balkrishpa has been accepted as the form of Krishna to be worshipped. One 
of the reasons is that the path of Bhakti primarily aims at purification of the 
heart of the devotee by bringing softer human passions to the utter 
exclusiveness, and thereby it helps him to obtain the supreme path. 

The devotion to Balkrishna was ohosen for the reason that the innate 
innooence and purity of a child has an unconscious appeal to the softer and 
nobler emotions of the people. But even to effect this natural reaction, it 
is necessary that the artist should maintain in his creation the high standard 
of conformity with the highest Natural Order. The very fact, that for the 
last so many centuries the * Padas 9 sung by the great singer have been 
vigorously sustaining the fire of devotion in innumerable beings, is enough to 
speak for the magnificent success of the artist. 

Udhava, a chum of Sri Krishna, was the professed champion of Yogamarga, 
and he was sent out by Sri Krishna to Vrindavana to console the Gopis who were 
suffering from the severe pangs of separation from their beloved Sri Krishna. 
He had enthusiastically accepted the onerous duty of bringing peace to the 
suffering Gopis by initiating them in the cult of Yoga, which he firmly held 
to be superior to the Bhakti cult. 

But when he was asked by the Gopis that Bhakti was not a mere cult or 
religion but a sacred creed and faith of life, his scholastic arguments of rare 
logical value utterly failed. He was unsuccessful in his mission and he himself 
got converted to their cult of love and devotion of Bhakti . 

Of oourse Surdas claims no originality. In retelling what is given in the 
Bhagavat PurSna he won for himself a much superior position as a successful 
poet and artist as compared to the great author of the Bhagavat. The poignant 
simplicity of the Gopis has reached its zenith in the songs of the poet who 
has breathed in them that immortal life knows no fading nor decay. 



A FEW THOUGHTS ON HINDI LITERATURE 


289 


In his time, sincerity of heart, coupled with that unflinching love and 
devotion, onoe again expresses itself in its truest oolour and wins a very easy 
victory over the mere casuistry of scholarship and pretensions of logic. This 
is the conclusive hit that once again kindles the spark of true light and reassures 
the devotee of the truth that the divine quest is purely a matter of realization 
and not of learned arguments or sense perception. 

Apart from the superb philosophic value of this chapter, it has a merit 
of its own as a pure piece of art and poetry. If true art aims at the inter- 
pretation of the genial current of human emotions, and if the Rasa is held 
to be the soul of poetry ( twr then perhaps a brighter 

specimen of art or poetry than this is yet to be created. The dominating 
Ram in v^TTRC is the ‘ Adirasa’. But the display of all the elements of this 
Rasa with such a perfect portrayal in its absolute universal aspect is a rare 
achievement, not only in Hindi literature alone but also in the world literature. 

IV 

Tulsidasa was another bright luminary of Hindi literature. Vincent Smith 
has paid the most glowing tribute to him when he says that ‘undoubtedly the 
greatest personality of the sixteenth century was Tulsi and not Akbar\ 

This great saint Tulsidasa, the author of Ram-Charitra-Manas and many 
more works of great merit and value, was also a Vaishnava Bhakta. But 
he was a devotee of Rama the ‘ Maryadapurushottam ’ . Sur and Tulsi both 
belonged to the Bhakti cult, and yet there was an important difference of 
outlook between the two. Sur looked upon his deity Sri Krishna as his 
dear friend whereas with Tulsi Rama was his master and the protector. This 
material difference of outlook was very vital. According to him poetry was 
merely the necessary medium of self-expression. As one of the modem 
poets has rightly said , 1 ‘Poetry did not garnish Tulsi, rather through the pen 
of this great divine singer poetry got itself garnished.’ He had also a mission 
of his own. In all his voluminous works (except in three) his theme is Rama’s 
life. But he has been exceptionally successful in maintaining a scrupulously 
high standard of ideal morality in painting his character, and yet the graces 
of the muBe have not been allowed to be sacrificed or left unattended to even 
in a single place. There is hardly an occasion here to discuss his great works 
in detail. But generally speaking, it can be stated safely that Tulsi’s outlook 
on life was extremely broad and he was the greatest champion of Hindi 
culture. His creed of culture demanded the highest discipline of the three 
selves (i.e. the physical, the intellectual and the spiritual) and the capacity of 
mutual understanding and sincere toleranoe served as the test of the culture 
acquired. All this self-discipline and the quest for peace was not merely for 
the worldly gain. But according to him, they were all the requisite pre- 
parations for a higher life, i.e. the realization of God. 

In delivering his message he was not unmindful of the practical difficulties 
of man, and it was to solve these that he held out in his Rama the most 


* 






290 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


perfect model of all the social relationships that a man is required to fulfil. In 
Slta he painted the most perfect model of the womanhood and the ideals 
thereof. It is marvellous indeed to see this great artist laying the foundation 
of his character in the most exalted imperial background of a royal palace 
and with all the paraphernalia of overflowing bounty and richness strewn 
all over with its unusual lavishness and yet the entire practical life of his 
great character is lived untainted with the slightest touches of aristocracy. 
Thus the artist has achieved his great aim of presenting the life-models, 
1 embodying the highest ideal of a pure and noble life. In order to send his 
message to the suffering humanity, he chose to sing his divine wisdom in the 
language of the masses, although he was a profound scholar of Sanskrit. 

He was a very great idealist and he gave expression to his idealism 
through his great hero Rama. By the dint of his superior genius and per- 
sonality Tulsidasa did not allow even for once his art to be sacrificed for his 
extreme idealism, or the idealism to be sacrificed to maintain the graces 
of art. Mere theorizing was genuinely foreign to his temperament as he 
himself says, “vx wfcn Wfft, § STHlf* ^ if fi ” ‘not few 
are efficient to advise others; but those who actually act up to their own 
advice are not many \ 

He says that Rama was a dutiful son of an illustrious father to whom 
fulfilment of his promise was sacred ; but his affection for his son Rama was 
very great. There sat the step -queen-mother demanding nothing shorter than 
the pound of flesh in the unconditional banishment of Rama. Rama broke 
the sad news in the presence of his own mother Kaushalya and sought her 
permission. Being so unprepared to receive such a rude shock, she maintained 
the perfect dignity of the most affectionate mother, the seniormost queen, 
the devoted consort of the royal lord, possessed of the unexcelled nobility 
of a co-wife, who was blessed with the highest culture and understanding. 
And all this is achieved in the two brief lines from the pen of this immortal 
singer : 

firg mmi mm, ^ ’’rf’i to mm i 

mm, ^ mmr to mra mum” i 

* With a perfect oomposure she tells Rama that if the order of banishment 
is given by your royal father alone, then you need not go ; because such 
is your mother’s order, who, of course, is a superior authority; but if 
you have reoeived orders from your father and mother (Kaikeyi) both, then 
you must obey, and my dear son the forest will be better than hundreds of 
Ayodhyfi for you.’ 

The above is just one of the finest specimens of his skill as a great poet 
and artist. The short spaoe hardly allows a more detailed treatment of the 
subject. 

V 

Now we turn to Kabir who was also ono of the brightest jewels of Hindi 
literature. In respect of time he was senior to Sur or Tulsi. In matter of 

19 » 



A FEW THOUGHTS ON HINDI LITERATURE 


291 


faith and cult he belonged to the Sohool of Ramananda, which prescribed 
the worship of Rama the incarnation of Vishriu. On the basis of the inner 
and outer evidence, it is undeniable that he belonged to the said school ; but 
in essence, he had very little to do with the faith and practices of that school. 
He calls his God Rama in various names. But in conception, Rama of Kabir 
is not the traditional incarnation of Vishnu. He is the all-pervading Nirguna 
Brahma and for his realization it is not Uptisam or Bhalcti that is needed; 
but what is required is pure and simple Stidham. As the chief preceptor of 
this cult, Kabir was primarily a Stidhaka. 

Some refer to his Vaishnavite tendencies, and his leanings towards the 
path of Bhakti. It would be a mistake to class him as a Bhakta or a Vaishnava 
of any school. It is well known that Kabir never wrote a line in his own 
hands, nor did he follow any systematic plan of going about to preach his 
own doctrines. The numerous disciples who used to assemble round him 
from the various parts of the country and used to sing with him almost in a 
chorus spread his message all over the world. A part of preservation was 
also theirs. This being a known fact about the life and work of the poet, 
taking all the various collections of Kabir, all that we can claim is to possess 
mainly his thoughts and also his spirit through some of his typical expressions. 

Kabir had no pretension of any scholastic background. His was the 
most direct method of acquiring and imparting knowledge, and he prescribed 
nothing but the path of Stidham as the surest method of self-realization: 

*nrsi ^ Ti^ff arc ftrc: *rc frc* 

mfr i frcfl fac Ttrc i 

ilrcr im vfte T* qsrcrcft wnrc 

w JiTfr i 

In referring to religious mythologies or in discussing the theological 
principles he has erred, and at times the errors are glaring; but when he 
discusses the merits or the requisite items of Stidhanti he gives ample evidence 
of his complete mastery and thorough knowledge of his subject. 

Kabir has also expressed his views on many other problems than * self- 
realization \ His utterances are usually the outcome of his strong common- 
sense. A precise balance of outlook, brevity, and his appeal to reason 
rather than to emotions are the outstanding characteristics of his utterances. 
Thus in spite of his critical attitude towards the commonest of human failings 
he carried conviction to a very large number of people with the result that his 
utteranoes became the household words of wisdom and light amongst them. 
The remarkable sincerity and intellectual purity of the sage are noticeable 
in his valuable words. 

A creative art is essentially superior to other types of art. A true creation 
through the medium of art is the creation of the time spirit that not only 
shapes its age, but also goes to sustain life against the forces of deoay and 
corruption. This is the justification to hold that it is true that a literature 
is created by man who is also created by a great literature. 



SUFIS AND MUSIC 

By 

Db. M. L. Roy Choudhuby Sastri, M.A., Ph.D. 

Caloutta University 

It is not the place to define what Stifism is and what a Sfifi stands for. 
Suffice it to say that Sufism is an attitude of mind towards God and things 
Godly. The Sufis have their own way of thinking, which the orthodox says, 
is not warranted by the law of the Prophet. They were often maligned, 
cursed and persecuted for their free thi nk i n g. Still they exist as a powerful 
factor in the community of the Muslims. 

Sufis generally hold independent opinions on many fundamental points 
of Islam. One of these is on the subject of music. Many of the Sufis hold 
that music is lawful. Of this class the most important are the ‘Chishtis’. 
The ‘Naqshbandi’ order holds that music is unlawful. Sattaria and Qadiriya 
hold that permissibility of audition of music is conditional. Other minor 
orders follow the practices of their preceptors — ‘Pits’. 

Siifis are classified into three distinctive groups according to time : — 

(а) Motaqaddemin — who were mentioned in the Tadhkirattd Awlia 

by Fariduddin Attar — such as Junayd Baghdadi, Abti Bakr 
Shibli, Wais Qaranl, Haram bin Hayan, Mansur Hallaj, Khawaja 
Hasan Basri, Dhun-Nun Misri, Fadl bin Aiad, Bayazid BistamI 
and others. 

(б) Motausssetin — who were mentioned by Jami in his Nafhatul Uns — 

such as Ma‘inuddin Chishti, Maulana Rumi, Jam!, Fariuddin 
At^ar and ‘Abdul Qadlr Jilani. 

(c) Motaakhyrin — who were mentioned in modem books like Tamuf aur 
Islam by Maulana ‘Abdul Majid Dariabadi — such as Nizamuddin 
Awlia, 9‘adi, Hafiz, Imam ‘Abul Qasim Kashrl. 

There are innumerable orders of the Sufis who may be classified according 
to the principles and practices of the Pirs or according to the country they * 
live in. In India the most important of the SCLfi orders are : — 

(1) Chishtia — (a) Nizamia section. 

(6) Sabir! „ 

(2) Naqshbandia — four Qayyums. 

(3) Qadiria — (a) Bahul Shah! Section. 

(b) Maqim Shahi „ 

(c) Naw Shahi 

(d) Husayn 

(e) Myall Khel 

(4) Suhrawardia — (a) Jalal! Section. 

(6) MakhdumI Section. 

(c) Ism‘ail Shahi Section. 

(d) D&wala „ 



StJrtS AND MUSIC 


(e) Lai Shahi Section. 

(/) Rasul Shahi ,, 

(5) Other orders— (a) Uwaysl Section. 

(6) Madari ,, 

(c) Shattarl ,, 

(d) Qalandar! „ 

(e) Malamatl, etc. 1 

The following are the principal Sufis who have expressed their opinions 
on music either for or against : Abu Nasr Sarraj (one of first writers on Sfifism 
in Arabic), Imam Ghazali, Shaikh ‘All bin ‘Uthman Hudhwiri (first writer 
of Sufism in Persian), Junayd Baghdadi, Muhammad bin Taher, Shihabuddin 
SuhrawardI, Shaikh Ahmad Mujaddidi Naqshbandi, Khawja Nizamuddin 
Chishti and his followers like Kutubuddin, Fariduddin, Nizamuddin, Salim 
and others. Mohiuddin bin ArabI, Mohsin Fani, Abdur Rahman us Salami 
(author of Kitab us Sama‘), Dhun-Nun Misri, Abu Muhammad Jorayri, 
Jalaluddin Rumi, Muslehuddin Sadi and others. 

Imam Ghazali in his two famous books Ihya-ul Vlum wa Din (Revival of 
sciences) and Kimia-i-Sa'adat (Chemistry of happiness) have advanced a 
philosophical background of music. In his chapter on music in Kimia, 
Ghazali has defined music as ‘the fire inside the stone \ It comes out when 
it is struck, and it burns the ‘whole forest’. Music is like a light emanating 
from inside a mine which is the human heart. It reveals the beauty inside — 
it is ‘ Tanasub Tanasub is the reflection of the beauty of the world. It 
reveals the ‘ Jamal ’, ‘ffusn’ and 'Tanasub' of the universe — it is the unity of 
the two worlds. Music leads everything to finality. 

Then Imam Ghazali goes on arguing against the view-point of the Mullas. 
He says that Mullas are of two kinds : 

?aheriin (external), and 
Bateniin (internal), Cs-fH 

The former decides things by the external manifestations and the latter by 
what is latent. Accordingly Imam Ghazali, a Mulla, ordinarily thinks in terms 
of the ‘materiaF (things apparent). Sufi defends musio on the grounds that 
it leads to love of God and anything that brings man nearer to God is lawful; 
hence StLfls hold music as lawful. Whereas the Mullas hold that love may 
grow between the same species : a tiger may love a tiger, a sparrow may love 
another sparrow, a man may love another of the same species. As God has 
no species or genus, He is beyond the sphere of love of man. Thus according 
to the Mullas, Sfifis mislead themselves and others by pleading love of God 
as the basis and defence of music. They hold that love of God, if it may be 
so called, is to submit to His commands and to surrender to His will. In 
Islam the inherent idea is ‘surrender’; a Muslim is he who has ‘surrendered’. 

•Further the Mullas hold that love is a matter of reciprocity whioh is impossible 

i Taeaitf-i-Ielam, by Abdul M&jid, Axamgarh, p. 45. 




294 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


between man and God. Man feels by five senses but God, being unlimited, is 
beyond the approach and reach of the five human senses which are but limited. 
So the Mullas who are ‘Zaheriin’ condemn music as is understood by the Sfifis. 

To this, ImSm Ghazali, in his chapter on ‘Mahhabbat* (love), has given a 
very philosophical yet logical reply. The great Imam says that human heart 
can hardly remain empty; it always craves for association. By nature, it 
wants to associate with things beloved. If the heart is to love, the best love 
must be for the best of the treasures — the best treasure is certainly God. If 
man does not love God, he must by nature love something other than God, 
which is of lesser value than God. So according to Imam Ghazali love of God 

is permissible. Further God has said in the Qur‘an : v 

> + a >> .>*>-. 

J f-f-r*-'- 

Yu fiibbo hum o yu hibbuna hu. 

‘God loves them and they shall love God/ 1 


The Prophet has said : 

‘He has no religion who cannot love God and the Prophet more than 
any of his possessions/ 


Love has been permitted in the Qur'an as follows : — 

j • L:.i \ j . L 1 JJ 


Qul ink ana abaokum wa Abna wa Kum 
Wa Akhawanukum 


‘Love of God is more than the love of parents, children and brothers/ 

Love by and through senses, as is understood by the Mullas (Zaheriin), is 
the sensual love — physical love, and the object of love may be changed, trans- 
ferrable and transient. They are objects of the animal world. But beyond 
the five senses, which every animal possesses, there is yet another sense called 
the sixth sense which differentiates man from animal. It is through this sense . 
that man can soar to the heights from which he can love God, and love of 
God may be best realized through music which reveals the hidden treasures 
inside the heart. 

Ghazali has classified music under three heads : — 

(1) Music as sports ( ^ ), which is unlawful because it creates 

disturbance. 

(2) Music as delight (ol)\ which has reference only to the joy off 

the heart for the sake of delight only. The green grass, running 
waters, budding flowers, singing birds please the five senses and 
make a man happy; and they are not unlawful. Why should 
music which pleases the sense of audition be interdicted as 
unlawful ? Pleasure of the senses is perfectly justified in Islam ; 
... music is a source of delight of sense, pure and simple. 


1 domination in Islamic Mysticism, by E. J. Jurji, p. 44. 




suf!s and music 


295 


(3) Music is permissible ( ) because the Prophet has set an example 
by enjoying it himself and allowing others to enjoy it. 

ImSm Ghazali then quoted profusely the practices of the Prophet, specially 
the tradition of ‘A’yesha enjoying the performance of Abyssinian acrobat 
accompanied with music in front of his mosque. He has drawn five con- 
clusions from it, namely : 

(a) (Music) ‘Sports’ may sometimes be enjoyed. 

(b) It may be enjoyed near a mosque. 

(c) It was a kind of request of the Prophet, because He asked ‘A’yesha 

if she would enjoy the acrobat’s performance. 

(d) The example proves that it is lawful to make women and children 

happy by giving them opportunity for enjoyment of sports. 

(e) Finally it was a command of the Prophet. 

j-il JjaJu ^3^ is*. !; 

Dona kum ya bani arfada babazi mashgul bashed. 

‘Oh the children of Arfad (Abyssinia) I go on with performance.’ 1 

So said the Prophet to the Abyssinian. 

Some say that Abyssinians were mere performers of feats of war and 
there is no reference to music. But Ghazali is definite that Abyssinian per- 
formance was accompanied with music, etc., which was a normal custom of 
the Abyssinian acrobats. 

Bazie janghian Raqas wa Sorud buda. 

‘The sport of the fighters was with music and dance.’ 2 * 

In Arabic, the oldest book on Sufism is Kitdbul Lum'aijit Tasauuf by Abii 
Nasr Sarraj, which has discussed the question of music in Islam. The great 
author was known as Tawosul Foqara ‘ (the peacock of the Sufis). Though 
the author has been referred to by famous writers like Fariduddin Attar and 
by Jami, yet his book could not be traced till Prof. Nicholson of Cambridge 
found a manuscript of Kitdbul Lum'ai with Mr. Elis. 8 He searched for 
another copy which was found in the British Museum. The learned professor 
compared the two manuscripts and produced a very nice edition of this famous 
book ‘ Kitdbul Lum'ai ’. 

In the 9th chapter of this book, the author has discussed the question of 
music under the following sub-heads : — 

(а) Varieties of music. 

(б) Diversity of opinions as to its import. 

(c) Melody and audition. 

(d) Audience. 

1 KvmiA-i-S'a'adat, pp. 220-221. 

* Compare Bukhari’s Hadlth published from Lahore in 1341 A.H., p. 123. 

» Copied by Afrmad bin ?aheri, dated 638 AJI./1284 AJD. 




296 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


(e) Public and individual music. 

(/) Disciples and beginners in the art of music, etc., etc. 

AbH Nasr Sarraj has assigned a very high place to melody and music. 
He has based his defence of music on Hadith : 1 * 


<A*»U 


Ma ba’ tha Allaho Nabiyan ilia Hasan as Saut. 
‘God has not sent any Prophet but with a melodious voice.’ 

Jkj\ J^\ i 0* jJ u J 

' 0 /> * 4 , 

Zayyeinul Qur'an a be aswatekum. 


‘Beautify the Quran with melody.’ 

" m 00 % CTT * 00 ^ • * • * * ) 1 \ ~ " 

^ ui » Lw LuJ aJJ I OS I l* 


Ma azanallaho ta’allah le Shayin 
Kama Azana le Nabiyin Hasnas §aut. 


‘God has not given permission (so strongly) for anything as He has given 
permission to the Prophets for melody.’ 

Then the learned Sufi goes on discussing the different measures of music. 
He quoted the expressions of Sufis like Junayd Baghdadi, Abul Hasan Nurl, 
Hudhwiri and others who enjoyed music. Like Ghazali he supported music 

even when the common people enjoy them for mere delight (oiJ ). Aba Na§r 
Sarraj enthusiastically quoted Hadith to show that ‘A’yesha, Abfi Bakr, 
Belal and other great Sa^abis enjoyed music for mere delight as did the Prophet 
on ‘Id days with Daff. Malik bin Anas, ‘Abdullah bin Ja‘far, ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Umar, Imam Shafi’i have been quoted to justify the recitation of verses and 
poems in melodious voice. 

Aba Nasr Sarraj has classified the audience ( ) into three groups 
according to their personal capacity : 

(a) j jUl* Mubtadyan and Muridan. (The beginners and the 
disciples.) 

(b) cek* 4 ** j Motawasetin and Siddiqin. (The advanced and the 

purists.) 

(c) cpjc ‘Arifin. (The mystics.) 


FjmUy the author has advanced very learned arguments both for and 
against music. 

Junayd Baghdad!, the famous Stiff, is of opinion that music by itself is 
not unlawful. But it becomes unlawful when it is not done properly; it 
becomes ‘Hnram \ He insists on three factors which must be taken into 
serious consideration in giving judgment on music: 

1 Whatever may be the authenticity of these Hadith, the faot that they are there, is 

enough to iacboatto the tendency of the traditionists in regard to musks. 



SUFiS AND MUSIC 


297 


(а) Zam&n (Time). jlo 

(б) Mak&n (Place). 

(c) Ikhw&n (Company). jty.1 

In times of prayer or in times of taking food, or while engaged in one’s 
duties, one should not enjoy music. 

In a dirty place, in a dark room, in the house of a tyrant, music will 
cause pain instead of pleasure. So it should not be done there. 

Music may be enjoyed only in company of persons who are fit to enjoy it. 
Music should not be enjoyed with a person who is too much engaged in worldly 
affairs; with a person who has no music in his ears or who is unwilling or 
inattentive — because in such company music will produce no effect. Junayd 
Baghdadi says that great restraint must be maintained in the enjoyment of 
music. 

Shaikh ‘All bin ‘Uthman Hudhwlri in his famous book ‘ Kashjul Mahjub 9 
(Withdrawal of the Screen) has discussed the question of muBic in the 25th 
chapter of his book. He has divided the chapter into ten sub-heads and has 
based his arguments in favour of music on the basis oi'TartiV (Science and 
art of recitation) of the Qur'an. 

Abdur Bahman Lahori in his book called Kitab-us Sama ‘ has supported 
music and has quoted the following authorities. 

( Ikhwanus Qafa* (Brethren of Purity) is an encyclopedic work in 50 
tractates. There is no particular author of this vast work, but the scholars 
are of opinion that it is a compilation of various authors who formed a 
society for the pursuit of holiness, purity and truth, and established 
amongst themselves a doctrine whereby they hoped to win the approval of 
God, maintaining that the religious law was defiled by ignorance and 
adulterated by errors, and that there was no means of cleansing and purifying 
it except philosophy, which united the wisdom of faith and the profit of 
research. They held that perfect result would be reached if Greek philosophy 
was combined with Arabic religion. 1 The most important of this group is 
‘Abu Solaiman Muhammad bin Ma’shar though Ibn ul Jaidi is claimed by 
some scholars to be the author. I have used the Persian translation by 
Maulana Ahmad, a descendant of Imam Ja'far Sadiq (1304 A.H.). 

IhhwanUs §qfa has discussed music from the Greek standpoint, the word 
Muslqa ( ) has been traced to Greek root ‘Maw’ — meaning ‘Sound’ 
and ‘Saqi’ meaning ‘Knots’. So it is a science of sound and notation (A*), 
Pythagoras has written an excellent book on music (sound). Aristotle’s work 
on sound has been translated into Arabic by various scholars. According to 
Greek conception, sound is primarily connected with the soul and not body. 
But when sound is rendered into rhythm, it establishes connection between the 
soul and body, and music comes out of this combination of soul and body. 
Then it is (Sailed ‘soma’— or what is known as audition. 


1 Ref. is to Tarikhul Hukama , edited by Lippert, 1, p. 83. 


298 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Ihhwanus $afa tells that audition is the gift of God and the use of the 
gift of God is perfectly justified. 



Alladi Ja"ala la kamus Sama‘ wal basara 
Wal afedata qalilum ma tash karun. 

‘ He ("Allah) Who has given you the power of audition, the power of 
sight, the power of understanding, you be too thankful to Him/ 
Ikhwanus Safa mentioned the names of twelve Arabic notations and 
suggested their scientific background in consonance with the twelve planets in 
the constellation. Then there is a short discussion on Hindu notations which 
are three hundred and sixty in number and are based on mathematics, 
astronomy and astrophysics. Ikhwanus Hjfafa is enthusiastic on music. 

Abu Sa‘id Fadul ullah of Khurrasan — 357 A.H./967 A.D. — heard music 
and invited Sufis to join music with him. 1 

Singing was practised in ‘Umar’s tomb by Shaikh Abu’l Fadl Hasan, in 
presence of Abu Sa‘id. 2 

Qasharyia at first doubted the permissibility of audition but in the end 
followed it in the house of Abu Sa‘id after a long discussion. 8 

Sufis hold, as Nicholson writes, that progress in mystic life becomes 
quicker and easier through music. 4 

Ibn-ul Farid says (Odes): — (440 A.H./1050 A.D.) 

‘In music I behold my Beloved with all my being; I am riven 
asunder by the struggle of my spirit escaping from the body/ 

Abu’l Qaslm al Baghwl says : — 

‘Music is food for the spirit. When the spirit obtains its food, 
it attains its proper station and turns aside from the government of the 
body; then appears in the listener a commotion and a movement/ 

Abii "Abdillah al Niyaji says : — 

"Audition starts thought and produces admonition; all else is 
temptation/ 

The author of Latayef says 6 : — 

jl j Jl* ^ OJU jjwtf £/\ 

j ) jLi5v« c :***) j ojJU* j 

JfUl J U***. 4 XlAb Jl**l Asfi j 4U\j 


1 Studies in Islamic Mysticism, p. S. s ibid., p. 25. 

8 Ibid,, p. 34. 4 /Wd.,p. 188. 

4 Quoted in Ihqdqu* Smna% by Maulana ‘Abdul B&rl, p. 19. 



SUFfS AND MTJSIC 


299 


4ij\yi -L*«r O f JUi U j\ J JCiU* j&l J Jb*:> j> ^ 

Aa- jjl j ^jA> j JaL* j <~*Jj** J $*.y) J 

Afl & £j\y y* j <w Jb jt> J KbJ l jlZp All! JLC j 

j\ j Aoj) l^T j\ }£ | jjka«»k oli-U j$ £* iJ&j'j' j 

^jJI eJa5 4^1 j>» j Om]I JL^ j ^jJI Jb ^lT o jAj>- £li» 

Jbf I 4** dA^» j»jL* dAw^j jLtiJ jl 4>t^ O^JJ J-* CrjJ! fit jy* j 
A*»l Cjb£> ^1 j>- j J-^l> ^1m I j ^Ac* J$" j* O^J J A>1 

^pU ♦ j < j » i O jlj£ jl j JL^l ^1 j>- j\ ^U j\ AjP & 

0 JLL^l 6$^ <*J j>~ j^lbu J*- l « 4 j jWJI (J,jj\i A4-9 (jU j>l 

In faqir muddat i si sal dar tabte qobba-i nilagun o jeregumbed i ghardun 
por karwar gardidah o ba-molazimat-i akaber-e rozgar rasidah az bazme 
ne‘yamat-i eshan jura-i-chashidah o khel‘at-i himmat o ne‘yamat-i In khub 
keshan dar bar kashidah hcch kas az taifa-i be sam‘a na yaftah o hama In 
ashghal dashtand agar che b‘ad akaber o barkhe-e-amathir be sanl'a ham 
budand o lekin inkar na dashtand o az mashaikhe ma taqaddam Iiadrat sayidut 
Taifa o Abu Bakr Shibli o m‘aruf karkhi o Seri Saqati o Bayazld o Abu Sa‘yid 
Abul Khair o ‘Abdulla da‘if o Haji Sharif o ‘azizan-e ke tadhkiratul Awlia 
madkur and o buzurgan-e ke dar tabaqat-ul-asfhia mastur akthar az anha 
saheb-e-sam‘a budand o az mashaikhe motaakhkher Ha$rat Shaikh Fariduddin 

0 qadi Hamiduddin o Khwajah Kutubuddin o Shaikh Nizamuddin dar rewayat- 

1 sahibah ke az eshan rasidah n^alum shudah ke hama tawajud kardaand o 
raqs farmudah pas-har ke sam‘a ra munker bashad o baram goed pas goftah 
bashad ke In hamah awalia irtekab-e-baram kardah bashad ? 0 In sokhan az 
‘adawat bud, ‘0 man‘ada walian faqad barazan! bil moharebah’ ba Haqt'ala 
barb kardah Mshand. 1 

I, this faqir for thirty years, moved like a compass beneath the blue sky 
and the moving doom and in the service of the great men of the time and I tasted 
bits of grace of their assembly and I put upon myself the cloth of their courage 
and grace of these gentlemen. I have not found any of that assembly to be 
without audition and all were engaged in this (music). Even if any of them did 
not hear music, but he did not prohibit it. And many of the old shaikh, such as 
Haqlrat Sayadut Taifa (Junayeed Baghdadi), Abu Bakr Shibli, M‘aruf Karkhi, 
Sari Saqati, BSyazid, Abu Sa‘yid Abul Khair, ‘Abdulla d‘aif, Haji Sharif and 
those who have been mentioned in Twlkirdtvl Awlia and faba~qatulA$fia y — 
were men of music of the modern (Shaikhs), Shaikh Fariduddin, Qaxji Hamid- 
uddin, Khw&ja Qutubuddin and Shaikh Nizamuddin are found, on correct 
authorities, to have enjoyed ecstasy and danoe. Those who are prohibitionists 

1 \\ 4mL» ju 


300 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


and condemn it as unlawful, say that all these awlias (lovers of God) were 
performers of unlawful things. This is something of enmity, for the Prophet 
told, ‘He who has been enemy to the lovers of God, fights with God.* 

Bedan ke dar istema‘e sarod ikhtelafe foqaha ast, Imam Shaf‘i o Shamsul 
aemmai serakhsi az foqahae Hanafiah o Shaikh Abu Yazld Bistaml o Shaikh 
Ibn-e-‘ArabI qael ba tall and o tafsilash dar mow^a ast. Pas iltizam-e- 
shunidan-e-ghena , bar har murid lazim nist che har kas liyaqat an nadarad, 
o hal© an mashrut ast, bachand sharut o ySftah shudnash dar hamah kas 
ghair mumkin, o an shorut in ast: — ke daran raghbat ba dunya o dikhre 
fawahish o tariqe lahwe o mabfil-e-fussaq o majm'ai niswan na bashad o 
same‘a az ahle nafs na bashad o shunidanash baiz-har-e-fakhr o rea nabashad 
o izhar-e-ojd badarogh na nomayed o ta bamaqdur dabt karda bashad o qalbash 
pur az ‘ishq-e-khuda bashad ke ghina maskane qalbe oo (jt) bashad che 
naghmah ra tathirat ast kathirah pas agar in sharut dar zate khud jam‘a 
darad pas oora mubab ast o chun shaikh oo iltizame sem‘a midarad o oo 
jam'eush shorut pas iltezam an awla ast o bedun ijtem‘a shorut b&ram lakin 
darin zaman jam‘eush shorut naderul wajud ast lehada foqha hukm baburmat 
an dadah and mutlaqan o fil baqiqat-‘Laisa hakada bal le ahleha bal&lun 
o leghaireba har am. 5 

Maulana Nizamuddin Muhamniad Sahalvi says in Manaqab-i-Eezzaqia. 1 
% 

j) J y\ j fij jl 

^*0 J* J* j Jil 

4 £ jl >Xi j* J 

& cu— I Cf) $ j jC? jf’ ^ 4lil j 

vjt £& j jl— * j jf ) j^jW j y j j 

jlfl^l J *Lj j jMJ jl^l Jii ' XJ# j JL*lj { jJu JaI j\ juL* j «i*li 

r s . 

jl j y jl*L tsj Jdu> jjjk IT j *1c 4,* fjjx j*j 

b Jj** ^ I ijpi' 4 Ca— i oijrJlL I J O^M 4 9* oil jl VwJl *l*£ 

j) j *j\x* gb* fl jl 0-i by; j 4 I j ^ * y* oli 

• bjA j cu-l jT f\ji) i bjjJtS) 

Uf) *yrj\ jl * j j* 

0 UjrJ«) j Jib* l#l*V IJlCi f jJ J J Hiik* Jbl #db jT 


i Ibid., p. 7. 




sufIs and music 


301 


* dW Know ye ! regarding music there is difference 

amongst the jurists (Foqaha). Imam Shaff and Shamsul ‘Ayema Sarkhasi 
from the Hanafi jurists, and Shaikh Abu Yazid Bistami and Saikh Ibn i 
Arabi — all these jurists admit its permissibility. You may find the details 

in these places But it is not necessary for every follower to take to 

audition as his way. How can those who do not deserve it (hear it) ? 
And its permissibility depends on certain conditions. It is impossible to 
get all those conditions in every man. These are the conditions. (The 
hearer) must not have (1) love of material world, (2) not remember evil 
things, (3) not be in the way of bad sports, (4) not be in the company of 
bad men, (5) not be in the assembly of fallen women, (6) not be a man of 
flesh, (7) audition must not be for pretension of spirituality, (8) its appearance 
shall not be for display of ecstasy, (9) as far as possible, should be controlled, 
(10) heart will be full of absolute love of God — so that the song will 
make his soul clean. Wonderful are the effects of tunes and notes. 

And if he had collection of all these conditions, for him the music is 
permissible. If his Shaikh (teacher) take the way of music, and he fulfills 
all the conditions, then the imposition (acceptance) of the way of music 
is better. If all these conditions are not there, music is not justified ( )• 
But in this age a collection of all these conditions is hardly found. For 
this jurists have opined in favour of non-permissibility. But really the 
fact is not that. It is permissible for those who deserve it and prohibited 
for those who are otherwise. 

Dhun-Nun, the Egyptian says: ‘Audition is a divine influence (warid 
ul-haqq) which stirs the heart to seek God : those who listen to it spiritually 
(bahaqq) attain unto God (tahaqaqa), and those who listen to it sensually 
(ba-nafs) fall into heresy (tazandaqa).’ This venerable Sufi does not mean 
that ‘audition is the cause of attaining unto God, but he means that the auditor 
ought to hear the spiritual reality, not the mere sound, and that the divine 
influence ought to sink into his heart and stir it up. One who in that audition 
follows the truth will experience a revelation whereas one who follows his lower 
soul (nafs) will be veiled and will have recourse to interpretation (ta’wil).’ 1 

Shibli says: ‘Audition is outwardly a temptation (fitnah) and inwardly 
an admonition (ibrah): he who knows the mystic sign (isharah) may lawfully 
hear the admonition; otherwise, he has invited temptation and exposed himself 
to calamity — i.e. audition is calamitous and a source of evil to any one whose 
whole heart is not absorbed in the thought of God.’ Abu’ ‘Ali Rudbari said, 
in answer to a man who questioned him concerning audition: ‘Would that I 
were rid of it entirely because man is unable to do every thing as it ought to 
be done, and when he fails to do a thing duly he perceives that he has failed 
and wishes to be rid of it altogether. ’ 

Re. the principles of audition, Hudwiri is of opinion that c no fixed law 
, should be laid down for one and all, and that it should be decided by the 


1 Islamic Sufism, by S. Ikbal, pp. 269-870. 




B. 0. LAW TOWil 


302 

capacity of the singer and hearer. What is “Ilahi” (Divine) for a man of 
pure heart becomes “Lahi” (frivolous) for a man of loose morale. As men 
differ in their temperament, permission to enjoy music should be given very 
carefully and cautiously.’ He has divided the hearers (mustami'in) into 

two classes:— 

(a) those who hear the spiritual meaning, 

(b) those who hear the material sound. 

Those who hear music and follow the truth ( y ) they are justified, and 
those who enjoy the effervescence ( ), they are false ( JU ). 1 

The whole of this topic has been well illustrated by the story of David 
which runs as follows : — 

4 God made David His vicegerent and gave him a sweet voice and caused 
his throat to be a melodious pipe so that wild beasts and birds came from 
mountains and plains to hear him, and the water ceased to flow and the birds 
fell from the air. It is related that during a month’s space, the people who 
were gathered round him in the desert ate no food, and the children neither 
wept nor asked for milk, and when the folk departed it was found that many 
had died of the rapture that seized them as they listened to his voice. One 
time, it is said, the toll of the dead amounted to seven hundred maidens and 
twelve thousand old men. Then God, wishing to separate those who listened 
to the voice and followed their temperament from the followers of the truth 
(ahl-i haqq) who listened to the spiritual reality, permitted Iblis to work his 
will and display his wiles. Iblis fashioned a mandoline and a flute and 
took up a station opposite to the place where David was singing. David’s 
audience became divided into two parties: the blest and the damned. 
Those who were destined to damnation lent ear to the music of Iblis while 
those who were destined to felicity remained listening to the voice of David. 
The spiritualists (ahl-i-ma'ni) were conscious of nothing except David’s voice, 
for they saw God alone; if they heard the Devil’s music, they regarded it as a 
temptation proceeding from God, and if they heard David’s voice, they 
recognized it as being a direction from God; wherefore they abandoned all 
things that are merely subsidiary and saw both right and wrong as they 
really are. When a man has audition of this kind, whatever he hears is lawful 
to him.’ 

Famous Sufi saints like Khawaja Mu'inuddin ChishtI (founder of the 
Chishtia Cult), Shaikh ‘Abdul Qadir Jilani (founder of the Qadiriah School), 
Shaikh Shihabuddin Sulirawardl (founder of the Suhrawardi sect) and Shaikh 
Ahmad Sayyid (the founder of the Naqshbandl order) who have large number 
of followers, hare given their opinions of music. 

In India, the Chishtia is the most famous of all S&fl orders. It was 
introduced into India by Khawaja Mu'inuddin ChishtI bom in 1142 A.D. He 
came to India with the army of Sultan Muhammad Ghori in 1192 A.D. and 


1 Islamic Sufism, 8. Hcbal, p. 280: Though Sard* Ikbal has used Khuqful Majhub of Hujwiri, 
be bad not the courtesy to recognize it clearly. 




StTFfS AND MUSIC 


303 


two years after settled at Ajmir opposite to the famous Hindu pilgrimage of 
Pfishkar where he left his earthly remains at the ripe age of 96. Of his spiritual 
descendants a large number have been recognized as ‘Cherags’ (lights) — such 
as Qutubuddin of Delhi, Fariuddin of Shakarganj, Jalaluddin of Panipath, 
Nizamuddin Awlia of Balkh, Muhammad Sadiq of Gungoh, Shaikh Salim of 
Fatehpur. The order is famous for adoption of music as a part of their 
religious system and they think that the nearest cut from men to God is 
through music. They have been branded often as heretics by the orthodox 
for their extremely eclectic and free views. Nizamuddin Awlia, whose real 
name was Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Daniyal al Bukhari, was one of the 
most notable Muslim saints who is respected even today by the Hindustanis 
irrespective of castes and creeds. His views on music have been expressed in 
his ‘Fatubat * (collection of letters) now embodied in Panj Ganja Chishtia. He 
says that music is ‘Mobab’. In Siyar ul Awlia, it is told that Nizamuddin 
Awlia was once questioned about the propriety of music. He enthusiastically 
supported it and produced some Hadlth on this behalf. Mullas refused to 
accept these Hadith, and the saint cursed them with pestilence which visited 
them later on. This is also mentioned in Ferishta. He appointed salaried 
Qawwals to sing in his hamlet. Nizamuddin’s view may be summarized as 
follows : — 

Music by itself is not ‘baram’, but common people may make it 
‘ harani ’ by applying it for prohibited things. For the better class 
people who are in the way of God, it is ‘mobab’: for the Sufis it is 
‘Mustabbab’; for the lover of God it is ‘Halal\ A Chishtia upholds 
‘the hearing of harmonious sounds ryoves the heart and kindles the fire 
of love for God’. 1 

Author of Siyar ul Awlia says, ‘I went and sat in front of a tomb. The 
spiritual musical performances in the congregation were of its highest order 
and the singers and Sufis were excited.’ 2 

Shaikh Burhan (1462-1562) delighted in music. 3 

Myan Shaikh Mohiuddin Abu Yusuf (1602-1689) enjoyed music and 
even Aurangzeb slackened his rigours of the ban of music against him and he 
enjoyed it in spite of the ban. 4 

The Naqshbandi order is against music, but it does not say that music is 
absolutely unlawful. Bahauddin Naqshbandi says : — 

jl 4* j Or,! 4* 

Na in kar mi kunam o na an kar mi kunam 

‘I do not do this nor do I do that (neither haram nor halal ).’ 5 

Between the prohibition of Naqshbandi order and the liberty of the 
Chishtia stands the middle course of Shaikh Shihabuddin Suhrawardi. 


1 Sufism, its saints and shrines, by John A. Sobhan, Lahore, p. 215. 

8 Sayir-td- Awlia, p. 315. 1 Akbor Akbyar, p. 326. 

8 Mirat-i Ahmadi, p. 69. 8 Jowtu-%-Sama\ t>. 21. 



304 


B. C. LAW VOLV11S 


Shaikh ‘Abdul QSdlr Jil&ol, the founder of the Qadiriah met, in the «th 
chapter of hie book Fotfml Ohoib has discussed the question of murie. ;■/(_* 

The learned Sflf! in the 2nd chapter of hie fiunoo e book ‘Aiooriftd M*aorif 
' says that the Qitf'an and Hadlth should be recited in a inelodioaeTOiee. 

Shihabuddin SuhrawardI says that those who oppose music do not know 
the life and actions of the Prophet and of the ^afeibls. As such musio should 
not be condemned. 1 

He says in his * Awarif ’ advising his son in regard to music: — 

i upvji 

Ya Bonaia la tun kereis sama’. 

‘0 my son, do not reject music.’ 

Of the Persian Sufis, a large number of them have discussed the subject 
of music, though as a class the Persians are Shi'as, and the Shi'as are generally 
opposed to music. The Persian Sufis are enthusiastic supporters of music. 
Bum! says that the whole universe came out of sound ( *rn? - j ) and to 
this eternal sound, the world will ultimately dissolve. Maulana Rumi says 

(T j jj oV* j' j 

fi fj. f.f /' jit 

Raz pinhan ast andar zir o bam 
Fash agar guyam jahan barham zanam. 

‘The mystery is hidden in the subtle and coarse notes. 

If I reveal them, the creation will be dislodged.’ 

Further the Great Maulana* Rumi conceived the whole life of a ma n 
and the musical notes are but the call of the body by the soul. 

xC. c-&- Ojc j j' 

ijjU t jj 

Bishnu az nay chun hekayet mikunad 
Waz judai ha shekayet mikunad. 

S‘adi says in Buetan:— 

jj ~ j j-* j **<-' j ^ jy. 

JJ-f j* o&J 

Jah&n pur sama’ ast o masti o shor, 

0 lekin chebenad dar Hy’anie kor. 

‘This world is full of music, ecstasy and notations ; but what can a blind 
man look through the mirror f ’ 

Further the great savant says 

J* -9“ »J> 

J X\.jj ij 


* Ihgtoet &mw’, by ‘Abdol BSri, p. 18. 


DEVAPUTRA 


m 


Agar az burje ma 1 * * * 5 ni buad sai r-e-oo 
Ferishta fero m&nad az tair-e-oo. 

‘If the musician soars up to the pinnacle of ecstasy, the angel cannot 
follow in pursuit of him.* 

S‘adi has drawn beautiful comparison between camel and man who does 
not appreciate music and has condemned the man as something lower than 
animal. 

Appreciation of music by the Persian poets cannot be better expressed 
than by the following words of the great Persian Sfifi:— 

>jj~ Jly j jjj f jj 

f\tr ) yJkk* .uli o—l 

Ru-em ba ru-i dilbar o Qawwal dar sarod, 

Dastam badast-e-shahid maq^ud dar sama 5 . 

‘The eyes were fixed on my beloved’s and the musician was on his 
song; my hand resting on the hand of my love in rapturous song.* 


DEVAPUTRA i 
By 

Dr. F. W. Thomas, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt., C.I.E. 

I. Appellation of Kusa^a Kings 

It is commonly thought that the designation devaputra , ‘god-son 5 , applied 
in India to the kings of the Ku§a$a dynasty, was copied from the ancient 
Chinese imperial title, Tien-tzft, ‘Son of heaven 5 . Justification of this view 
cannot be found in any novelty in the very widespread notion of divine descent 
of kings and emperors: even in Homer the kings are ‘Zeus-born 5 (Stoyevifc); 
nearer to India in space and much nearer to the Kusaijas in time, the title 
8t6s y ‘god 5 , was borne by Ptolemy VI in 164-146 B.C., as also by a Parthian 
Arsakes on the Indian border; an earlier Parthian, Mithradates II, was 
0«or tfcpyiTTjSy another, Mithradates III, was 8* os diranop, and a third and 
fourth, Phraates II and III, were dtondTwp, ‘god-fathered 5 , their fathers 
having perhaps been apotheosized; in India every king was dew. The 
justification would be sought in the historical fact that the designation 

1 The view that devaputra was not an imitation of the Chinese imperial title ‘ Son of heaven \ 

but should be understood in its Indian sense, was propounded and discussed in a draft chapter 
on the ‘Kushan Empire’ submitted to the Editor of the ' Cambridge History of India’, Vol, II, 
in 1922, and it was thence noticed by Prof, de la Vall6e Poussin in his admirable Ulnde aux 
' temps dee Mauryas (1930, p. 312). In view of the faot that the publication of the volume has 

not yet (1944) taken place, and also of M. L4vi’s valuable article discussed below, a further 

treatment of the subject is here essayed. 

so 



306 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


appears first with the Kusa^as, whose ancestors had migrated from the vicinity 
of China and whose empire, when it took shape, was in communication and 
contact with that Power. A possible fallaciousness in the reason, however, 
appears upon consideration of the historical facts. 

It is possible that the nomadic Yiieh-chih people of the first quarter of the 
second century B.C., when inhabiting Kan-su (between the later Tun-huang 
and Kan-chou) had heard of the Chinese, who were still at a distance from 
their country; although the Chinese may scarcely have heard of them, since it 
was indirectly, from the Hsiung-nu (see Wylie, Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute , III (1874), p. 415, and De Groot, Die Hunnen der vorchristlichen Zeit y 
I, pp. 76-7), that the Chinese court learned of their defeat by the Hsiung-nu 
in 176 B.C. and (only during the period 140-134 B.C.) of their migration, 
c. 140 B.C., to the west. 1 But it seems hardly doubtful that both in Kan-su 
and during the earlier part of their sojourn in the west the Hsiung-nu loomed 
larger than the Chinese in their minds. Towards the close of the first century 
B.C. a Chinese text (Shih-chi, c. 123, § 98, trans. Hirth, op. cit.) complains of 
the greater deference shown by the peoples west of Farghana towards the 
Hsiung-nu, ‘indeed they were more afraid of the Hsiung-nu than of the Chinese 
ambassadors’. Even in Chinese Turkestan the Hsiung-nu influence was 
during the whole middle half of the first century A.D. superior to that of the 
Chinese; so that king Hsien of Yarkand, who from 38 to 60 A.D. was ‘master 
of all the States east of the Pamir ’ and at times also of Pamir Sakas and of 
Ta-yiian (Farghana), was known in neighbouring States as ‘the Shan-yu\ this 
being the Hsiung-nu royal title. 2 * 4 Among the Hsiung-nu themselves, when 
they began to break up, there were at one period as many as five rival 
Skan-yu’s. Now the Hsiung-nu Shan-yu was also entitled, we are told, 8 
‘Son of heaven 5 , whether an indigenous notion or borrowed in ancient times 
from the Chinese. If the Kusanas of the first century A.D. had invested 
their rulers competitively with the title ‘Son of the gods’, it would have 
been in opposition to the Hsiung-nu rather than to the Chinese that the 
claim was made. 

II. As an Indian term 

But we should not overlook the fact that devaputra is an Indian term, 
not invented by, or for, the Kusanas. With the meaning ‘god-son’ it is found 
in the Jjtg-Veda.* In the inscriptions of Bharaut, long prior to the Kusanas, 
it occurs with a meaning which Professor Liiders conjecturally (List of Brahmi 
Inscriptions , nos. 774, 814) renders by ‘angel as Speijer had done in his trans- 
lation of the Jataka-mald (see Index). The Pali has it as an old standing 
appellation of Mara, god of love and death, and also in a wider, classifieatory, 
use . 8 With the Buddhists of about the fourth century A.D. the devyputra’B 

1 Hirth, Journal of the American Oriental Society , 37 (1917), p. 93; De Groot, op. cit., U, p. 9. 

* See Chavanne* in T’oung-pao, 1907, p. 198. 

* See Wylie, /. Anthropol. Institute , HI (1874), p. 410; Parker, China Review, XX, pp. 8-9;* 
De Groot, op. di. t I, pp . 53*4; K. Shiratori in Memoirs of the . . . Toyo Bunko , I, pp. 8, 11. 

4 X, 62. 4. * See the Pali Dictionary , s.v. 



DEVAPUTRA 


307 


were a class of divinities, distinguished, but not consistently, from the Yak fa's 
and having representatives in most countries, as particularized at length in a 
list contained in the Candragarbhasutra (see L4vi in B.&F.d’E.-O., V, 
pp. 264-8). 

L6vi, however, who has discussed the term devaputra with citation of 
valuable new materials (Journal Asiatique , CCXXIV (1934), pp. 1-21), held 
(p. 16) nevertheless that, as a royal title, it was borrowed, from the Chinese, 1 
by the Kusanas, for whom with its proper Indian signification it would have 
been humiliating, not a cause of pride. The point of this observation is, 
however, blunted when we note that devaputra was never, at any rate in 
early times, adopted by the Kusanas as an official title. It never appears on 
any of their coins, its reading on a coin of Kujula Kara Kaphsa being an 
error. 2 Wima Kadphises is maharaja rajadiraja sarvaloga-ihara mahUvara, 
but never devaputra ; Kaniska is basileus basileon , shaonano shao , but never 
devaputra , and the like applies to all his successors. Even in the Peshawar 
Casket inscriptions, 8 which are our nearest approach to a document 
officially authorized on the part of Kaniska, the title devaputra is wanting. 
Moreover — and this is a remarkable fact — neither the Chinese nor any other 
foreign sources betray an awareness of a title * Son of heaven 5 applied to the 
Kusana kings, at least until a comparatively late period, when, in a translation 
of an Indian Buddhist text (see infra, pp. 16 sqq.), they were included among 
the four, regional, 'great kings', who were ‘Sons of heaven'. How comes it 
then that the title is so commonly present in dedicatory and other inscriptions 


1 L6vi’s suggestion (pp, 18-9) of an Iranian intermediary is based upon the occurrence 
of the term fypivr, as probably a Pahlavl form — baypuhr , in one of the early Sogdian letters 
recovered by Sir A. Stein from the Chinese limes in Kan-su and edited by Professor Reichelt in 
Die Soghdischen Handschriftenreste des Britischen Museums , II (see Glossary, p. 47). Apparently 
(see Schwentner in ZDMG. 93 (1938), p. 88) L6vi has been followed in this opinion by Professor 
Schaeder (OrientaliscJie Liter aturzeitung, XLI (1938), col. 598), who regards the form Baypur 
as ‘Saka’ and concludes that it was brought by the Yiich-chih in their original migration from 
the Chinese border in Kan-su. In the letter the term is thought to be used as a collective 
designation of the Chinese, and literally it might translate, no doubt, the Chinese expression 
‘Son of Heaven’. But /3a y = ‘god’ seems not to be known in ‘Saka’. 

Even apart from the unfounded supposition that the speeoh of the Ydoh-chih in Kan-su 
was ‘Saka’ (or Iranian of any kind), the suggested intermediary seems unconfirmed and 
improbable. The Sogdian letter oan hardly be dated earlier than c. 150 A.D., since it mentions 
Krorayina (Reichelt, II, p. 4), a Chinese colony whereof the foundation was not even proposed 
before 119 A.D. (see Chavannes in T'oung-pao , II, vi (1906), pp. 248, 251-2, and cf. Reichelt, 
p. 6). At that date the designation devaputra had been in common application to the Ku?apas 
during about 70 years (inscription of c. 79 A.D. in J.R.A.S., 1914, pp. 975-6); and, as concerns 
a ‘Saka’ source, the outstanding fact is that neither devaputra nor fa ypxtr nor any equivalent 
is ever evidenced or inferable in regard to any preceding or subsequent ruler of known Saka 
affinity until we come to MaralbashI jezdatppura of c. 700-800 AD., whose title, like, the 
gyasta-vura noted infra, is derived from the Sanskrit expression, devaputra. Also the equation 
Bypwr ■> ‘Son of Heaven’ seems highly questionable. Can it denote ‘the [Chinese] officials* 1 
Even the addressee of a letter is Bywxwtfiw, ‘ god-lord and ‘ god-son \ 

i * This is stated after consultation with Mr. Allan, who has re-examined the ooins on which 
Cunningham had read the title . 

* See Spooner in A.S.I. Report, 1909-10, pp. 136-144, and Konow, Kharoshthi Inscriptions, 

pp. 135 sqq. 




308 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


dated in the Kaniska era and even in an inscription on the base of the statue 
of perhaps a Kusana king, and on a statue of Kaniska himself, set up in the 
Kusana Valhalla at Mathura ? 1 It must be that devaputra was not a title > 
but a complimentary epithet, current only among the Indian subjects of the 
Kusai^as and therefore with its Indian meaning. Similarly, though every 
Indian king was addressed as deva , we shall not find an Indian king referring 
to himself as deva, any more than an English king styling himself ‘My Majesty* 
or ‘Our Majesty*. It is noticeable that even in the third to fourth century 
Kharofthi documents from Chinese Turkestan the term devaputra occurs only 
in datings and in references to the kings by other persons, and not in direct 
communications from the kings, such communications commencing simply 
mahanuava maharaya lihati. 

Had the Indians any particular conception when they initiated the fashion 
of referring to the Kusana kings as devaputra , a designation which they do 
not seem to have applied to the preceding Greek, Saka or Pahlava rulers? 
The term is evidently classificatory, and it must denote a class of beings 
belonging to the deva-w orld, but not sufficiently distinct or limited in number 
to be included in the closed list of the Thirty-three. There are some indica- 
tions that the devaputra' s were divinities having special functions, depart- 
mental beings: the two citations of the term in the Jataka-mald of 6ura 
(tr. Speijer, pp. 94, 135) refer to the devaputra' s in charge of the rains ; it is notice- 
able also that in a Saka-Khotanl text (J nanolkddhdrani) edited, with translation, 
by Leumann (Buddhistische Literatur, I: Nebenstiicke , pp. 167-162) the term, 
translated gyastavura , along with gyastassaa = devasuta (pp. 157, 1. 40, 158, 
11. 24, 34-5), is applied to the Sun and Moon, 8 who with the other heavenly- 
bodies are definitely included among the Caturmaharajakayika gods, typical 
devaputra' s (see Abhidharma-ko6a , tr. de la Valine Poussin, III, p. 159). In the 
Pali Dictionary we find note of another particular function attributed, in 
Buddhism, to devaputra' a: this is that of acting as a sort of guardian angel to 
arhats; an instance being the Kakudho devaputto of the Vinaya-pifaka ( CuUa , 
VII, 2, 2): even the throne seat (bodhi-manda) whereon Buddha attained his 
Enlightenment had been constructed by devaputra' s (devaputrehi nirmita , 
Maha-vastu , III, p. 275, 11. 1-2). The devaputa Arhadgupta of Liiders* List 
proclaims this function by his very name, a Prakrit compound = ‘Arhat- 
protector*. 

The devaputra' a, whom by reason of their multitude — devaputrasahasrani 
dharaniye pratitfhitd (Mahd-vastu, III, p. 275, 1. 3)— we may define as ‘mis- 
cellaneous devas't were in danger of being confused with two other groups of 
divine beings, namely the dew's proper and the yak§a'a. the P&li Jataka 
commentary (HI, p. 261, 1. 12) goes so far as to identify the two terms — 
devo ca ndma devaputto . In any case the two belong to the same pariqad — 
3 pi ca kho devaputto devaparisayam dhammam deseti ( Aftguttara-nikdya , II, 
p. 186, 3). 

1 See A.S.I. Report, 1911>12, pp. 120 sqq. 

* In the Stwartiaprabhdsott<ma-tiUra also (XV, v. 72) the sun (turyendro) is a dwaputra. 




DEVAPUTRA 


300 


Sometimes the Buddhists may have sought to depreciate the Brahmanical 
deities by using devaputra in place of dew: in the Lalitavistara (ed. Mitra, 
p. 2) — Maheivarapramukhdn aprameyan devaputran ‘countless devaputra *s/ 
headed by Mahe^vara* — and pp. 127-8, maheivaro devaputrah Auddhavasakayikan 
devaputran drmntryaivam aha ‘the devaputra Mahesvara thus addressed the 
devaputra ’s of the (Wdhavasa heaven’. 

Similarly in the Suvarnaprabhdsottaim-sutra , VI (ed. Nobel, pp. 85, 91), 
the devaputra MaheSvara is no less a person than the great god Siva. But the 
outcome may be the opposite of this, as when Buddha himself is said to have 
been (Jataka, IV, pp. 100-4) a devaputta . The Yaksa 1 s, terrestrial powers with 
largely, it seems, local connections, may as a class have suffered from a draw- 
back by reason of their familiarity in popular worship, where their grotesque, 
pot-bellied, images and frequently malignant disposition confined them to a 
low order of divinity (Foucher, L’Art grfoo-bouddhique du Oandhdra , II, 
pp. 40 sqq., Coomaraswamy, Yaksas, pp. 4-8). Yet even as a class they are 
described in the Digha-nikdya (XX, 7-9, Vol. II, p. 256, where their groups are 
specified) as ‘of various complexion, miraculous power, brilliant ( jutimanto ), 
fine-complexioned, glorious (yasassino)\ and elsewhere also their brilliance is 
mentioned : and when Sakka = 6akra and Vessavana = Vai^ravana are reckoned 
as yakkha's (Pali Dictionary and Majjhima-nikdya , 37), evidently the sense is 
not far different from that of deva\ and the close contact of the term with 
devaputra is shown not only by frequent connection of the two and by identifica- 
tion of them (yakkho ti devaputto in the Petavatthu commentary, 113), but also 
by alternation, as when Buddha, a devaputta as shoVn above, is in Milinda- 
patiho (trans. Rhys Davids, I, p. 289, n. 2) a yakkha. 

The most conspicuous case of identification of devaputra and yaksa is that of 
the four ‘Regents of the Quarters ’ (dik-pdla), who by the Buddhists are named 
the ‘Four Great Kings’ (Caturrmhdrdja), viz. Dhrtarastra, Virudhaka,Virupaksa 
and VaiSravana. If we disregard Mara, these seem to be the divinities who in 
•Pali are most frequently designated devaputta . Yet on the Bharaut stupa 
Virudhaka and Vai^ravapa (Kupira = Kuvera) are both figured as yakkha's . 
It seems likely that the change evidenced by the Pali texts had been by way 
of promotion. Discharging functions which in Brahmanism were exercised 
by (eight) great deva 1 s, of whom one was identical with Vaisravana, they 
were clearly raised above the ordinary yak§a' s of more limited, or quite local, 
authority: they became ‘great yaksa’ s ’ or ‘ya^a -kings’ or the ‘four great 
kings’. Kuvera, in particular, as regent of the north, controller of wealth 
and associate of Siva, demanded a high consideration. The Buddhist cos- 
mology has systematized this : in the Abhidharma-kofa, the most authoritative 
source, an intermediate place is found 1 for the Caturmahar&jika deities on the 
fourth terraoe of Mt. Meru (and the other great mountains), above the 
Caturmahdrdjakdyika’B, who include the yak§a' s, and below the Thirty-three, 


i See trans. by de la Vall6e Poussin, III, pp. 159-181. In the Suwrt&prabM&oUama'Stitm 
a whole chapter (VI) is devoted to the Caturmaharajas. 



310 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


who were too long established to be displaced in the system. The system was 
sufficiently practical to allow of popular local distinctions between certain 
deities who enjoyed a rather superior respect, and who accordingly were 
styled devaputra’ s, and others, Gandharva’ s, Yalcsa’ s, Nagct's, etc. ranking 
lower. The distinction is carried out in the long list of countries, Indian and 
Central-Asian, cited from the Candragarbha-sutra by L6vi in his early article, 
published in B.&F.d’E.-O., V (see pp. 264-8). Here most of the countries are 
provided with names of divinities belonging to the several classes, and in 
each case the devaputra’ s, where present, head the list. 

Naturally, however, nothing could prevent the exaltation of individual 
members of the several classes. Even in India, for reasons already mentioned, 
Kuvera overtopped the other three world-regents. As Vaisravana, he attained 
in Central Asia a commanding status in the Buddhist pantheon : in Khotan 
he had been from the beginning the chief deity of the country, supposed to 
have presided over the foundation of the State ; and in the eighth century he 
was there a ‘lord of Yaksa’ s ’, a ( deva~ king ’, a ‘great king ’, ‘king of the northern 
region \ and even a Tathdgata (Thomas, Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents> 
I, pp. 12, 181, 202, 253, 256, 307, 314). His associate, {§ri-devi, who in Jataka 
No. 382 (text, III, p. 257) is Siri-deviya, a devadhita (feminine of devaputta ), 
daughter of Dhatarattha = Dhrtarastra, one of the four ‘Great Kings’, or 
‘World-regents’, held a corresponding rank. 1 


III. Application of the term to the Ku§auas 


From these considerations it appears that the title devaputra , whether 
understood in a general sense or as referring to some particular divinity, could 
not in application even to the great Kusana kings have been demeaning. But 
in which sense was it actually applied ? If the Indians had been struck by 
some vague similarity between the figures of the grand Yaksa’s, exemplified by 
the Parkham and other statues, and those of the burly Kusana kings, they 
would have seen in the superior title, devaputra , a more acceptable connotation. 
Or were they thinking in particular of Kuvera, who, as regent of the north and 
god of wealth, would have been an apt prototype of the northern potentates, 
with their lavish gold coinage, and whose images (see Vogel in Bulletin de 
Vit cole Francaiee d’Extrbne Orient, III, pp. 149-163, and Foucher, L'Art 
Orico-Bouddhique du Oandhara, II, pp. 118-120) tend to have a guost-Scythian 
physiognomy? A4vagho?a does indeed address his ‘great king Kanika’ as 
‘guardian of the northern heaven’ (Maharaja-Kanika-lekha, v. 47). Or did 
they mean even &va-mahe£vara, whom we have seen styled devaputra and 
who is the sole deity figured on the coins of Wima Kadphises ? 

Possibly it may be helpful to note that the Buddhist texts extracted by 
L6vi { Notes sur les Indo-scythes Journal Asiatique, XX, viii (1896), pp. 444 


» nie devakanyS’i and lUvaduhitr’e are likewise mentioned, along with the devajmtra'B, in 
the Mavtteya -samUx texts analyzed by Letimazm, pp. 264-6, 273. 



DEVAPUTEA 


311 


sqq.) do not seem to refer to Kaniska as devaputra, a title rarely absent from 
the inscriptions mentioning the king. Instead they use a term which in the 
Chinese versions appears as Chen-fan and which L6vi originally 1 * * * * * * understood 
as = Clna-sthana, ‘China’, and so implying the Chinese imperial title, ‘Son of 
heaven’: for this reason L4vi, in his translations, substitutes the word deva- 
putra. The Chinese expression had previously been reproduced by Beal 
(Indian Antiquary , XV, p. 356, and Buddhist Records , I, p. 56 n.) as Chandan , 
and by him had been explained as meaning ‘of Gandhara’, ‘Gandharian’. 
Subsequently L6vi, in view of a note by 6arat Chandra Das (J.A.S.B., LV 
(1896), p. 193), which adduced Candana as a name of Khotan, inclined to the 
view that Candana was a Tibetan reproduction of Chen-fan = Cina-stMna f 
but that in connection with Kaniska ‘ China ’ really meant Chinese Turkestan 
or Khotan: this did not, however, affect his view that the intended meaning 
was ‘ king of China ’ = ‘ Son of heaven ’ = devaputra. In an important posthu- 
mous article (Journ. Asiatique , ccxxviii (1936), pp. 61-121), which I am 
discussing elsewhere, L6vi renounces (p. 80) this view, and clearly demonstrates 
by interesting evidence that Chen (or Chan)-t'an represents a title in wide use 
among the Yueh-chih as a designation of the younger brother of a king : * 
the title in its Sanskrit form was Candana. 

It is unfortunate that the Buddhist texts containing the title chen (or 
chan)-t’an are known only in Chinese versions and not in the original Sanskrit. 
The one partial exception, the ‘ Sutralamkara of A^vaghosa’, as represented by 
the fragments of the ‘ Kalpana-manditika' of Kumaralata’, 8 does not include 
the passages in question. But IAvi’s citations in the Journal Asiatique , 
ccxxviii (1936), pp. 77-81, leave no doubt that the Sanskrit form was in fact 
Candana ; and it certainly seems as if the term was used by the Buddhist texts 
where we should not have been surprised to find devaputra instead. 

In adducing and discussing (pp. 76-9) the occurrences, rare in Brahmanical 
sources, comparatively frequent in early Buddhist texts (Pali Nikdyas } etc.), 
of Candma as a personal name, L6vi notes as a ‘ curious and perhaps significant* 
fact that even in the very ancient texts the most prominent is a devaputra 
Candana : after what has been said above we should suspect his identity with 
the Candana who in the Digha-nikaya (text, Vol. II, p. 258) is named among 
the entourage of the ‘Four Great Kings’ and who in another passage (Vol. Ill, 
p. 204) appears in connection with Yakkha* s, Maha-yakkha’ s, Sendpati* s, 
Maha-sendpati’ s, etc. What significance attaches to this fact L6vi lias not, 
in the unfinished article, expounded. But we, on our part, may feel confident 
that the Buddhist authors of the texts concerning ‘Candana Kaniska’ knew 


i See his article Deux Peuples Mlconnus (1890), pp. 239*240 of the reprint in Aflmmol 

Sylvain IAvi (1937). 

* For the particulars connected with Gandhara, Wakh&n and Further India, see pp. 81-4 

of lAvi’s article and as regards Wakh&n the original documents published by Chavannea in 

T*oung-pao t II, v (1904), pp. 51 & n., 64, 55, 82. 

* On this see LOdera’ edition of the fragments discovered by him and his discussion, pp. 17 

sqq., and Uvi, J. As., ccxi (1927), pp. 95 sqq., coxxviii (1936), p. 80, n. 1. 



312 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


the devaputra Candana from their canonical writings and knew a Candana 
Kanaka from mundane information: in using the title Candana , when it 
came to them in connection with Kaniska, they can hardly have failed to 
think also of devaputra. To the less literary people, the composers and readers 
of dedicatory inscriptions, the devaputra Candana may have been unknown: 
for them the class-name, devaputra , would be a more intelligible substitute. 
This interpretation implies, of course, that in some circles an etymologizin g 
association of Candana Kaniska and Candana devaputra had in fact taken 
place. In view of the etymological passion of Indian and Central-Asian 
people, who have rarely spared the foreign names brought to their notice, this 
may be thought to have been inevitable: and such inevitability is apparent 
from another handling of the same foreign name, when Asvaghosa (Mahdrdja- 
Kanika-lekha, v. 83, and the note in Ind. Ant., xxxii, p. 349) brings it punningly 
into connection with candra, ‘moon’, and perhaps also with canda , * violent*. 

From this point of view it would seem that L6vi’s original conception of 
devaputra and then (or chan) -t’ an as virtually equivalent was correct, if we 
omit the reference to Cinasthana (China or Chinese Turkestan), which has 
been withdrawn. But we might still inquire whether in the application of the 
term devaputra to Kaniska some particular devaputra or kind of devaputra 
was popularly envisaged. The sun and moon, both of which in the Abhidharma- 
ko&a belong to the class and which in the J hanolkadharant also are, as we have 
seen, so designated, could have been in people’s minds, and a reference to either 
of these could be harmonized with the above -cited passage from Asvaghosa ’s 
Maharaja- Kanikadekha . Or it might be Kuvera Vai^ravana, as suggested 
by Asvaghosa ’s reference to Kanika as ‘ruler of the northern region’ and by the 
later inclusion of the Yiieh-chih, as ruling the north-west, in the system of the 
four ‘Sons of heaven’. But it may have been merely general; and at present 
we do not seem to find ground for making a choice. 

IV. Kaniska as Devaputra 

One point, however, stands out clearly, and it is of great chronological 
moment. In case the development was on the lines here sketched, it seems 
certain that the designation devaputra was not applied to any Kusana king 
prior to Candana Kaniska: and it would follow that the maharaja rajatiraja 
devaputra Khu$ana of the Taxila Silver Scroll inscription 1 * was Kaniska. 
Hitherto this possibility has been ignored, mainly, no doubt, because in this, 
as in the Panjtar inscription of year 122, the Kusana king’s name is not given. 
Any other reason would be hard to find, whether in the circumstances of the 
discovery of the scroll or in its contents. The scroll comes from a part of the 
TaxiU terrain occupied during a long period, where have been found coins of 
K anig k a and his successors. It was discovered, as we learn from Sir John 


1 ff 4 * 1 fry 8ir J°fra Marshall, J.B.AJ3., 1914, pp. 973-7, and Professor Konow, 

KharoihfM Inscription*, pp, 70-7. 



DEVAPUTRA 


313 


Marshall’s descriptions {A.S.I. Report , 1912-3, pp. 18-9; JM.A.S., 1914, pp. 973- 
5; Guide to Ta'xila , pp. 51-3), in a chapel subsidiary to the Dharmarajika 
stupa, built in a style dating from about the middle of the first century A.D.: 
it had been deposited at the slight depth of about one foot below the floor. 
It seems likely that the 4 Bodhisatva-house ’ named in the inscription as the 
place of deposit was that same chapel. In the contents of the inscription we 
could hardly expect to find anything discriminative as between Kaniska and 
an immediate predecessor, more especially as, if Kaniska is meant, the date of 
the inscription would probably be in, or near, his first year. In the phrase 
maharajasa rajatirajasa devaputrasa Khusanasa the absence of the king’s 
personal name, which seems to link the inscription with the maharayasa 
Qusmasa of the Panjtar inscription, is more than compensated by the addition 
of devaputrasa, which is not included even in the most flamboyant of the coin 
legends of Wima Kadphises, where he appears as maharajasa rajadirajasa 
sarvalogaA&varasa mahiivarasa. The devaputrasa of the Scroll inscription is 
the first known instance of the application to the Kusanas of the designation 
devaputra, which regularly, though not invariably, recurs with Kaniska and his 
successors; the retention of the old era in the first, or nearly the first, year of 
a new reign is natural. The narrowing effect of the prepossession of scholars 
in regard to the person may be seen in statements concerning the monogram 
at the end of the scroll: thus we are informed that ‘the monogram is 
characteristic of coins of Vima -Kadphises, but it is also found on coins of his 
predecessor’, it ‘is known from the coins of Kujula Kara Kadphises, Wima 
Kadphises and Zeionises’. Who would have suspected that its most 
numerous, exclusive and almost unfailing occurrences are on the coins of 
Kaniska ? Should it be established that the devaputra of the inscription is 
Kaniska, then in the year 136 = c. 78 A.D., Kaniska was already reigning in 
India ; and this would end all controversy concerning his era. 

V. Indian doctrine concerning Devaputra and the 
‘ Four Sons op Heaven ’ 

So far we have been concerned with the original application of the term 
devaputra to the Kusana rulers and the manner in which it may have come 
about. As to how the term was understood by Indians, at any rate by 
Buddhist Indians, of later Kusana times, there cannot be any doubt. For 
L6vi drew attention (J. As,, ccxiv (1934), pp. 1 sqq.) to Chapter XII ( Devendra - 
samaya-parivarta) in the Suvarnaprabhasottama-sutra, which he shows to 
belong to that period, where the question is actually asked why kings are called 
devaputra. 

katkavn manu§yasambhuto rdjd devas tu procyate I 
Icena ca hetund raja devaputras tu procyate ||* 

‘how is a king born as a man styled god’ (deva) ? 
and for what reason is a king styled devaputra f ’ 



314 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


The answer is that before being born as a man he was abiding among the 
gods (deva) and that, because the Thirty-three .gods (each) contributed to his 
substance, 1 therefore he is ‘god-son’ — 

api vai devasambhuto devaputrah sa ucyate || 
trayastrimfair devardjendrair bhago datto nrpasya hi | 
putratvam (sic) sarvadevandm nirmito manujeharah || 

The author explains the appellation on purely Indian lines and does not 
even conceive the possibility of its being a translation of a foreign title. The 
explanation, given at a time when the term had been, no doubt, many years 
in use, cannot, indeed, be decisive in regard to its origin; but, occurring in a 
text which frequently mentions the celestial devaputra' s, it is distinctly adverse 
to a separation of the two cases. That the Kusanas are envisaged is obvious, 
since no other Indian kings are known to have been styled devaputra. It is 
noticeable that, as L6vi has pointed out (p. 11 n.), in the Chinese translations 
(the Sanskrit originals being lost) Nagarjuna’s commentary on the Prajha - 
paramita mentions the ‘ state-king ’ called ‘Son of heaven’ (no doubt devaputra) 
as an example of a ‘god [not “god-son”] by name’, 2 and the Abhidhxrma- 
maha-vibhasd groups, as ‘one -region-kings’, the Kusana and Murunda kings 
with the Chinese ‘son of heaven’: both texts belong to the Kusana period. 
Apparently, therefore, Nagarjuna did not understand devaputra literally, and 
the Maha-vibhdsd did not accord to the Kusanas and Murundas the title 
‘son of heaven’ in its Chinese meaning. 

Evidently the Suvarnaprabhasottama-sutra knows nothing of the doctrine 
of the ‘four sons of heaven ’ which otherwise could hardly have escaped mention 
in the chapter (VI) entitled Caturmakaraja-parivarta. But a passage rendered 
by Sylvain L6vi (J. As., IX, ix (1897), p. 23, n. 2), as from a Buddhist sutra 
translated into Chinese in 392 A.D., introduces the four in the following 
terms : — 

‘In Jambu-dvlpa there are 16 great kingdoms with 84,000 walled 
cities; there are 8 kings and 4 “sons of heaven”. In the east there is 
the “Son of heaven” of the Tsin (= China under the Tsin dynasty, 
265-420 A.D.): there the population prospers. In the south there is 
the “Son of heaven” of India: there the land has many celebrated 
elephants. In the west there is the “Son of heaven” of Ta-ts’in (the 
Roman empire) : there the earth abounds in gold, silver, jewels, jade. 
In the north-west there is the “Son of heaven” of the Yiieh-chih: there 
the earth has many excellent horses.’ 

The text goes on to give some particulars concerning the 84,000 cities 
and, farther, concerning the ‘2,500 sea-kingdoms’ and the 5 kings, ruling 
each over 500 kingdoms. In the same connection L6vi refers to a well-known 


i The doctrine, as L6vi notes, of Manu VII, 3 sqq. It is not necessary here to discuss 
details of reading and translation, in regard to which reference may be made to L6vi’s article 
and the notes in the edition by Professor Nobel, pp. 133-6. 

* As distinguished from ‘god by birth ‘god by purity ’, and ‘god by inborn purity*. 




DEVAPTJTRA 


315 


passage where Hsiian-tsang (Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World , I, 
pp. 13—7) discourses concerning the four rulers who, when there iB no paramount 
cakravartin king, jointly govern Jambu-dvipa; in the south the ‘lord of 
elephants ’ (gajapati) ; in the west the ‘ lord of treasures ’ ( ratnapati or dhanapati ) ; 
in the north the ‘lord of horses’ (ahapati)\ in the east the ‘lord of men’ 
(narapati). Hsiian-tsang does not expressly identify the four kingdoms; but 
from the particulars which he proceeds to add it is evident that he has in 
mind India (south), the Sasanian empire (west), the Hsiung-nu, Turks, etc., of 
Central Asia (north), and China (east) : the inference is confirmed beyond all 
doubt by a statement of a literary collaborator of Hsiian-tsang, who names 
India (south), Persia (west), the Hsiung-nu = Turks (north), and China (east) 
(Pelliot in Toung-pao , 1923, pp. 108-110, 125). 

In 1918 (J. As ., XI, xi, pp. 82-3, 159-160) IAvi mentions that the passage 
in question, with a further passage (concerning certain States in India), is not 
found in the sutra text as extant, but is given in a compilation of 516 A.D. 
as an. extract from the sutra. Professor Pelliot, in an article (‘La th6orie des 
quatre Fils de Ciel’, Toung-pao, 1923, pp. 97-125) devoted to this subject, 
suggests (p. 105) that the citation may be from a different, earlier (266 or 
281 A.D., p. 101) Chinese translation of the sutra, known to have existed, 
remarking that in any case the composition of the translation is singularly 
incoherent and confirms the suggestion of a Chinese catalogue of 594 A.D. to 
the effect that it consisted of extracts from a larger work. The passage, which 
in the Chinese version has', Professor Pelliot assures us (p. 105), transcription 
of an archaic type, certainly, by reason of the stock numbers, such as 84,000, 
and other features, represents an Indian original. 

In the theory three distinct elements can be recognized, namely: (1) the 
doctrine of four great States situated at the four cardinal points of the compass ; 
(2) the distinctive characteristics of the four great States; (3) the identifica- 
tion of the States with existing great powers. As regards No. 2, Professor 
Pelliot has shown (pp. 111-6) that the notion of a division of India (not the 
world), after the time of the great legendary sovereigns, between three 
successions of kings, ‘lords of horses’ (aivapati), ‘lords of elephants’ (gajapati), 
‘lords of men’ (narapati), or four, when we add the ‘lords of parasols’ (chaitra- 
pati), is a late popular notion, not found in the literature. Every Indianist 
will subscribe to this view. But Pelliot proceeds (pp. 116-9) to show that 
some such notion, with Iran as the land of wealth, India of elephants, China 
of men, and the Turks of ‘fierce beasts ’ (instead of ‘ horses ’), was communicated 
in the ninth century A.D. by a Chinese emperor to an Arab traveller. 1 At a 
date much more remote, namely c. 245-250 A.D., a Chinese ambassador to 
Fu-nan, a State in Indo-Chiha partly corresponding to the later Cambodia, 
reported that in the foreign countries there was a saying that under heaven 
there were three abundances, abundance of men in China, abundance of gems 


i Pelliot refers to the translation of the ‘Voyage of the Arabic Merchant Sulayman\ by 
M. Ferrand, who has further written in BSOS., VI, pp. 329-338, on this subject. 



316 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


in Ta-ts’in (the Greco-Roman east), abundance of horses among the Yueh-chih 
(pp. 121-3). Pelliot plausibly suggests that the saying, obviously not of 
Chinese origin and partly corresponding, though without mention of the 
cardinal points, to the extract from the Buddhist sutra , arose in India, which, 
as the point of observation, would naturally omit to name itself as the fourth. 

Prom an Indianist point of view this suggestion invites consideration both 
in respect of the substance of the saying and in respect of its terms. The 
general criticism that no such saying is known in Indian literature may be 
put aside on the ground that it was a popular dictum, evoked by the active 
commercial intercourse of the early centuries A.D., which in later India lapsed 
into oblivion, and that it did indeed find its way into a Buddhist sutra . But it is 
not easy to see how Indians should have come to regard the Greco-Roman 
west as the land of gems instead of as a land which had much wealth for 
purchase of Indian gems : 1 it is still harder to ascribe to populous India the 
notion of China, of which the Indians knew very little, as abounding in men; 
that the Yueh-chih country was a land specially of horses, which is not known 
to be a fact and is not indicated by the Kusana coinage, may indeed have been 
inferred from incidents such as that of the four Yueh-chih horses brought 
to Fu-nan, as reported by the above-mentioned Chinese ambassador, by 
an envoy of an Indian king. Possibly the repute of the Yueh-chih in regard 
to horses may have accrued to them as representatives of northern Asia, which 
with good reason, considering the horsed Hsiung-nu and later nomads, may 
have been very widely famed in that respect: the Yueh-chih horses may, 
in fact, have been transmitted from Farghana, with its choioe breed which 
at the beginning of the first century B.C. provoked a Chinese conquest of the 
country. We do not therefore find in the substance of the saying anything 
pointing to India in particular as the source : and, if we proceed to include 
India as the ‘land of elephants’, we have a notion quite natural in outsiders, 
such as the Greeks and the Baktrian informants of Chang Ch’ien, 1 but not 
found in India itself. On these grounds it seems preferable to attribute the 
saying to the ‘foreign kingdoms’ whence it was reported and to understand 
primarily the countries of Indo-China and Malaisia, where the active trade 
communications, illuminated by the researches of Sylvain L ivi and Professor 
Pelliot, may have given birth to it. In those countries China may indeed 
have been conceived as a land of vast population, and the omission of the old 
fa m ilia r heighbour, India, may have been almost as natural in the States of 
Indianized culture as in India itself. 

The terminology also is provoking: what Indian terms are represented by 
‘China*, Ta-ts’in, ‘Yueh-chih’ ? Are we to understand Cina (no doubt, quite 
justifiable), Tavana (or Romaka) and Tukhdra ? The last-named is, in fact, 
known to have been rendered into Chinese by Y&eh-cMh * and Yavana (or 

1 Perhaps the notion really came from China, where it appears as early as in the Later Han 
Annals: see Chavannes’ translation in T'oung-poo, 1907, pp. 181-4. 

* See Hirth, op . cU. t p. 98; De Groot, op. cit ., II, p. 20. 

* L6vi, Jowrn. As,, IX, ix (1897), p. 10, n. 1. 



DEYAFTJTRA 


317 


Romaka) is possible enough. The application of advapati, ‘ lord of horses ’, and 
gajctpati , ‘lord of elephants’, primarily designations of functionaries, to rulers 
of States strong in cavalry and elephant squads is in itself quite reasonable 
and can, in fact, be instanced. 1 But that the Indians should have originated 
the use of the word narapati/ lord of men’, so common, as Pelliot has remarked 
(p. 115), in the general sense of ‘king’, as the appellation of the ruler of a 
particular State notable for its ‘men’, is not less improbable linguistically than 
is conceptually an Indian recognition of China as being such a State. We can 
think of only one way in which such a use can have arisen, namely if narapati 
in this sense was a translation of a foreign term, so that both the idea and the 
expression came from outside. As for devaputra , which, since the Yiieh-chih 
come into the question, must in the passage be the Indian term represented 
by the Chinese ‘Son of heaven’, the notion of a devaputra of India (Bharata- 
var§a ? Aryavarta ?), as distinct from the Yiieh-chih, is so unheard of that we 
may doubt whether it was ever put into Indian words, except in the sutra 
passage itself and in connection with the four-empire theory. 

As regards the location of the four States at the four cardinal points, it 
seems not insignificant that, while absent from the report of the Chinese 
envoy, it occurred, if it did certainly occur, in the approximately contemporary 
Buddhist sutra. Does it not seem as if the original saying, with its popular 
recognition of the three (or four) great States, had come to the knowledge of 
the much-travelled Buddhist pilgrims and propagandists and had by them 
been fitted into a pre-established framework ? The long prior existence of 
such a framework is, as we have seen, a fact: the system of the four ‘regents 
of the quarters ’ existed in the earliest period of Buddhism and was a permanent 
part of its cosmography and theology. And what was the common designation 
of the four regents ? The ‘ four great kings ’ {catur -maharaja). And what was 
the regular expression for their divine status ? They were ‘sons of gods’ or 
‘of the god class’ (devaputra). Thus the Buddhists, before contact with the 
saying concerning the three (or four) great existent States, were aware that 
each of the four cardinal points was ruled by a divine ‘great king’ (maharaja) 
who was a devaputra , the appellation which quite certainly stood in the Indian 
sutra, if authentic, where the Chinese version has ‘son of heaven’ (t’ien-tzti), 
the Chinese imperial title. It seems impossible to suppose that this corre- 
spondence can have been absent from the consciousness of the author of the 
sutra. 

But there was also a further special link. One of the great States 
mentioned in the saying, namely that of the Yueh-ohih, was actually under a 
ruler respeotfully known as devaputra , and was associated with one of the 
cardinal points, namely the north. Here we seem to find the germ of the 
whole later theory of the four ‘sons of heaven’. It does not seem accidental 
that, in addition to the inclusion of the Yiieh-chih in the earliest known record 
of the theory, namely that extracted from the Buddhist sutra , another Chinese 


* Pelliot mentions (p. 114) the gcyapoti kings of Orissa. 



318 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


work of the third century A.D. (see Pelliot, p. 123 n.) states concerning the 
Yueh-chih independently that their king has the title ‘son of heaven’. Thus 
we are led to the conclusion that the theory of the ‘ four sons of heaven ’ resulted 
from conflation of an ancient doctrinal framework with a popular saying 
concerning three (or four) great States which in fact, by reason of their geo- 
graphical situation, readily adapted themselves to it, but that the link was 
supplied by the circumstance that one of the States had separately acquired 
for its head the designation ‘son of heaven’. The fact that in the sutra the 
Yiieh-chih are placed not, as by A6vaghosa, in the north, but in the north-west, 
which from the Indian point of view is more exact, seems to be a concession to 
actuality, indicating that the conflation, or the composition of the Buddhist 
sutra ) took place in India, not in some other region of the Buddhist world. 

The superior validity of the framework is seen in its persistence through 
the changes in the later selections of the representative States, selections 
adapted to the times. In the time of Hsiian-tsang, as we have seen, the 
Yiieh-chih had been replaced by the Turks, and the Greco-Boman world by 
Persia (the Sasanians). In the ninth century A.D. the Khalifate had pushed 
itself into the place of the Sasanians, regarded as the central power, while in 
another contemporary account it made itself a fifth, greatest of all (Pelliot, 
pp. 116-120). A more or less contemporary Tibetan version (Thomas, Tib. 
Literary Texts and Documents , I, p. 276) had the Turks in the north and the 
Tajiks (Perso-Arab world) in the west. 

The characteristics of the different States likewise undergo modification. 
In the Tibetan version the west is no longer the land of gems*, but, more 
sensibly, of wealth ; and this seems to be accepted by the two Arab accounts 
in respect of their country. China was evidently not content to rank simply 
as the ‘land of men’ and added a gloss, claiming the excellence of a peaceful, 
orderly State: the Tibetan version terms it the land of ‘wisdom’. 1 To the 
Tibetans, with their own great armies of mounted men, the north could not 
he distinctively the ‘land of horses’, and so the Turk country became the land 
of ‘arms’: to the Arabs it is the land of ‘fierce beasts’. Finally, India, the 
‘land of elephants’, is in the Arabic-Chinese account also the land of ‘wisdom’, 
whereas to the Tibetans it has become simply the land of ‘religion’. 

It appears, therefore, that about the middle of the third century A.D. 
it became for the first time known in China, from an Indo-Chinese source, 
that the Yiieh-chih rUlers had an appellation which, as rendered into Chinese, 
was verbally identical with the ancient Chinese imperial title ‘son of heaven’. 
The fact that the Chinese in all their Central-Asian intercourse with the Yiieh- 
chih had not previously heard of the appellation suffices in itself to prove that 
it was not one adopted by the Yiieh-chih in actual competition with the 
Chinese empire: it would, no doubt, be beside the mark to point out that 
the Chinese title has a meaning quite different from anything normally 
expressed by the Indian devaputra , ‘son of a god’ or ‘son of the gods’; but, 

1 Even in the Later Ban Annals of the Chinese (see Chavazmes in T'oung-pao , 1907, p. 218) 
this notion is expressed. 



DEVAPUTRA 


319 


as has been stated supra, there is no evidence to show that the term devaputra 
was ever, at any rate at an early period, adopted by the Yiieh-chih rulers as 
a title. The earliest available indication of its being even understood in the 
Indian and Greater-Indian world as a title seems in fact to be the report of 
the Chinese envoy, about the middle of the third century A.D., to Indo- 
China and the, perhaps approximately contemporary, version of an Indian 
Buddhist sutra. 

In India itself the term devaputra has never, except in reference to the 
Yiieh-chih, been used as an appellation of royalty: this may have been due 
in part to reaction from its application to foreign rulers ; but far more probably 
it was simply because to Indians the devaputra' s, as a particular class of divine 
beings, were the familiar connotation of the term and because, as an honorific 
appellation of kings, the term had long been forestalled by deva. Indo-China 
also, where the introduction of Indian culture probably antedated the Kusafta 
empire, had no devaputra. The Ceylon inscriptions and histories (Mahd- 
vamsa and Cula-vamsa) likewise ignore the term. As regards Chinese 
Turkestan, we have seen that the KharosthI documents of c. 200-300 A.D. 
apply the term, chiefly in datings, to the Shan-shan kings: in c. the eighth 
century its equivalent (jezdam-pura) in Professor Konow’s ‘new Saka dialect’ 
from Maralbashi (Berlin Academy Sitzungsberichte , 1935, pp. 772 sqq., see 
p. 818) occurs once, in a dating. Presumably there is here an imitation of 
Kusana India. From the other States, except Khotan, the evidence is too 
exiguous to justify any positive statement ; but the fact that from the Khotan 
records the application of the term to royalties is totally absent suggests that 
in Kuca also and other kingdoms the same may have been the case; if so, 
one reason may have been, as in India, familiarity with the expression ‘god-son ’ 
as denoting a particular class of divine beings : and this is supported by the 
above-noted occurrence of the term, in a Saka-Khotam rendering, with that 
signification. 

The application of the term ‘god-son’ to kinglets in Shan-shan and else- 
where in Chinese Turkestan may be regarded as in itself a proof that the 
term did not imply any competition with the great Chinese ‘son of heaven’: 
the signification in the two cases was entirely different, the devaputra' s being 
a class, numerous, whereas the ‘son of heaven ’ was essentially unique. 1 There 
is, however, one instance of late date, where such competition may be described 
as likely. In the eighth century A.D. the Tibetan rendering Lha-sras is 
applied to the famous Btsan-po Khri-Gtsug-ldehu-brtsan, whose queen was 
Chinese: in editing the documents (J.B.A.J3., 1927, p. 839; 1928, pp. 73, 74, 
87, 90) I regret to have overlooked the real significance and to have given as 
translation merely ‘prince’; there is no doubt that the Btsan-po himself is 
meant, and the expression oocurs similarly in Tibetan elsewhere. 2 At the time 

1 So L6vi in J . As., ccxxiv (1934), p. 18. The Suvarxuiprabhdaottama-sutra has a chapter (XV) 
entitled ‘The prophecy of the Ten Thousand Devaputra' b\ 

8 It is used as tendering of devaputra in the Tibetan version of the tSuvartiaprabhdsottama- 
sutra: see the extract printed by L6vi in Journal Asiatiqw , ccxxiv (1934), p. 7. 



320 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


the Tibetan power had in about a century of almost continuous war shown 
itself fully a match for that of China : the two ruling dynasties had an intimate 
mutual acquaintance, having been more than once associated by marriage. 
Hence a competitive claim on the part of Tibet is quite intelligible. ^But 
even here a doubt is not precluded. The Tibetan Buddhists were familiar 
with the term * god-son’ in their texts and in the Buddhist usage of Chinese 
Turkestan; and in their translations they had used the identical expression, 
Lhasras, so that they may have meant ‘god-son’ and not ‘son of heaven’: 
moreover, the doctrine of the divine descent of the Btsan-po 1 s was not only 
ancient in Tibet, but was also proclaimed formally on official occasions, as 
may be seen exemplified in the famous treaty inscriptions of Lha-sa (< J.R.A.S . , 
1909, pp. 923 sqq., esp. p. 949, 11. 17-20) and in the text edited in J.R.A.S . , 
1928, pp. 77-8, where the phrasing is, so to speak, stereotyped. Probably the 
doctrine is old indeed, being involved in the ancient Bon-po cosmology, with 
its two heavens and descents therefrom. It is therefore in its essence rather 
akin to the Chinese doctrine than dependent upon it ; but this does not preclude 
a rivalry of phrase with the Chinese or, on the other hand, an appropriation 
of something current in some State of Chinese Turkestan. 


SIR WILLIAM WATSON 

By 

Dr. Amaranatha Jha, M.A., Hon.D.Litt., F.R.S.L., Vice-Chancellor, 
Allahabad University 

The Victorians — poets and politicians and prophets — are, for all their 
solemnity and solidity the subject now of ridicule or at best of gentle superior 
criticism. They are so distant from the stern realities of today, it is said: 
ihey lived in such an attractive imaginary earthly paradise; they so ignored 
harsh truths and preferred to pin their faith to God in His heaven; their com- 
fortable belief in the federation of the world has been proved to be so false; 
their major problems, Free Trade and Protection, the education of women, the 
Tractarian movement, the Bulgarian atrocities, the War in Crimea, seem in 
the retrospect so petty; they were, in short, so Victorian that it seems, except 
for historical reasons, hardly worth while attending to them. But it is no use 
forgetting that today is the heir of yesterday, and, whether we like it or not, 
we are descended from the Victorians. Is it, however, quite clear that they 
have no intrinsic worth ? Are they not worth a study for their own sake ? 
Is there not in them largeness of utteranoe, nobleness of vision, healthiness of 
outlook, energy, power, grace and the other qualities that ensure permanence ? 
The robust humour of Dickens; the tragic intensity of Thomas Hardy; the 
moving eloquence of Newman; the clear, keen insight of Matthew Arnold; the 
encyclopaedic range of Tennyson’s interests; the psychological studies of 



SIR WILLIAM WATSON 


m 


Browning; Swinburne’s impassioned and elemental energy; William Morris’ 
dreams of tomorrow’s uprising to deeds that shall be sweet ; the tender lyrics 
of Christina Rossetti; the perfection of the prose style in Walter Pater; Yeats, 
whose melody never failed him — is one to ignore all this merely because it is 
Victorian? ‘Q’, a sure judge of literary excellence, a man of letters more 
than a more professor, says : 

‘After many months spent in close study of Victorian v^rse, I rise 
from the task in reverence and wonder not only at the mass of poetry 
written with ardour in these less-than-a-hundred years, but at the 
amount of it which is excellent, and the height of some of that excellence ; 
in some exultation too, as I step aside and — drawing difficult breath — 
gaze after the stream of young runners with their torches. * 

I maintain that at no period of English literary history has so much been pro- 
duced and so much of real excellence. They had defects, too, ‘thick’, in the 
words of Tennyson, ‘as dust in vacant chamber’; but under the dust, under 
the dead weight of contemporary rust, there is pure gold. 

It is of a late Victorian that I write in this paper. I have not cared to 
obtain knowledge of his life. I have contented myself with a study only of 
his published work. Sir William Watson is a writer whose work can be 
appraised without any reference to the circumstances of his career. I do 
not know if he was born in a well-to-do family ; if he went to a University ; 
what job ho had ; what, in legal phraseology, his ostensible means of living 
were; where he lived; whether he was married and had children. Nor is 
any of this information necessary in order to enjoy and criticize his literary 
work. 

Watson’s first volume ‘The Prince’s Quest’ was written in 1880 and his 
active literary career continued for half a century. His intense patriotism, 
his transparent sincerity, his manly outspokenness, his sense of the high 
dignity of the poetic muse, are characteristics that one can notice in all the 
stages of his career. One notices, too, the marvellous felicity of phrase — a little 
too polished, too faultless for lyric passion and energy, indicating rather 
thought, deliberation, criticism than abandon, liveliness and vivacity. There 
is eloquence and grace, and a uniformly high standard of finish. There is no 
trace anywhere of slovenliness or haste. The poet seems to have thought 
carefully over every phrase and every line and given to it a polish and a grace 
that may appear a little cold, a little too perfect, but that is a testimony to 
his skill as a verbal artist. Scattered all over his work are jewelled phrases, 
verbal gems such as : 

‘The mystery we make darker with a name.’ 

‘And little masters make a toy of song.’ 

‘Keats, on his lips the eternal rose of youth.’ 

‘The earth was all in tune, and you a note 
Of Nature’s happy chorus.* 

‘I have seen the morn one laugh of gold.’ 



322 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


*0 lives, that nameless come and noteless go/ 

'Who tilled not earth, save with the harrow of war/ 

But while he is obviously in love with words, he is no lover of many words. 
As he says in the ‘Preface* to ‘Poems, Brief and New’, he has studied 
brevity. He succeeds in packing many thoughts into a line and a whole 
landscape in a few phrases. His opinion on the subject is expressed in the 
lines: 

‘Since Life is rough, 

Sing smoothly, 0 Bard/ 

Many of Watson’s poems are distinctly literary, owing their inspiration 
to literature and men of letters, reminiscent of great passages, and yet 
characterized both by originality of expression and freshness of approach. In 
‘Wordsworth’s Grave*, written in the eighties, we have for the first time an 
endeavour to combine elegiac emotion with penetrative criticism. In one 
stanza he distinguishes Wordsworth from other masters : 

‘Not Milton’s keen, translunar music thine; 

Not Shakespeare’s cloudless boundless human view; 

Not Shelley’s flush of rose on peaks divine; 

Nor yet the wizard twilight Coleridge knew.’ 

He goes into the heart of Wordsworth’s poetry when he says : 

‘Thou hadst for weary feet, the gift of rest.* 

In the same volume he refers to ‘ the frugal note of Gray *, surely a more 
fit phrase than Matthew Arnold’s — ‘ He never spoke out ’ . And how exquisitely 
he describes Burns : 

‘On life’s broad plain the ploughman’s conquering share 
Upturned the fallow lands of truth anew.’ 

This is how he sums up the main features of the poetry of the eighteenth 
century : 

‘Thenceforth she but festooned the porch of things * 

— external decoration, touching but the outer surface of life, not plumbing the 
deeps, playing but on the porch, never venturing to enter the heart. 

On Shelley *8 Centenary in 1892, he described ‘the ineffectual angel* as 
‘A singer, who, if errors blurred 

His sight, had yet a spirit stirred 
By vast desire, 

And ardour fledging the swift word 
With plumes of fire.* 

On the death of Tennyson he wrote ‘Lachrym® Musarum*, the poem 
by which perhaps Watson is best known. Obviously he took as his model 
Tennyson*s Wellington Ode, but the poem is unquestionably a noble and 
sincere tribute from a young poet to the most picturesque and melodious singer 
who had dominated literature and stirred the popular imaginati on for over 

2XB 



SIB WILLIAM WATSON 


323 


half a century. He laments that the life that seemed a perfect song is o'er; 
he mourns for the singer of undying songs is dead. 

‘For us, the autumn glow, the autumn flame, 

And soon the winter silence shall be ours. 

Him the eternal spring of fadeless fame 
Crowns with no mortal flowers.' 

Here are two passages culled from different poems on Shelley : 

‘Who pre-eminently of men 
Seemed nourished upon starbeams and the stuff 
Of rainbows and the tempest, and the foam.’ 

‘ The hectic flamelike rose of verse, 

All colour and all odour and all bloom, 

Steeped in the moonlight, glutted with the sun.' 

Here is a sentence on Keats : 

‘ Great 

With somewhat of a glorious sunlessness.' 

In the poem entitled ‘In Laleham Churchyard’, where Matthew Arnold is 
buried, there is insufficient appreciation of his poetic achievement and 
inadequate criticism; but the following lines are a fair summing up of his 
main gifts : 

‘And nigh to where his bones abide, 

The Thames with its unruffled tide 
Seems like his genius typified, — 

Its strength, its grace, 

Its lucid gleam, its sober pride, 

Its tranquil peace.' 

Landor's ‘Hellenics’ he describes as 
. ‘ The bland Attic skies 

True-mirrored by an English well.' 

On Burns : 

‘A Shakespeare, flashing o’er the whole 
Of man's domain 

The splendour of his cloudless soul 
And perfect brain.' 

And again: 

‘He came when poets had forgot 
How rich and strange the human lot, 

How warm the tints of Life ; how hot 
Are Love and Hate ; 

And what makes Truth divine, and what 
Makes manhood great 



324 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


A dreamer of the common dreams, 

A fisher in familiar streams, 

He chased the transitory gleams 
That all pursue ; 

But on his lips the eternal themes 
Again were new. * 

There appeared in the 1893 edition of * Lachrym® Musarum ’ a bitter poem on 
Oscar Wilde, which Watson omitted from his ‘Collected Poems’. Here are 
four lines on him : 

* And as for us — to our disgrace ; 

Your stricture’s truth must be, conceded; 

Would any but a stupid race 

Have made the fuss about you we did ? ’ 

Another ungenerous poem appeared in the 1890 edition of ‘Wordsworth’s 
Grave ’ — an uncharitable attack on Ruskin : 

‘Yes, you have carried, we are well aware, 

Up to its highest point of cultivation, 

The art of talking nonsense with an air 
Of inspiration.’ 

The epigram has not had a prosperous career in England, particularly in 
verse. But Sir William Watson has written many excellent, pithy epigrams 
which have much of the effectiveness of those attributed to Martial. Indeed, 
one may look upon the epigram as Watson’s most successful lyric form. There 
is a large range of themes — and invariably the style is distinctive. He tried 
to follow the view which he expresses in one of his critical essays that ‘Passion 
plus self-restraint is the moral basis of the finest style’. Of the achievement 
of the poet he says, of the discovery of poetic beauty in unexpected places, 
of the communication of loveliness to unpromising material : 

‘ The Poet gathers fruit from every tree, 

Yea, grapes from thorns and figs from thistle he. 

Pluck’d by his hand, the barest weed that grows 
Towers to a lily, reddens to a rose.’ 

On ‘ The Three Kinds of Song ’ he expresses his partiality for the kind that 
supplies nourishment both to the spirit and the mind, that satisfies the 
intellect as well as the heart, that is both thoughtful and emotional: 

‘Song have I known that fed the soul, 

And song that was like a foaming bowl ; 

But the song that I account divine 
Is at once rare food and noble wine.’ 

There are some bitter lines on modernist verse and specially on its formlessness, 
its deliberate defiance of metrical laws, and the delight it takes in irregular 
patterns: 



SIB WILLIAM WATSON 


325 


‘I bought one day a book of rhyme— 

One long, fierce flout at tune and time ; 

Ragged and jagged by intent, 

As if each line were earthquake-rent.’ 

I may also draw attention to ‘A Recipe’ — or * hints on how to write poetry 
such as may please certain contemporary palates ’ : 

‘Let metre eternally jump, jolt, and lurch: 

For infinite crudeness make infinite search .... 

So beware lest a line inadvertently scan, 

And of course be as odd and as queer as you can .... 

And write in a fashion that makes men of sense, 

At the mere name of Poetry, haste to fly hence.’ 

Two epigrams more— both rather bitter in tone— may be quoted. The first is 
entitled, ‘Loves and Hates’: 

‘ I love the poet of cloudless ray ; 

Love, too, the folded, golden vapour; 

But hate the humbug who all day 

Serves up deliberate fog on paper.’ 

The other is addressed ‘To a Successful Man’ : 

‘Yes, titles, and emoluments, and place, 

All tell the world that you have won life’s race. 

But then, ’twas your good fortune not to start 
Handicapped with a conscience or a heart.’ 

A devoted disciple of Wordsworth’s, Watson learnt much from nature and 
specially celebrated the beauty of nature. There is no evidence that he learnt 
from it anything of moral evil and of good, nor that he road any philosophy in 
it. He is content to see and feel and drink in its beauteous sights and sounds 
and sometimes find in them a reflection of his mood and a picture of the life 
of man. The following quatrain best illustrates his nature-poetry : 

‘Spring, the low prelude of a lordlier song: 

Summer, a music without hint of death ; 

Autumn, a cadence lingeringly long : 

Winter, a pause;— the Minstrel— Year takes breath.’ 

Here are some pretty lines to April : 

‘April, April, 

Laugh thy girlish laughter, 

Then, the moment after, 

Weep thy girlish tears 1 
April, that mine ears 
Like a lover greetest, 

If I tell thee, sweetest, 

All my hopes and fears, 



326 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


April, April, 

Laugh thy golden laughter 
But, the moment after 
Weep thy golden tears ! ’ 

In another poem he speaks of Nature ‘who never negligently yet fashioned an 
April violet’ and ‘who suffers us pure form to see in a dead leaf’s anatomy’. 
The contrast between men and nature is brought out in the poem entitled 
‘The First Skylark of Spring ’ — evidently inspired by Shelley : 

‘ We sing of Life, with stormy breath 

That shakes the lute’s distemperedstring ; 

We sing of Love, and loveless Death 

Takes up the song we sing 

But I am fettered to the sod, 

And but forget my bonds an hour : 

In amplitude of dreams a god, 

A slave in dearth of power.’ 

The same contrast is expressed in an epigram : 

‘Toiling and yearning, ’tis man’s doom to see 
No perfect creature fashion’d of his hands. 

Insulted by a flower’s immaculacy, 

And mock’d at by the flawless stars he stands.’ 

In a different key is the poem ‘The Lark and the Thrush’ — reminiscent of 
Wordsworth’s ‘Lesser Celandine’ and ‘The Green Linnet ’ : 

‘0 from too far, and from too high, 

In too pure air above, 

Doth the great Rhapsodist of the sky 
Utter melodious love. 

Bird that from neighbouring tree does pour 
Songs of less heavenly birth, 

’Tis thine, thine, that can pierce me more, 

Sweet Rhapsodist of the Earth.’ 

Both Shelley and Wordsworth have their share in the fashioning of the poem 
entitled ‘Rejuvenescence’ — the ‘Immortality Ode’ and ‘The West Wind’ 
must have suggested the underlying thought: 

‘The Day is young, the Day is sweet, 

And light is her heart as the tread of her feet. 

The Day is weary, the Day is old : 

She has sunk into sleep through a tempest of gold. 

Sleep, tired Day ! Thou shalt rise made new, 

All splendour and wonder and odour and dew.’ 

I shall quote one more specimen of Watson’s nature-poetry, a vivid and 
powerful word-picture of a storm from the poem entitled ‘In the Midst of the 



SIR WILLIAM WATSON 


327 


'Many have sung of the terrors of the Storm; 

I will make me a song of its beauty, its graces of hue and form ; 

A song of the loveliness gotten of Power 
Born of Rage in her blackest hour, 

When never a wave repeats another, 

But each is unlike his own twin brother, 

Each is himself from base to crown, 

Himself alone as he clambers up, 

Himself alone as he crashes down ; — 

When the whole sky drinks of the sea’s mad cup 
And the ship is thrilled to her quivering core, 

But amidst her pitching, amidst her rolling, 

Amidst the clangour and boom and roar, 

Is a Spirit of Beauty all-controlling.’ 

Watson took at one time, quite early in his career, a lively interest in 
politics. He was no supporter of Jingoism. He was a firm believer in the value 
of freedom for all races and not only for England. He passionately denounced 
all those who stood in the way of other nations attaining freedom. Naturally 
verse written as part of current political polemics can have but a transitory 
interest and can hardly be of value once the ashes of controversy are 
cold. Watson did not raise any issues that are permanently engaging man’s 
attention ; this portion of his work is the one least likely to last. One of his 
collections, published in 1 897, is entitled ‘ The Year of Shame ’. He says : 
‘Never henceforth, 0 England, never more 
Prate thou of generous effort, righteous aim, 

Whose shame is that thou knowest not thy shame ! ’ 

In another poem, written * during estrangement’, he says ‘as architects of ruin 
we have no peers and 

‘ Redder from our red hoof-prints the wild rose 
Of freedom shall afresh hereafter spring.* 

In connection with the South African War, he says : 

‘Ah, not today is Nature on our side! 

In mountains and the rivers are our foe. 

And Nature with the heart of man allied 
Is hard to overthrow.’ 

In ‘ Harvest he says : 

‘A naked people in captivity; 

A land where Desolation hath her throne ; 

The wrath that is, the rage that is to be: 

Our fruits, whereby we are known,* 

And in ‘The True Imperialism ’ : 

‘Vain is your Science, vain your Art, 

Your triumphs and your glories vain, 

To feed the hunger of their heart 
And famine of their brain.* 



328 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


In ‘ Metamorphosis ’ : 

* Shouting her own applause, if haply so 
She may shout down the hisses of the world.* 

But this mood did not last long. In the ‘Ode on the Coronation of King 
Edward VII *, he says ; 

‘ Proudly, as fits a nation that hath now 
So many dawns and sunsets on her brow, 

This duteous heart we bring,* 

Naturally, scattered over the pages of Watson’s several books, are many 
pieces that deal with weightier matter, have a considerable ballast of thought 
and meditation, and touch the depths of life. There is no obligation for a 
lyric poet to be a philosopher. Indeed, should he lose himself in the mazes 
of divine philosophy, however charming it might be, the less poet he ! But 
the best poetry is a combination of thought and fancy and melody. If we 
read Watson with care, we shall find him frequently expressing a mood of 
discontent with things as they are, of deep dissatisfaction with the hard 
terms of human life, of despair that one must fret one’s soul ‘ with crosses and 
with cares It is not the ‘ pale contented sort of discontent ’ of which Keats 
speaks in ‘Lamia ’. The following lines express the prevailing mood : 

‘Man only, irked by calm, and rent 
By each emotion’s throes, 

Neither in passion finds content, 

Nor finds it in repose.’ 

In another poem he states the same uncertainty about the nature of existence 
on earth : 

‘On from room to room I stray, 

Yet my Host can ne’er espy, 

And I know not to this day 

Whether guest or captive I.’ 

The concluding stanza of the poem entitled ‘The Hope of the World* is in the 
same strain : 

‘Here, where perhaps alone 
I conquer or I fail. 

Here, o’er the dark Deep blown, 

I ask no perfumed gale; 

I ask the unpampering breath 
That fits me to endure 
Chance, and victorious Death, 

Live, and my doom obscure, 

Who know not whence I am sped, nor to what port I sail.* 

That some sorrow is inevitable and that luck consists in the n um ber of errors 
one can avoid is the theme of the lines ‘ To a Friend * : 



SIR WILLIAM WATSON 


329 


‘For they are blest that have not much to rue — 

That have not oft mis -heard the prompter’s cue, 

Stammered and stumbled and the wrong parts played 
And life a Tragedy of Errors made.’ 

The glory of the past and the brightness of the hope for the future sustains 
man’s faith : 

‘And I count him wise, 

Who loves so well Man’s noble memories 
He needs must love Man’s nobler hopes yet more.’ 

That is an expression of the nineteenth century creed of Progress which, in 
‘A Death in the Desert’, Browning says, is — 

‘Man’s distinctive mark alone, 

Not God’s, and not the beasts’ ; God is, they are; 

Man partly is, and wholly hopes to be.’ 

John Morley, looking back in the evening of his days to the period when he 
also shared passionately in this faith, asserted that Progress stands for a 
working belief that the modern world will never consent to do without. In the 
poem entitled ‘The Dream of Man’, Watson also puts forward the view that 
struggle, effort, aspiration are what make life liveable. Man is shown in it 
as having conquered Death, but that gives him no satisfaction. Life without 
any necessity for conquest seems empty. At ‘his dreadful zenith’, he cries 
for help to God : 

‘ And Deity paused and hearkened, then turned to the undivine, 

Saying, “ 0 man, my Creature, thy lot was more blest than Mine. 

I taste not delight of seeking, nor the boon of longing know. 

There is but one joy transcendent, and I hoard it not but bestow. 

I heard it not nor have tasted, but freely I gave it to thee 
* The joy of most glorious striving, which dieth in victory.” ’ 

I have mentioned earlier some of the brief criticisms of some men of 
letters which Watson has put into verse ; a word may now be said of the volume 
which he called ‘Excursions in Criticism’, and which he described as ‘the 
prose recreations of a rhymer’. It was published in 1893. Two critical dicta 
deserve to be specially noted: ‘True criticism, when it approaches the work 

of the masters, can never be quite cool it is the critic’s business to feel, 

just as much as to see’. And, secondly, ‘There can be no doubt that Style is 
the great antiseptic in literature — the most powerful preventive against 
decay’. Two other short sentences may be quoted — this on Saintsbury — 
‘Mere ease of style often gets more credit than is its due. It is ease with 
power, or ease with splendour that is the valuable thing * ; and this on James 
Russell Lowell— ‘It is delightfully fresh and tonic, with a certain saline shrewd- 
ness in it, reminding us that it has come aoross the ocean*. 



330 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


elaborate passages will illustrate the quality of his critical judgments and 
specially the earnestness which mark them . Writing of Burns, he says : 

‘All Burns’s qualities are on the great scale. Look at his humour. 
This laughter is no crackling of thorns under a pot, but a sheer blazing 
and roaring of piled-up faggots of fun. It is the very riot and revelry 
of mirth; there is something demoniacal about this hilarity. Even the 
coarseness that goes with it hardly offends us, it is so manifestly and 
naturally of a piece with the utter licence and abandonment which this 
lord of literary nonsense has for the nonce decreed.’ 

This of Ibsen : 

‘ He shows us little but the ugliness of things ; the colour seems to 
fade out of the sunset, the perfume seems to perish from the rose, in his 
presence. But if power and impressiveness are their own justification, 
Ibsen is justified ; for whatever else he may or may not be, he is powerful, 
he is impressive. To those enthusiasts, however, who would place 
him on an equality with the greatest dramatists, sane and sober criticism 
can only reply : No; this narrow intensity of vision, this preoccupation 
with a part of existence, is never the note of the masters: they deal 
with life: he deals only with death-in-life. They treat of society; he 
treats only of the rottenness of society. Their subject is human nature 
—his, human disease.’ 

Watson does not attain the eminence of the masters. He has not their 
spontaneity, nor their breadth and depth. But as one who upheld the dignity 
of the muses and strove to serve them assiduously, as a skilled craftsman, he 
holds a high place. As he says himself : 

‘Not mine the rich and showering hand, that strews 
The facile largesse of a stintless muse. 

A fitful presence, seldom tarrying long, 

Capriciously she touches me to song — 

Then leaves me to lament her flight in vain, 

And wonder will she ever come again.’ 


THE HISTORY OF THE SRI VIJAYANARAYANA TEMPLE 
OF BELUR (MYSORE STATE) 

By 

Be. M. H. Kkishna, M.A., D.Litt. (Lond,), Director of Archaeology* Mysore, 
formerly Professor of History, Mysore University 

Belub is a small town now ; but eight hundred years ago it was the capital 
of a mighty empire ruled by a line of Yadava kings known as the Hoysalas. 
This dynasty was at first subordinate to the Chalukya Empire, but later on 
it became independent and ultimately controlled the destinies of even the 
Cholas and Pandyas in the far south of India. 



THE HISTORY OF THE SRI VIJAYANARAYANA TEMPLE OF BELUR 331 


Hoysala Structure 


The first ruler to break off from the Chalukyan yoke was king Vishnu- 

^ m , vardhana popularly known also as Bittiga or Bittideva 
The Temple ~~ 

and it was he who built the main temple of Kesava m 

Belur. The artistic greatness of this structure has all along been attracting 
;o the place crowds of visitors, both Indian and foreign. Students of art 
xiave never ceased to wonder at the grandeur of the structures, the charm of 
the sculptures, the variety of the ornamental details and the minute and 
delicate carvings of the pillars and panels, the doorways and ceilings. The 
successive friezes, rising one upon another, depict a series of decorative motifs, 
birds, animals or dancers, all full of life and vigour, with a bewildering variety 
of attitudes and movements. A valuable monograph has been prepared for 
publication, giving an exhaustive description of the temple, and its archi- 
tecture and sculptures, with numerous photographs and drawings. 

The inscriptions state that Vishnu vardhana built the temple in com- 
memoration of his victory against the Chola viceroy of 
Talkad, while tradition has it that he built the temple in 
token of his having been converted to Vaishnavism by the great teacher Rama- 
nujacharya, who had for a time migrated from the Chola country to the realm 
of the Hoysala king. From a detailed study of the structures, it looks very 
probable that he built only the star-shaped garbhagriha , the sukanasi and the 
cruciform navaranga. The large niches, friezes and sculptures on the outside, 
as also the beautifully designed inside pillars and ceilings, including three of 
the doorways, were carved in his time. The garbhagriha was surmounted 
by a high star-shaped tower of brick and mortar supported by wood-work 
and plated with gold-gilded copper sheets. Standing on a high platform on 
the top of a rising ground, the structure had a commanding appearance. 
The beautiful image of Kesava, called Vijayanarayana by the builder, was 
installed in the sanctum in 1117 A.D. 

At about the same time, Vishnuvardhana’s senior queen Santaladev!, 
though inclined to Jainism, did not fail to make her con- 
tribution. She got built the Chennigaraya temple, 
similar in form to the king’s temple, though less elaborate and less ornamental. 
The image of Chennigaraya installed by her is almost exactly like that of 
Kesava in the main temple, though smaller in size. It bears the votive 
inscription of the queen. 

Narasimha I, son and successor of Vishnuvardhana, made grants for the 
maintenance of the temple and the regular conduct of 
worship. The existence of his Durbar soene to the north 
of the mvaranga doorway indicates that he might have made some improve- 
ments in the temple. 

The next king Ballala II got constructed in 1175 a fine pond called 
Vasudevatirtha to the north-east of the temple and in 
1180 a low-roofed storehouse in the north-west comer 
of the compound. Among other works carried out during his reign may be 
mentioned the kitchen on the eARt-e™ «««« ^ 11 


Chennigaraya 


Narasimha I 


Ballala II 



332 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Vijayanagar 


with its two mahadvaras . The navaranga pavilion of the main temple, 
which up to now was open on all sides, was covered with perforated screens 
and the three entrances were provided with massive battened wooden doors. 
Supporting towers were erected on either side of each doorway, while in the 
interior of the temple the navaranga was separated from the sukanasi by the 
insertion of a beautifully carved potstone doorway. Further, in the com- 
pound of the temple, a shrine with charming sculptures like those at the 
Kedaresvara temple at Halebid was constructed for god Viranarayana. 

In the days of Vira Ballala III one of his officers, named Somayya 
Danayaka, got the central tower rebuilt with brick and wood. 

When the Tughlaks invaded the Dakhan, their officer Gangu Salar of 
Kalburgi laid siege to the temple and burnt its gateway. 
Shortly afterwards he founded the Bahamani dynasty. 

The Vijayanagar emperors spared no pains in preserving, as a matter of 
policy, all that was good and beautiful. In 1381 Kampaima, an officer of 
Harihara II, set up four granite pillars to support the cracked roof stones 
in the sukanasi of the main temple. In 1387 Malagarasa, another officer, 
replaced the broken kalasa with a rolled-gold one. In 1397 Gunda, a general 
under Harihara II, built the seven-storeyed gopura in place of the old maha- 
dvara which had been burnt and pulled down by Gangu Salar. During the 
succeeding years three important buildings, namely, the Saumyanayaki 
shrine, the large manlapa on the west and the Andal shrine wore put up 
behind the main temple; in their construction materials from the ruined 
Hoysala buildings at several places were freely used. A good part of the 
navaranga of the Ckennigaraya temple was also rebuilt during the Vijayanagar 
period, while a number of minor erections were done here and there in the 
compound of the temple, like the dipa-stambha, the uyyalc-mantapa , the 
yagasala and the Narasimha and Rama shrines. During the fifteenth cen- 
tury the materials of the ruined Siva and Jain temples were utilized for the 
construction of the Naganayakana mantapa right in front of the main temple. 
Naganayaka mentioned here was possibly an officer under Saluva Narasinga 
of Vijayanagar. The Tuluva emperors of Vijayanagar claimed the deity as 
their family god. Several repairs and minor constructions were undertaken 
and completed during the period of the Nayak chiefs of Belur. 

The work of the Mysore kings in Belur is seen ever since the beginning 
of the eighteenth century. A small kalyana mantapa on 
the north side of the temple was built in 1709. Another 
mantapa and a small pond were constructed in 1717. Venkata, a chief of 
Belur, who remade the tower of the main temple in 1736, was a vassal of 
Krishnaraja II of Mysore. But shortly afterwards the tower became damaged 
once again and was repaired by a certain Nanjayya, an officer under Krishna- 
raja II. In the eighties of the last century the vimana tower became so 
ruined that it had to be dismantled to save the main temple from collapsing. 
But the courtyard still remained overcrowded with ugly and highly dilapidated 
structures of later periods. 


Mysore Kings 



THE HISTORY OF THE SRI VIJAYANARAYANA TEMPLE OF BELTJR 


333 


On the recommendation of the Archaeological Department in 1929, the 
question of opening out the courtyard and renovating 
T *c oinmittee ° n the temple stage by stage was taken up by the Mysore 

Government, and the Belur Temple Renovation Com- 
mittee was formed in 1935 for carrying out the work systematically. All the 
ugly and dilapidated later structures like the Naganayakana mantapa were 
removed and the sculptures were cleared of age-old soot and wax. The 
ceiling of the sulcanasi , the north-east wall of the main temple and the sanctum 
of the Chennigaraya shrine were rebuilt, the buildings abutting the east, 
south and north ramparts were repaired, the compound was paved, new 
images of Ramanuja and Garuda replaced the damaged ones, a new car shed 
was built, the front of the temple was improved, olectric lighting was installed 
and a host of smaller repairs were carried out. The materials were obtained 
free locally. The Archaeological, Muzrai, Public Works and the Electrical 
Departments gave their supervision with little extra cost and the funds 
generously granted by Government from the Muzrai and State funds were 
utilized mainly for the workmen’s wages and other sundry expenses. The 
total work carried out is estimated at nearly five lakhs of rupees, while the 
actual expenses have amounted to only a little over one lakh. This conser- 
vation work and the scientific skill, zeal and co-operation, evinced by the 
various limbs of the Government of Mysore in carrying it out, have won the 
admiration of the Director-General of Archaeology in India and other dis- 
tinguished visitors. 

Thanks to the generosity of His late Highness Sri Krishnaraja Wadiyar 
IV and His Highness Sri Jayachamaraja Wadiyar 
H.H. The Maharaja g a j ia( j ur — ma y dy^gty endure for ever — the labours 

of the Renovation Committee have been rewarded by the preservation of one 
of the greatest treasure-houses of Indian art. The temple has been restored 
as nearly as possible to its original form. Only two major items of work 
now remain to be attended to: the mahadvara and the vimana. 

In commemoration of the work carried out during the enlightened rule 
of His late Highness Sri Krishnaraja Wadiyar IV and as a mark of His High- 
ness’ devotion to the deity and personal conservation 
of the temple, a statue in bronze of His late Highness 
was got prepared at the Chamarajendra Technical Institute, Mysore. It is 
now consecrated and installed at the temple along with the metallic statue 
which is traditionally identified with Vishnuvardhana, the builder of the 
temple. 

Following the ancient custom, a commemorative inscription in Kannada 
has also been set up, giving a very brief account of the 

Commemoration Tli * i 

history and conservation of the temple. 


Bhakta Vigraha 


Commemoration 



A NOTE ON PERSIAN, TURKISH AND ARABIC MSS. 

By 

Mr. Fazal Ahmad Khan, M.A. 

The Archaeological Department acquired a few years ago a unique 
collection of manuscripts of great historical value. This is the donation of 
Dr. B. C. Law, a well-known scholar and philanthropist of Calcutta. 

The most important of these manuscripts is a Turkish manuscript 
of the work of Mir Ali Slier Beg Nawai. Mir Ali Sher Beg was bom at 
Herat, and studied at Meshad and Samarkand. After having completed 
his studies he entered the service of Sultan Husain ibn Biqara, the ruler of 
Herat. Sultan Husain in recognition of his distinguished services, invested 
Mir Ali Sher with the dignity of Beg and appointed him governor of Asterbad. 
But Mir Ali Sher Beg was not content with this job and renounced the pro- 
fession of arms in favour of spiritual contemplation and literary leisure. 
Mir Ali Sher Beg was an excellent poet in the Persian as well as the Turkish 
language. His Diwan or collection of odes in the Chaghtai or pure Turkish 
under the poetical title of ‘Nawai’ amounts to ten thousand couplets, and he 
had left a noble monument of his learning and assiduity in his parody of 
Nizami’s five poems, containing nearly thirty thousand couplets which are 
universally admired. In the Persian language ‘Nawai’ wrote a Diwan, under 
the Takhallus or poetical title of Fani (Perishable). In Turkish poetry ‘Nawai ’ 
has no rival. The present manuscript which is entitled ‘Khamsa-i-Nawai’ 
comprises the following five poems : — 

(а) Sab-i-Sayyara, ‘The Seven Planets’, for Nizami’s ‘Seven Faces 

or Images’. 

(б) Haiyrat-ul-Abrar, ‘The String of Pearls’, for Nizami’s ‘Treasury 

of Secrets’. 

(c) Shirin Farhad, ‘The Loves of Farhad and Shirin’, for Nizami’s 

‘Khusrau and Shirin’. 

(d) Laila Majnun, ‘The Loves of Laila Majnun’ are both alike. 

(e) Aeena-i-Sikandri, ‘The Rampart of Alexander’, for Nizami’s History 

of Alexander. 

In three poems Mir Ali Sher Nawai has eulogized Maulana Jami and 
Sultan Husain. In the fourth he has eulogized Badi-Uzzaman, the Sultan’s 
son. In the fifth poem he has, after eulogizing the Sultan, given him advioe. 
Nawai dedicated this work to Sultan Husain ibn Baiqara, whose beautiful 
portrait in ink-drawing of extreme finish we see in the manuscript. 

On different folios of the manuscript there are royal seal impressions of 
Mughal emperors, and endorsements of Emperor Hamayun and Maulana Jami. 
Careful examination of the seal impressions has revealed that these impressions 
are doubtful. As for example, when we study the seal impression of Emperor 
Babur his father’s name comes out as Sultan Shikh Mirza, while whose real 
name was Umar Shaikh Mirza. Again in the same seal impression there is 



A NOTE ON PERSIAN, TURKISH AND ARABIC MSS. 335 

one letter which appears to have been misengraved as nothing can be made 
out of it. For the ‘ Great Seal’ of Akbar, the folio of a manuscript is not the 
proper place to be stamped. This seal which contains the names of Akbar 
and those of his ancestors up to Amir Timur, was stamped only on Kingly 
Farmans and letters to foreign kings. 

The engraver seems to have copied the impression of this Great Seal 
from same Akbari Farman. As regards the genuineness of the endorsements 
nothing can be said at this stage with certainty. The object of stamping 
forged seals on old manuscripts and paintings is simply to give historical value 
and importance to them, and after it becomes a problem to distinguish between 
the genuine and the forged ones. 

The present condition of this manuscript caused by bookworms gives 
some indication of its wanderings from place to place and from person to 
person, but since the later Mughal times when Turkish was hardly read by 
the courtiers in India, it is unlikely that it was much read or enjoyed. 

There is no colophon giving the date of its transcription. But on folio 
la, year 886 A.H. is written which is said to have been put down by Maulana 
Jami when writing the endorsement above this date. 

Another manuscript of great value and interest is the famous ‘Khamsa-i- 
Nizami’, 'Quintet’, or ‘Panj Ganj’, or ‘Five Treasures’, of Nizami of Ganjah, 
the celebrated romantic poet of Persia (A.D. 1140-1203). It took Nizami 
about thirty years (1165-98) to compose five poems and after his death when 
arranged together formed the Khamsa. 

The immortal poems were written at the solicitation of contemporary 
monarch s and princes. These poems not only contain mere love stories, but 
they ‘teach moral lessons of unaffected piety and true wisdom, and also depict 
the good and bad tendencies of the human mind, the struggles and passions 
of men’. 

The manuscript is in a much better condition than the Khamsa-i-Nawai. 
It is elegantly written in Nastaliq characters and lavishly illuminated with 
Persian paintings illustrating the text. The Persian artists took their subject 
from poetry and romance. The artist fused into his design the utmost ex- 
pressions in telling his story, and this fact is witnessed in these paintings. 
The paintings which are 11 in number represent the phase of Persian art 
before its maturity and introduction in India under the Mughal emperors. 
Human action and emotion remain the principal theme in these paintings. 

Seals of Mughal emperors and nobles such as Babur, Akbar, Abdur Rahim 
and Aurangzeb, are also to be seen, the last of which being those of Husain 
Quli Khan, and Syed Muizz Khan, nobles of the time of Emperor Muhammad 
Shah. The fate of these seal impressions appears to be the same, as those of 
the preig&us ones. 

There is a bit of controversy regarding the date of transcription of this 
manuscript. The first poem of the Khamsa is not dated, but the dates in other 
poems hardly correspond to each other. Colophon at the end of Khusraw 
and Shirin gives the date 855, the figure 8 is somewhat doubtful. Laila 



336 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Maj nun’s colophon bears the date 955, which appears to be later addition. 
At the end of fourth poem the date is given in letters and figures — 855, with 
the name of the month Jamadi-us-Sani, but the word Sani has been mis- 
spelled. The colophon of the last poem Sikander Namah has been damaged. 
The name of the month Jamadi-us-Sani and the unit and tenth of the date, 
viz. 55, are quite clear. So tho name Jamadi-us-Sani and the units and tenths 
of two poems, i.e. Haft Paikar and Sikander Namah correspond to each 
other. So we can infer the date of transcription of the manuscript as 855 A.H. 

Another Persian manuscript is the famous love story of Laila Majnun, 
an Eastern romance sometimes called the Persian Romeo and Juliet, and 
which is similar in some respect to Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso, and in imitation 
of Nizami’s well-known Masnawi of the same style, written by Maulana 
Abdullah Hatifi, nephew of the celebrated poet Jami. Among the numerous 
Persian poems on the love story of Laila Majnun, that of Maulana Hatifi seems 
to be the simplest and most pathetic. 

The present manuscript is believed to have been written in the time of 
Emperor Akbar. On the paintings in this manuscript we see the names of the 
painters who flourished during the reign of Akbar, such as Farukh the Qalmaq 
and Tara. 

The manuscript is in good condition. It is illustrated with 7 paintings 
relating to tho story, which are supposed to be the best specimens of Mughal 
art in India. It was during the reign of Akbar that Persian influence in 
Mughal art was apparent, and within no time a new style developed. Akbar 
tried to create an art that would bear comparison with that of his ancestors, 
and the Indian miniatures are thus translations of Persian originals. Bihzad’s 
paintings appealed much to the Indian taste. The artists of Akbar’s time 
have worked in the same style and it is difficult to find out the difference. 

The calligraphy is of a very high standard in Nastaliq characters. The 
borders of the paintingB are lavishly embellished in gold with the pictures of 
birds and animals. The name of the transcriber and the date are not given. 

There is another Persian manuscript named Nasihat-ul-Muluk written by 
Shaikh Sadi of Shiraz (A.D. 1175-1292), a celebrated Persian poet. Nasihat- 
ul-Muluk, which means, ‘Advice to Kings’, is a small tract and was written, 
as Shaikh Sadi states, in the beginning of the book at the request of a friend 
whom he addresses as his son. 

The manuscript is well written in Nastaliq style, which is of very high 
standard. The borders of the manuscript are beautifully decorated with gold 
floral designs. 

In the Delhi Fort Museum, there is an original Persian petition which 
was . presented to Emperor Shah Jahan. This petition was written and 
presented by Abdur Rashid Dailmi, better known as Aga Khan. He was a 
court calligraphist of Emperor Shah Jahan, as well as tutor of Prince Dara 
Shikoh. 

The calligraphy of the present manuscript resembles to a very great 
extent with the above-mentioned petition, and so we can safely conclude 



LILiTILAKA— A STUDY 


337 


that the manuscript was transcribed and presented by Abdur Rashid Dailmi 
to Emperor Shah Jahan. Moreover the portrait of Shah Jahan in the manu- 
script bears a very close similarity with the portrait of Shah Jahan in the 
petition. The last few pages of the manuscript are missing. 

Besides the Turkish and Persian manuscripts one is in Arabic. The 
manuscript contains the Arabic collection of traditions of the holy Prophet 
Muhammad (may peace be on him), with special reference to prayers, styled 
Hasn-i-Hasin, ‘The Strong Castle*. The prayers were compiled by Shafiite 
Shaikh Shamsuddin Abu Alkhair Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Ali bin 
Yusuf al’umari aldemishki alshirazi, known as ibn-aljazari who was bom in 
A.H. 751 (A.D. 1350) at Damascus and died at the age of eighty-two (A.D. 
1432). Aljazari completed this collection at Damascus in A.D. 1389, revised, 
partly enlarged, partly curtailed it in Shiraz and then it was sent by Maulana 
Najib Shafi to Ahmed Shah of Gujrat. 

The book is divided into six chapters. There are comprehensive expla- 
natory notes in Persian on the margins of the text. The calligraphy is of 
second rate in Naskh style. The first two pages of each chapter are lavishly 
decorated with gold and other colours. 

At the end of the manuscript there is an endorsement which indicates 
that the present manuscript was transcribed for one Mian Saif-uddin. The 
present condition is due to damage by worms and the total number of pages 
is 515. The name of the transcriber and the date are not given. 


LILATILAKA— A STUDY 
By 

Prof. K. Rama Pisharoti, M.A. 

LUatilaka is the oldest available treatise on Malayalam grammar and 
rhetoric and as such it occupies a unique place. It has attracted considerable 
attention among Malayali scholars and critics. The text is now available in 
two editions, the original edition of Sri A. K. Pisharody and the latest one of 
Sri K. V. Moosad; but the two editions do not reveal any material difference. 
There have also appeared a large number of papers, almost all of them in Ma- 
layalam, some discussing the date, others pointing out differences in reading 
and still others elaborating the grammar of the text. The importance of the 
text is our main excuse to add to the list of papers already existing on the 
text. 

The'author has quoted a large number of verses and these give us the names 
of over thirty heroines, who resolve themselves into two dozen Ndyikas, 
presumably from different works then popular in the land. These verses 
depict how the charms of feminine form ensnare, enslave and stupefy man, 
sometimes immersing him in bliss eostatic and sometimes steeping him in 
the throes of misery and despair, and thus indirectly sing the glories of perfect 
womanly beauty in their fullest and riohest sex-appeal. The obvious oon- 
22 



336 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Maj nun’s colophon bears the date 955, which appears to be later addition. 
At the end of fourth poem the date is given in letters and figures — 855, with 
the name of the month Jamadi-us-Sani, but the word Sani has been mis- 
spelled. The colophon of the last poem Sikander Namah has been damaged. 
The name of the month Jamadi-us-Sani and the unit and tenth of the date, 
viz. 55, are quite clear. So tho name Jamadi-us-Sani and the units and tenths 
of two poems, i.e. Haft Paikar and Sikander Namah correspond to each 
other. So we can infer the date of transcription of the manuscript as 855 A.H. 

Another Persian manuscript is the famous love story of Laila Majnun, 
an Eastern romance sometimes called the Persian Romeo and Juliet, and 
which is similar in some respect to Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso, and in imitation 
of Nizami’s well-known Masnawi of the same style, written by Maulana 
Abdullah Hatifi, nephew of the celebrated poet Jami. Among the numerous 
Persian poems on the love story of Laila Majnun, that of Maulana Hatifi seems 
to be the simplest and most pathetic. 

The present manuscript is believed to have been written in the time of 
Emperor Akbar. On the paintings in this manuscript we see the names of the 
painters who flourished during the reign of Akbar, such as Farukh the Qalmaq 
and Tara. 

The manuscript is in good condition. It is illustrated with 7 paintings 
relating to tho story, which are supposed to be the best specimens of Mughal 
art in India. It was during the reign of Akbar that Persian influence in 
Mughal art was apparent, and within no time a new style developed. Akbar 
tried to create an art that would bear comparison with that of his ancestors, 
and the Indian miniatures are thus translations of Persian originals. Bihzad’s 
paintings appealed much to the Indian taste. The artists of Akbar’s time 
have worked in the same style and it is difficult to find out the difference. 

The calligraphy is of a very high standard in Nastaliq characters. The 
borders of the paintingB are lavishly embellished in gold with the pictures of 
birds and animals. The name of the transcriber and the date are not given. 

There is another Persian manuscript named Nasihat-ul-Muluk written by 
Shaikh Sadi of Shiraz (A.D. 1175-1292), a celebrated Persian poet. Nasihat- 
ul-Muluk, which means, ‘Advice to Kings’, is a small tract and was written, 
as Shaikh Sadi states, in the beginning of the book at the request of a friend 
whom he addresses as his son. 

The manuscript is well written in Nastaliq style, which is of very high 
standard. The borders of the manuscript are beautifully decorated with gold 
floral designs. 

In the Delhi Fort Museum, there is an original Persian petition which 
was . presented to Emperor Shah Jahan. This petition was written and 
presented by Abdur Rashid Dailmi, better known as Aga Khan. He was a 
court calligraphist of Emperor Shah Jahan, as well as tutor of Prince Dara 
Shikoh. 

The calligraphy of the present manuscript resembles to a very great 
extent with the above-mentioned petition, and so we can safely conclude 



LtLXTILAKA — A STUDY 


339 


The citations in the text indioate originality of poetic conception as well. 
Evidences for instance the comparison of a lady’s calf to a bottle, her foot to 
a tortoise, her neck to a bottle, her cheeks adorned with sweat to a mirror set 
with pearls or Laksml adorned with drops of milk, as she rose out of the milk 
ooean, her speech to drops of milk, her laughter to a piece of milk in the beaks 
of a parrot, or a swan besmeared with honey or a pearl set in ruby, her com- 
plexion to the tendrils of a mango tree, etc. Compare again the quarrel of 
the varied organs of sense in the raptures of sensuous bliss or the description 
of a lady going to temple in wet clothes — a sight familiar with us even today, 
or the description of Spigara of the Sambhoga variety based upon what we 
may term free love, so characteristic of our land — a freedom which has igno- 
rantly been interpreted to mean nothing short of licentiousness. Thus the 
innovations introduced in the body naturally enough affected the spirit as 
well of our poetry. 

The heroes mentioned in the citations in the text are Goda Martanda 
Varma of Kolamba, Vlra Ravi Varma of Venad, and Vikrama Pandya and 
Pandyesa of the Pandyan kingdom. The first of these is described as a very 
generous ruler and great warrior. He had no issue to succeed him for a 
long time, but, at last towards the close of his life, an heir was bom 
to him, which event he signalized by lavish gifts to all. The last three 
are described as fighting successfully against the Turuskas. We leam also 
the Vikrama Pandya and the Pandyan king were not getting on happily 
together, that Vira Ravi Varma fought with the former, defeated and cap- 
tured him prisoner and then having made a present of him to the Pandyan 
king, mitigated the insult done him by marrying Vikrama’s daughter. 
These verses, then, treasure up for us the joint endeavours of Malayalis 
and Pandyans to oust Muslims from South India. And lastly, one of 
the verses, cited from KS., has preserved for us an ancient tradition that 
Kalidasa intended his MS. for his own wife, the sister of the great king 
Vikramaditya, and this lends support for the traditional view which associates 
'TLalidasa with the court of Vikramaditya. 

On the basis of the personalities, described in the citations, given in the 
text, an attempt may be made to fix up the age of the work. P&ndyan 
history tells us that Maravarman Kula4ekhara Deva had a co-regent, named 
Vikrama P&ndya, who died in 1290 A.D. and, sinoe then up till 1401 A.D., 
that history does not know of any Pandyan prinoe of this name. Could 
Vikrama, figuring in the citations here, be identified with the co-regent of 
Maravarman Kulafekhara Deva ? Such an identification would be an ana- 
chronisnf, since he is described as having fought the Muslims who came to 
South India only fourteen years after his death. Seoondly, Pandyan history, 
» so far ftibit is known, is silent, regarding the enmity between Maravarman 
and his oo-regent Vikrama; it is equally silent regarding a Vlra Ravi Varma 
of VeQ&d fighting against Vikrama and then defeating and capturing him 
prisoner and then the two again fighting together against the Muslims oh 
behalf of M&ravarman Kulafekhara. The stations in LT. should, therefore, 



340 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


be taken as giving us a new glimpse of Pai^dyan history which has yet to be 
looated historically. 

Some scholars have identified Vira Ravi Varma of Venad with Ravi 
Varma Kula&khara Deva of the Kupakas. We have elsewhere noticed the 
untenability of this identification. To summarize our arguments: In the 
first place, Ktipaka and Venad were distinctly different kingdoms during 
this period and continued to be so for centuries afterwards; and it is mani- 
festly absurd to identify the king of one kingdom with a king of another 
kingdom, purely because they happen to possess the same name. Secondly, 
there is no reference at all in any of Ravi Varma’s epigraphs that he ever 
fought Vikrama Pandya of the Pandyans — note Ravi Varma of the Kupakas 
came into limelight only after Vikrama Pandya ’s death — defeated him, 
took him prisoner and made a present of him to the Pandyan king or that he 
married his daughter: on the other hand, they tell us that he fought Vira 
Pfinfya and married Maravarman Kulasekhara’s daughter. Thirdly, we have 
no evidence at all, furnished either by his own inscriptions or by the accounts 
given by Muslim historians, that Ravi Varma ever fought the Muslims. And 
lastly, contemporaneously with Ravi Varma of the Kupakas, there were at 
least two kings of Vepad which epigraphy gives us, namely, Ravi Goda Varma 
and Aditya Varma. Hence Ravi Varma of the Kupakas cannot be identified 
with Ravi Varma of Ve$ad, mentioned in the verses cited in LT., despite 
the fact that the identity has been advanced and accepted by many scholars 
here and elsewhere; and, consequently, Vikrama Pandya cannot be identified 
with the prince of the same name who was the co-regent of Maravarman 
KulaSekhara nor with his illegitimate son, Vira Papfya Deva. 

The citation from US. found in LT. clearly indicates that the latter could 
not have been written earlier than 1350 A.D. We have, therefore, to find 
out a Vira Ravi Varma of Ven§4 and a Vikrama Pandya in the latter half of 
the fourteenth century who successfully fought the Muslims and drove them 
away from South India. We do find a Ravi Varma mentioned in the ancierii 
history of Vei^ad about 1400 A.D. and Prof. K. A. Sastry mentions a Vikrama 
Panfya, whose accession is plaoed about 1401 A.D. Since the citation in the 
text makes a distinction between Vikrama Pandya and a Pandye&i, the events 
connected with Vikrama Pandya must have taken place before 1401 A.D. 
Here, then, we get one limit of the age of the work ; and we know that Muslims 
were finally ousted from South India by 1375 A.D. 

This view is further borne out, it seems to us, by the very last of the 
citations given in LT. The author’s friends and relatives are all "dead one 
after another; there is nothing for which he should wish to live; he has him- 
self become old and infirm and, therefore, he admonishes his mind % devote 
itself to the contemplation of God. The poet thus describes himself as the 
last of a glorious band of scholar-poets who lived and wrote during those 
stirring times. If this interpretation is acceptable, then we may find a 
Kalivacaka in the expression CiUame occurring in the last pdda of the verse, 



LILiTILAKA — A STUDY 


341 


which gives the year 1391 A.D. in which case this will be additional support 
to the limit we have set down. 

Dr. Goda Varma of the University of Travancore has advanced the view 
that the author of LT. has in his elaboration of Alamkdras followed Nagesa 
Bhatta and, therefore, must be put down to the post-Nage£a period. But 
we might well raise the question whether or not we may argue the other way. 
In other words, could not Nagesa have borrowed from the author of LT. ? 
The author has shown himself quite a distinguished scholar as evidenced by 
his remarks on the linguistic features of Malayalam. That a Malayali scholar 
is not inoapable of original views in the field of Alamkdradastra has been 
amply proved by K L., written by Udayottunga, who lived more or less in 
the latter half of the fourteenth century. Hence we are constrained to 
observe that Dr. Goda Varma’s views need not be the last word as regards the 
latest limit of the author. As matters stand now, this has to be decided on 
the basis of what internal evidence we get from LT. The absenoe of all quo- 
tations from the medieval Malayalam literature, such as KG ., R-C., (717., N-C., 
etc., would indicate that the author must have lived and written his work 
before this period, that is, before the middle of the fifteenth century, and this 
view is only strengthened by the linguistic evidence, so carefully documented 
by my friend and colleague, Mr. L. V. R. Iyer. We might, therefore, conclude 
that LT. must have been produced some time after 1400 and before 1480 A.D., 
possibly the author heralding the dawn of that glorious band of scholar- 
poets, collectively known as Patinettarakkavikal , who graced the oourt of 
Calicut in the latter half of the fifteenth century. 

Select Bibliography 

1. Original Works— English— 

(i) Ancient Cochin: K. R. Pisharoti {AO.). 

(ii) Pandyan Kingdom: K. A. N. Sastry ( PK .). 

(iii) South India and her Mohamedan Rulers: S. K. Ayyangar {SI MR.). 

(iv) Vikrama the Great of Calicut: K. R. Pisharoti {VGC.). 

1 Original Works— Malayalam— 

(i) History of Malayalam Literature: N. Panikkar {HML.). 

(ii) Nammupe Dr&yalcalakal: K. R. Pisharoti {ND.). 

(iii) Vanjibirudu: K. R. Pisharoti {VB.). 

(iv) VijMnadipika : U. S. P. Iyer (PD.). 

(v) Qokiprdhhamm: Ed. K. R. Pisharoti {GP.). 

3. Sanskrit Texts— 

(i) Kaumudi on Locarn: Udayottunga {K-L.). 

(ii) IMStUakam : Ed. A. K. Pisharoti {LT.). 

(iity Mukundamdla: Ed. K. R. Pisharoti (Afilf,). 

(iv) MayUrasandeia: Udayottunga {MS.). 

(v) Subhadrddhanaiijaya : Kuladekhara {SD.). 

(yi)mB'ivavildsak&vya : Damodara {SK.). 

(vii) Tapatisamvaraxta : Kulafekhara {T8.). 

4. Malayalam Texts— 

(i) Bdnayudhacampu (B-0.). 

(ii) Candrotoava {CU.). 



342 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


(iii) Krqnagdtha: Cemssery {KG.). 

(iv) KokasandeSa ( KS .). 

(v) Naisadhacampu [N-C.). 

(vi) Rdmacarita ( RO .). 

(vii) Rdmdyanacampu ( R-0 .). 

(viii) Rdsakrda ( RK .). 

(ix) UnninUisandeAa (US.). 

(x) (UC-C.). 

5. Journals — 

(i) The Bulletin of the Sir Rama Varma Research Institute , Triohur (BSRVR1.). 

(ii) The New Indian Antiquary , Poona (NIA.). 

(iii) The Indian Historical Quarterly , Calcutta (IHQ.). 

(iv) The Maharaja's College Magazine , Emakulam (MCM.). 

(v) The Matfbhumi Weekly , Calicut (MW.). 

(vi) The Journal of Oriental Research , Madras ( JOR .). 


LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 

By 

Dr. S. P. Chatterjee, M.Sc., Ph.D., D.Litt., 

Department of Geography, Calcutta University 

I. Introduction 

The present paper embodies the results of a preliminary land utilization 
survey of the district carried out by the author with the assistance of his 
colleagues. A number of visits to different places were arranged to study 
the local conditions. Soil specimens collected by field-workers were sub- 
sequently analyzed in the soil laboratory of the department of geography, 
Calcutta University. The district lies on 26 one-inch sheets published by 
Survey of India, which were found to be indispensable in the study of the 
topographical features and drainage conditions of the district. 1 Agricultural . 
statistics published by Government of Bengal were verified in the field, and 
land utilization maps illustrating this paper were prepared on the basis of, 
those data. 2 

The origin of the district dates back to the fifties of the eighteenth century 
when the East India Company was striving to strengthen its position in the 
Gangetic delta. In 1757 they succeeded in acquiring about 9,000 sq. miles 
of area, that is to say, about one-sixth of the area of the present district, as a 
zamindari on payment of a fixed revenue. This area, including that of 
Calcutta granted to them by Nawab Zaffar Ali Khan was then divided into 
twenty-four parganas or revenue-units. 2 Sinoe then the district js known 
by the name of 24-Parganas, though it may be remembered that the greater 

1 79 B/2 to 79 B/ie, 79 C/1, 79 C/2, 79 C/5, 79 C/6, 79 C/9, 79 C/10, 79 C/13, 7{gW|A 79 F/l, 
79 G/l, 79 G/2. 

2 Final Report on the Survey and Settlement Operations in the district of 24-Parganas, 
1936. 

3 According to Rai Saheb Anil Chandra Lahiri 12 were entire parganas, 11 part parganas 
and one was not a pargane — Melund mahal or Salt mahal. 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 343 

part of the present district originally belonging to the neighbouring parganas 
of Nadia and Jessore was added subsequently 1 and that Calcutta was se- 
parated as an administrative convenience from the 24-Parganas in the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. 

The importance of the district mainly lies in its geographical position. 
It occupies the south-western part of the Ganges delta between 88° and 88° 64' 
East Longitude and 22° 32' and 22° 64' North Latitude through which run 
the principal routes from the sea to the densely populated Gangetic plains of 
Northern India. The district is about 36 miles wide in the north and twice 
as much wide in the south. It covers a total area of 4,866 square miles, of 
which about one-quarter is still clothed with dense virgin forests. The district 
has well-defined boundaries in three directions. To the south of the district 
lies the Bay of Bengal, into which enter the Hooghly and Raimangal rivers, 
forming the western and eastern boundaries respectively. The northern 
boundary of the district runs through a slightly raised tract, overlooking 
marshy areas on either side. The land boundaries do not mark off this 
district as a geographic unit, since the same type of relief and climate, and 
land utilization prevail in the bordering areas of the districts of Nadia, Jessore, 
Khulna, Hooghly, Howrah and Midnapore. 

II. Physiographic Background of Land Utilization 
Relief and Physiographic Divisions 

In a deltaic tract with a long coastline relief features cannot but be 
very gentle. The topography of 24-Parganas is not an exception to this 
rule, though minor topographical contrasts are noticeable throughout the 
district. Unfortunately a detailed contour map of the district is not available, 
but the few surface spot heights marked on appropriate one-inch sheets reveal 
the broad features of the landscape. The whole area consists of one vast 
plain, gently sloping seaward. It is, however, traversed by low ridges formed 
either of river deposits (natural levees) or of artificially built-up road and 
'railway embankments. Several embankments have also been constructed 
in recent years to protect low-lying arable lands from the invasion of saline 
water. The interfluve area in the north is invariably studded with shallow 
lakes, which are gradually silting up (see Figs. 1 and 2). The entire surface 
of the district including the embankments lies below the 30-foot contour. 

The highest surface spot height away from railway embankments is 
28 feet which was recorded at the village of Bira, about 12 miles to the west 
of Ichapur. The surface gradient in that part is almost imperceptible, less 
than fwo inches per mile. About 11 miles north-east of Bira in the neigh- 
bourhood of Berghom another spot height of 24 feet was reoorded .which 
reveal** looal subsidence northward. The Padma stream in a broad meander- 
ing curve ohanges its course from south to north and flows towards this sub- 
sided area. North of Calcutta we oome across the following features. Firstly, 


i In 1850 there were as many as 62 parganas according to Major Smythe. 



344 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 



Fig. i. The district of 24-Parganaa showing the distribution of population. 

[Note that the railways serve only the densely populated parts. There are very few towns 
outside the Upper Hooghly Plain. The Southern Plains are enclosed by a system of canals. Note 
also that the marsh lands prevail in the north, and that wide estuaries penetrate through the coast. 
The braided type of river occurs in the Sundarbans.] 

Marsh Lands : — ... 

A, Bariti bil. B, Nangla bil and a group of smaller lakes enclosed by the Padma. C, Bam dii. 
D, Calcutta Marshes. E, Bhubanpur bils. F, Panohilbaria bil. G, Padma bil. H, Payna 
and Sareng bils. 

Towns ; — 

1, Gobardanga. 2, Baduria. 3, Basirhat. 





LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 346 

along the Hooghly there is strip of high ground, bounded on the east roughly 
by the Bengal-Assam main railway line. This marginal plain slopes 
more steeply than the interior plains, and hence is better drained. As such, 
it has provided in the past excellent sites for human settlements, and now 
contains a dense population. This plain continues southward, and hence- 
'orth be referred to as the Upper Hooghly Plain. In the north this plain 
slopes eastwards as well facing marsh lands which in deeper parts contain 
perennial water. This low-lying tract may be named as Bariti marshes. 
In approaching Calcutta from the north by rail or road one comes across a 
part of the Bariti marshes first near the railway station of Kankinara. The 
surface spot heights, along the railway embankments bordering the marshy 
area on the west, indicate a southward slope of the surface at the rate of 
one foot per mile. 

Further east stands another strip of high ground extending eastward 
from the present course of the Sunti Nadi. From east to west it is about 
5 miles wide. Here the ground slopes westward. It may be named the 
Sunti Plain. 

East of the Sunti Plain another low-lying area of about 100 square miles 
occurs, which is almost enclosed by a broad meandering curve of a sluggish 
stream, here known as the Padma. Within this area are found a series of 
crescent shaped depressions almost parallel to the present stream, all being 
abandoned courses of the same river (see Fig. 2). The pattern of the alluvial 
lakes suggests that the area has suffered some local disturbances which led 
to the gradual westering of the river from a pivotal point, leaving behind 
part of its course at successive stages. This area may be designated as the 
Padma Plain. Further east lies a somewhat raised, ground, the Ichamati 
Plain, which slopes gently eastward. The Ichamati Plain overlooks in the 
east another marshy tract, locally known as the Balli bil, which was once 
connected with the Dantbhanga marshes lying further south. These plains 
and marshes extending from the foot of the Upper Hooghly Plain right up 
'tG'the eastern boundary of the district may be grouped together, and named 
as the Amdanga-Stirupnagar Plains. 

South of the northern plains stretches another group of plains, locally 
known as the Barasat-Basirhat Plains. The embankment of the Barasat- 
Basirhat Light Railway whioh runs through these plains from west to east 
forms a conspicuous feature of the landscape. The surface spot heights on 
the railway embankment range between 28 feet in the west and 23 feet in the 
east, but these heights are no indication of the general level of the country, 
which hafdly rises over 10 feet. A continuous belt of dry plains, without 
being interrupted by north-south running rivers or their silted-up channels 
*as in thytfiFth, enabled a railway and a metalled road to be built right across 
the country. In the southern margin of these plains occur marsh lands, of 
which the Bhubanpur marshes in the west are the deepest and contain water 
throughout the year (see Plate IVA). The low-lying tract in the east in- 
cluding the Padma bil is much shallower. 



346 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


The rich arable lands of the district comprising the southern plains occur 
to the south of Caloutta between the old and present courses of the Hooghly. 
The surfaoe spot heights along the Kalighat-Falta railway range from 12 feet 
in the south to 15 feet in the north. West of the railway embankment the 
ground level drops to some 3 feet, as indicated by the surface spot height at 
the Samalia Trigonometrical Station. The bank of the Hooghly immediately 
west of this low-lying plain is still lower by another 2 feet, as shown by the 
spot height at Brul. This area may be named as the Budge-Budge-Bishnupur 
Plain. The ground rises, however, further south in the neighbourhood of 
Diamond Harbour below the confluence of the Hooghly and the Damodar. 
The Damodar is the first important river to join the Hooghly in its lower 
reaches, and is partly responsible for raising the southern flood plains of the 
Hooghly higher than those of the north. The Rupnarayan river which enters 
into the Hooghly about 6 miles south of the first confluence supplemented 
the work of the other two rivers in raising the level of the flood plains. Most 
of the bench marks in these plains indicate a height of over 20 feet. These 
higher areas may be referred to as the Kulpi -Diamond Harbour-Falta Plains. 
Along the eastern border of the plains an old course of the Hooghly 
with high banks is still recognizable. The high banks had once provided 
better sites for settlement than the neighbouring low-lying areas. These 
may be named as the Baruipur-Jaynagar Plains. 

The rest of the district is included in the Sundarbans proper, and forms 
a vast swamp, lying at the mercy of sea-water. This may be divided into 
three parts based on the degree of land utilization — (1) the Northern Plains 
of the Sundarbans, (2) the Reclaimed Sundarbans, and (3) Sundarban Forests. 
The northern plains oi the Sundarbans have been settled so long ago that 
they retain very few traces of reclamation, except in the east. In these 
plains high village sites, so characteristic of the densely populated plains of 
the district, are few and far between. The western part of these plains, 
however, was settled much earlier than the eastern, and hence village sites 
much above the general level of the country concentrate more in the west. 
These plains may be divided further into three parts, the Hasnabad Plain 
in the east, the Harua Plain in middle and the Bhangar-Rajarhat Plain in the 
west. The famous Calcutta marshes, which occupy a saucer shaped depres- 
sion occur immediately to the west of the Bhangar-Rajarhat Plain. The 
characteristic features of reclamation, however, are clearly visible in the 
plains of Sagar and Kakdwip in the west, and those of Canning and Sandeskhali 
in the east. These reclaimed plains have been cleared of forest and put 
uijder the plough. 

The remaining part of the Sundarbans still awaits development. It % 
is heavily forested today, the reserved and protected forests covering an area 
of about 1,240 square miles, more than one-third of the total area of the 
district. A number of islands with rather steep edges, which represent the 
southern extension of the delta face have not yet been united with the main* 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 347 

land. They lie near the mouths of the Hooghly, Matla, and other Sunderban 
rivers. 

The Drainage and Reclamation of the Sundarbans 

The Hooghly and the Ichamati are the two important rivers of the distriot, 
forming its western and eastern boundaries respectively. But from the point 
of view of drainage the Hooghly is of very little use, especially in the north, 
as its catchment basin does not lie within this district due to human inter- 
ference. North of Calcutta several important drainage channels had, how- 
ever, been constructed in the past joining the interior with the Hooghly, but 
their mouths have, in most cases, been almost silted up. The Mathura bil 
in the north which still has some sort of connection with the Hooghly through 
the Bagher Khal illustrates this point. During the time of our visit we found 
it almost dead, and choked with a thick mantle of water-hyacinth floating 
on it. The same thing had happened to most of the streams which used to 
drain the Amdanga-Sarupnagar and Barasat-Basirhat Plains of 24-Parganas. 
The Sunti Nadi has become a mere shadow of its former size. It flows south- 
ward very sluggishly until it enters into the Bhubanpur marshes. Two other 
streams in this part of 24-Parganas have deteriorated considerably. They 
were named after the two mighty rivers of India — the Jumna and Padma, 
which suggest that they must have been once powerful rivers of this district. 
The field evidence such as the disproportionate width of the river bed compared 
to the river which flows through it, corroborates the above statement. Both 
of these streams used to flow southwards for a considerable distance before 
joining the Ichamati. In fact the Ichamati below Taki is still known by the 
name of Jamuna, though their confluence lies much higher up today. On 
entering the district it flows sluggishly eastward into the Ichamati, thus 
• rendering its former catchment basin completely water-logged. 

The Padma, though equally sluggish, drains a larger area. It flows first 
southward, and then in a broad meandering curve turns northward, joining 
the Ichamati a little below the Jamuna confluence. Its former course can be 
traoed by connecting a number of alluvial lakes, some of which are locally 
known as Padma bits. 

The silting up of these natural drainage channels has given rise to marsh 
lands in the northern part of the distriot, and rendered them agriculturally 
unproductive. Moreover, the water-hyaointh, an obnoxious weed interferes 
with the proper utilization of the sluggish streams, marshes and tanks as 
fisheries *(see Plates IIIA and VIB). The poor drainage is also responsible 
for the deterioration of the health of the rural population. 

^NML&hamati is the only important drainage ohannel in this portion of 
the distriot, though unfortunately it lies in the extreme east. Its effective- 
ness as a drainage and navigable channel can be considerably increased by 
straightening this river between Basirhat in south and Chanduria in the 
north. The river meanders between these two plaoes for 40 miles, throwing 



348 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 



Fio. 2. The district of 24-Parganas showing location of industries and market pla<^>i*^HncipaA 
roads and waterways. The location of the thanas of this district has also been shown. 

[Note that the industries are located mainly on the bank of the Hooghly from Calcutta north* 
yard. There are several mills also in the south of Calcutta as for as Budge-Budge. The pattern 
>f roads resembles that of railways. The three important east-west waterways are to be noted. 
Dhe Hooghly in the west and the Ichamati in the east traverse the whole length of the district from 
lorth to south and are navigable throughout the year. Barasat and Basirhat are the main nodal 
owns in the rural north.] 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 349 

a number of ox-bow lakes on its right bank, whereas the straight course will 
hardly be 18 miles. The Balli marshes drain into the Ichamati by means 
of a small drainage channel, which was constructed in the latter part of the 
nineteenth century, Of the marshes in this area, the Bariti bil in the west, 
the Nangla group biU in the middle and the Balli bil in the east form conspi- 
cuous features of the landscape. The deeper parts of these bils were found to 
occupy an area of about 63 square miles, which can be transformed into 
fisheries. The Bhubanpur group of bils, which is partially drained by the 
Harua Gang, occupies an area of another 16 square miles (see Plate IVA). In 
contrast with the northern marshes these contain salt water and are tidal. 

In the northern plains of the Sundarbans the drainage is equally defective. 

It is true that a large number of rivers and canals such as the Harua Gang 
or the Bidyadhari river, the Chaumuha Gang, etc. , flow through the eastern part 
of this region, that is to say, over the Harua and Hasnabad Plains, but their 
beds rise above the surrounding country. They have, consequently, been 
embanked to protect the low-lying cultivated fields from the invasion of salt- 
water whioh they carry, without making a proper arrangement for draining 
the interior. The eastern part of the region comprising the Plains of Bhangar 
and Rajarhat has no natural drainage channel excepting the Bidyadhari. 
A number of navigable canals like the Krishnapur canal, the Bhangar kata 
khal , the Bidyadhari khal run through these plains connecting Calcutta with 
its rich eastern hinterland. But none of these can serve as a drainage channel, 
as the level of water in those channels cannot be sufficiently lowered with a 
view to enabling the adjoining areas to be drained into them. Moreover, 
these canals are protected by embankments, about four feet high without 
having sluices, with the result that the natural drainage channels have been 
deprived of their catchment basin, and got silted up. The effect of the Krishna- 
pur canal on the Bidyadhari can be cited as an example. Since the con- 
struction of the canal the river has been deteriorating, so much so that a 
heavy shower of rains in Calcutta invariably floods the low-lying portions 
of the streets, the excess of water being unable to flow immediately into the 
Bidyadhari which serves as an outfall channel for the rainwater and sewage 
of the city (Plate IA). 

The three plains, which lie south of Calcutta, that is to say, the Budge- 
Budge-Bishnupur Plain, the Kulpi-Diamond Harbour-Falta Plain, and the 
Baruipur-Jaynagar Plain, are better drained than any other part of 24- 
Parganas. This has been achieved not by natural drainage channels, but by 
a number of channels constructed for this purpose. Of these the Magrahat 
drainageTscheme is the latest venture. The Charial khal drains a considerable 
part of the Budge-Budge-Bishnupur Plain, entering the Hooghly near Budge- 
~TTiir1flTfN Uin other plains in this region are drained mainly by the Kaora- 
pukur khal, Surjyapur khal and Magra khals, the waters of which enter the 
Hooghly through the main sluioe gate of Diamond Harbour. The Kulpi canal 
drains the Kulpi Plain, and joins the Hooghly near Kulpi. Along the eastern 
margin of these Southern Plains runs a dry river bed, which was formerly 



360 


B. O. LAW VOLUME 


occupied by the Hooghly. The westward movement of the Hooghly led to 
the water-logging of a considerable portion of these plains until the artificial 
channels mentioned above were excavated. 

The Sunderban area is intersected by a network of big tidal rivers, the 
estuaries of which penetrate far inland. Here the rivers flow not in a single 
channel, but in a multitude of anastomozing channels, which under normal 
conditions raise the level of the land through which they flow. Included 
within the coastline of 24-Parganas are the outfalls of the Hooghly with its 
distributary, the Baratola creek; the Saptamukhi; the Thakuran or Jamira; 
the Matla; the Gosaba; the Hariabhanga; and the Raimangal. These big 
rivers cover an area of about 300 square miles, that is to say, about one- 
quarter of the total surface of the Sunderbans, but fail to drain properly 
the area through which they flow due to premature reclamation of the lands. 
The Government did not foresee the danger of early reclamation of the Sun- 
derban lands, when they were leased out in large blocks to individuals. Since the 
whole of this land was below the high water level of spring tides, the reclamation 
work mainly consisted of the exclusion of tidal salt -waters. The fields were 
enclosed by embankments and the rivers were forced to remain within their 
channels by artificial banks. Even the smallest water inlets were carefully 
confined between high embankments. The inevitable result of this inter- 
ference with the natural channels was the gradual rise of the river beds above 
the general level of the country making the problems of drainage and of the 
maintenance of the embankments more and more difficult. The Matla, for 
example, now lies about 10 ft. above the general level of the surrounding 
low-lands, and may break through the embankments any moment, causing 
a devastating flood. Because of the rise of the thalweg, the depth of this river 
has also decreased considerably within the last fifty years. In some cases — 
the embankments once breached, were not repaired with the result that re- 
claimed arable land again reverted to marshy area. The Payna marsh which 
is partially drained by the Karati or Kuriabhanga can be quoted as an 
example. 

To sum up, the greater part of 24-Parganas is poorly drained, giving 
rise to marsh lands, though Nature has endowed the district with big rivers 
capable of draining it most efficiently. 

Soils of 24-Parganas 

The soils of the district are derived mainly from sands, silts and clays 
deposited by the rivers partly under water and partly on flood-plains. The 
peat bed, which occurs at a depth ranging between 20 and 30 feet in the 
neighbourhood of Calcutta, whenever comes nearer the surface njnipwmtri 
butes to the formation of certain soils. 

Table I shows the results of mechanical analysis of soil samples taken 
from different localities, and an attempt has been made to prepare a soil map 
based on those data (see Fig. 9). A more detailed study of these soils in .the 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 


351 




362 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


field and laboratory will, however, reveal their true character. On account 
of insufficient data we could not correlate each of the important crops of this 
district with an optimum pH value. 

Generally speaking, fine sands or sandy loams predominate in the Northern 
Plains. Such soils contain over 60 per oent of fine sand, from 20 to 40 per cent 
of silt and clay, and about 4 per oent of organio matter. The pH value of these 
soils is 6-5, the lowest in the district. These soils are porous owing to the 
high percentage of sand, and hence not suitable for aman paddy which needs 
standing water in the field for its proper growth. Such soils are, however, 
quite suitable for growing aus paddy, jute, potatoes and green vegetables. 

The banks of the Hooghly and Iohamati, that is to say, the Upper Hooghly 
Plain in the west and the Ichamati, Basirhat, and Hasnabad Plains in the 
east consist of loams or silt loams. The Southern Plains of the district in 
the neighbourhood of Diamond Harbour, Falta and Magrahat are also 
composed of these soils. Such soils have a dark grey appearance, and agri- 
culturally are the most important in 24-Parganas. They contain 60 per cent 
or more of silt, 21 per cent or less of clay, and from 15 to 20 per oent of sand. 
The percentage of organic matter varies considerably, from 3-5 to 9*5. The 
pH value amounts to 7, slightly higher than that of the northern sandy 
plains. On account of the high percentage of silt they are very retentive, 
and can nourish excellent crop of aman paddy. The percentage of organic 
matter in the silts of the Southern Plains is rather low, which indicates that 
these excellent soils could be made to give heavy yields with sufficient appli- 
cation of animal and other manures. The old bed of the Ganges in the Southern 
Plains contains a slightly different type of soil, the percentage of clay being 
higher than that of silt, and having also equal proportions of sand and clay. 
The pH value of this soil is the highest in the district. There are smaller 
patches of clay loam in the other silted up river beds. 

East of the Southern Plains occurs a big patch of typical clay loams, 
especially along the banks of the Matla. These contain about 30 per cent 
of clay and 44 per cent of silt. The percentage of sand is somewhat lower. 
The pH value is considerably low, perhaps due to the prevalence of marsh 
lands. 

Clay soils predominate in the marshy low-lying Plains of Bhangar and 
Harua, adjoining Calcutta, and near the mouth of the Hooghly in the neigh- 
bourhood of Kakdwip. These soils contain 30 to 60 per cent of clay, and 25 
per cent of fine sand. On account of the high percentage of clay they tend 
to become sticky when wet and hard when dry. They cause water-logging 
of the land, thereby hampering agricultural operations. In the 1 Bhangar 
and Harua Plains there are also patches of clay loam. The soils in the northern 
fringe of the Sundarbans are usually alkaline due to the infiltra^ioirlff salt> ' 
water through the porous mud embankments. 

In the undeveloped portion of the Sundarbans sandy soils predominate 
along the edges of the newly formed islands, and are almost incapable of 
growing crops. 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 353 


III. Climatic Influence on Land Utilization 
Agricultural Calendar 

Owing to its looation at the head of the Bay of Bengal the district of 
24-Parganas receives the full force of the S. W. monsoon. The climatic changes 
within the district, however small, exert some influence on the distribution 
of orops, but unfortunately a precise account of the variations of climate 
cannot be given for want of sufficient meteorological data. There are only 
two full-fledged meteorological stations, one at Alipore (Calcutta), the head- 
quarters of the district (class I type), and the other at the Sagar island near 
the mouth of the Hooghly (class II type). Besides Calcutta and Sagar there 
are eight rainfall recording stations. 1 The year in this district as elsewhere 
in Bengal is divided into four seasons based on temperature, rainfall, and 
atmospheric disturbances, a very mild dry winter, which hardly lasts for three 
months — December, January and February; an early summer with moderate 
rainfall and high temperature lasting from March to May; a late summer with 
heavy rainfall and high temperature, known as the rainy season, lasts from 
June to September; and a fine autumn with some rainfall prevailing in the 
two months — October and November (see Fig. 3). 



Fig. 3. Seasonal Distribution of 
Temperature and Rainfall, and 
Prevailing Directions of the 
Winds. 

W — Winter. 

S— Summer. 

R— Rainy. 

A — Autumn. 


The activities of the farmers of 24-Parganas follow the cyclic order of 
these four seasons. Aman (winter paddy), aus (summer and autumn paddy) 
and jute are the three important orops of this district. Of these, aman is 
by far tile most important. For growing it, the cultivators spend their early 
months (Chaitra and Baisakh) 1 in manuring their fields, and then 


i Of these three ere situated in the Upper Hooghly Plain (Berraokpore, Duxn Dum and 
Budge-Budge), two in the Barasat-Baairhait Plains (Baras&t and Basirhat), two in the Sundarbans 
(Gosabe and Port Oanning), and one in the Southern Plains (Diamond Harbour). 

t These are names of months aooordang to Bengali calendar. For their English equivalents 
see Pig. 4. 



364 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


wait for rains to come. They start ploughing with the first rains when the 
ground is softened and continue it at least for three times right in the midst 
of the rainy season. Harrowing, weeding and transplanting of seedlings are 
also done in the rainy season. Thus this is the busiest season for the farmers. 
Autumn is the slack season for them. The harvest starts in Agrahayan and 
continues for another month, when the farmers are busy again. They get 
another respite after the harvest, when threshing and other in-door work 
keep them engaged. 

Those who grow aus paddy, which is harvested in the rainy season, 
plough their land immediately before and after the harvest of aman paddy, 
when the soil remains moist. Manuring, another ploughing, harrowing and 
finally broadcasting of seeds take place in early summer. For growing jute, 
the early summer months are also the busiest time, though harvest of this 



Fig. 4. Agricultural Calendar of 24-Parganas and Monthly Distribution of Rainfall. 


For Main Crops : — 
P — Ploughing. 

M — Manuring. 

For Pulses ;■ — 


TR — Transplanting. 
H — Harrowing. 

Br — Broadcasting. 


W — Weeding. 

HR — Harvesting. 


H — Harvest of Musuri. Br — Broadcasting of Musuri in As win. 

K— Harvest of Khesari. Br— Broadcasting of Khes&ri in Agrahayan when Aman 

paddy iB ripe. 

Bengali months : — 

(1) Baisakh — mid. April to mid-May. (2) Joistha — mid-May to mid-June. (8) Ashar— mid- 
June to mid-July. (4) Broom — mid- J uly to mid- August. (5) Bhadra — mid-August to mid- 
September. (6) Attain — mid-September to mid-October. (7) K artick — mid-October to mid- 
November. (8) Agrakaym-- mid-November to mid-December. (0) Fous — mid-December to 
mid-January. <10) Magh — mid-J anuary to mid-February. (11) Falgoon — mid-February to 
mid-March. (12) Chaitra — mid-March to mid-April. 


«3» 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 


365 


crop occurs in the rainy season. The musuri is usually grown in rotation with 
aus paddy. It is sown broadcast in autumn (Aswin), and harvested in winter 
(Magh). The khesari is sown broadcast in an aman land in winter when the 
paddy is ripe (Agrahayan) and harvested in winter (Magh and Falgoon). The 
climate, therefore, determines the nature of the activities of the farmers of 
24-Parganas (see Fig. 4). Let us study in some detail the elements of climate 
of this district. 


Temperature 

Temperature is one of the most important elements of the climate of a 
region. Its influence on plant life is considerable. The average winter 
temperature in 24-Parganas is 68-2°F., but along the coast it is slightly higher, 
69*4°F. The average early summer temperature is 83*9°F. and it is slightly 
lower along the coast. In the late summer or the rainy season average 
temperature remains the same or even increases slightly in the coastal areas. 
With the advent of autumn the temperature decreases, the average ranging 
between 77-5°F. and 78-l°F. Since none of the seasonal temperatures falls 
below 68°F., plants are never deprived of heat, without which they cannot 
thrive. 

Table II shows the annual march of significant temperatures in the two 
stations. Those relating to Calcutta (Alipore) have also been shown graphi- 
cally in Fig. 6. In the annual march of temperature there are two maxima, 



Fio. 5. Annual March of Significant Temperatures at 
Calcutta (Alipore). 


one in April or May, and a subsidiary maximum in September, and one 
minimum in January. In 24-Parganas the warmest month therefore is 
April) except along the coast, where because of the marine influence, it is 



366 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTBICT OP 24-PABGANAS, BENGAL 357 


May; and the coldest month is January. The monthly maximum tem- 
peratures rise to 90°F. or more in at least four months every year in inland 
areas, and range between 77°F. and 90*3°F. The temperatures in the two 
typical winter months, December and January, remain about the same, 
79°F. (Calcutta) and 77°F. (Sagar). It is interesting to note that the monthly 
maximum temperature increases in September with the decrease of rainfall. 

The highest monthly temperatures recorded in 1938 showed the same 
trend, with the difference that the highest temperature in May was consi- 
derably lower than that of April, which had recorded an unusually high 
temperature, 107°F. that year. 

The monthly minimum air temperatures range between 54 1°F. and 78*3°F. 
in Calcutta, and between 58*7°F. and 81 • 1°F. at Sagar. The monthly minimum 
temperatures remain below 0O°F. in the three winter months, and near about 
78°F. for five months from May to September, during the growing season of 
aman paddy. The absolute lowest temperatures for 1938 were not far below 
the monthly minimum temperatures. In the rainy season the lowest tem- 
peratures did not fall below 77°F. The average monthly temperatures show 
an annual range of about 20°F. 

Wind and Storm 

Wind is a great benefactor of plants, as by bringing moisture from the 
oceans and other large bodies of water it keeps them alive. The normal 
directions of the surface winds in 24-Parganas are shown in Fig. 3. In 
winter winds from some northerly point are most frequent, but in summer the 
prevailing direction is south-westerly. The prevailing direction in the year 
as a whole is southerly or south-westerly. Since the Indian Ocean and the 
Bay of Bengal lie in that direction there is copious rainfall in the district. 

The annual march of wind velocity shows the minimum in winter, and 
‘with the advent of summer the velocity increases, the maximum occurring 
in April. The velocity of winds in coastal areas is considerably higher, in 
at least five months a year, ranging between 10 and 15 miles per hour. On 
over 100 occasions the velocity of winds dropped to nil in inland areas, whereas 
such calms prevailed only on 12 occasions in the coastal areas (see Fig. 3). 

Tabus III 

Annual March of Wind Velocity 

Stations Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sept. Oet. Nov. Dee. 

Calcutta . . 2 2-6 3*6 5 5 4-3 3-8 3 5 2-9 2*1 1-9 1*9 

Sagar .. ..3-2 6-3 9*3 15 12*5 11*6 14*6 14*2 7-9 5*5 5*1 5*2 

The daily march of wind velocity also shows some interesting features. 1 
[n winter Months when the monthly velocity is the minimum the hourly 
velocity remains below 1 mile for over 12 hours from 6 p.m. in the evening to 
a.m. in the following morning, and then the velocity begins to increase 


i India Weather Review, 19$$, fable VJH. 


358 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


until the maximum is reached between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., about 4 miles per 
hour. In the next hour the velocity decreases to 3 miles, and remains as such 
till 4 p.m. In April, the hottest month of the year, when the monthly velocity 
of winds is also the maximum, the maximum hourly velocity also occurs 
between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., 7 miles per hour. In the next hour the velocity 
decreases to 6 miles, and remains as such till 5 p.m. The velocity is 5 miles 
per hour from 5 p.m. to the midnight, and then begins to decrease steadily 
till 5 a.m. in the morning. 

As rainfall during the early summer results largely from Nor’westers, 
these local atmospheric disturbances are of great importance agriculturally. 
The Nor’ westers, locally known as Kal-Baisakhi, are sudden storms gathering 
in the evening from mid-April to mid-June which may be little more than 
thundershowers, but are sometimes little less than cyclones. 1 

Sunshine 

The amount of sunshine never decreases to such an extent as to affect 
the life of plants. The number of days with over 0 hours of bright sunshine 
is the minimum in July, 7 days, and the maximum in December, 31 days. 
Not for a single day in March and April the duration of bright sunshine falls 
below 6 hours in most years. 

Rainfall 

It has already been pointed out that the agricultural life in 24-Parganas 
is regulated to a large extent by the amount and the seasonal distribution 
of rainfall. The Bay of Bengal branch of S.W. monsoon is mainly res 
ponsible for heavy rains in summer. It is augmented by depressions 
and cyclonic storms which originate in the Bay of Bengal and blow over the 
district. 

Though the S.W. monsoon is usually expected to arrive by the middle 
of June, the date of arrival varies considerably in the individual years. In 
Calcutta the monsoon burst in the first week in 1941, in the second week in 
1939 and 1940, and in the third week in 1942, though the heaviest rainfall 
during 24 hours always occurred between 10th and 22nd of that month (see 
Pig. 6). The other parts of the district also receive the first monsoonal rains 
on different days. In 1939 the monsoon burst in the Sagar island on the 
11th with a downpour of 2 inches, and on the next three or four days there 
was much smaller rainfall, hardly exceeding 0*5 inch on any single day. It 
was clearly a cyclonic rain, bright and dry days preceding the arrival of the 
cyclonic wind. Further north in the Diamond Harbour Plain the monsoon 
burst one day earlier, and heavy rainfall continued for another two dayp^ the 
total amount being 4 inches. Unlike in the coastal tract, there *%re aHzzleT 
for three or four days before the arrival of the monsoon. The distribution 


1 Nor’ waiter* of Bengal, by S. B. Chattwjce, Cal. Qeo. Review, March 1944. 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 359 



Fig. 6. Arrival of S.W. Monsoon in June. [Heaviest rainfall is recorded after the 
middle of the month.] 

of the rainfall throughout the year in different parts of the district is shown 
in Table IV. Based on the average annual rainfall distribution a sketch 
map has also been prepared (see Fig. 8). The greater part of the district lies 
between 60 and 80 inohes isohyetal lines. 

Table IV shows the average monthly rainfall in the stations situated in 
different regions. 

In the Upper Hooghly Plain the average annual rainfall increases from 
north to south, by some 10 inohes. But in winter and early summer the 
northern part receives slightly more rain than the central and southern. 

„ In^h ^thrge typioal monsoonal months, June, July and August, the average 
monthly rainfall is over 10 inches, whereas in November, Deoember and 
January it is less than an inch. In September the rainfall is somewhat lower 
than that of the preceding month, but by October it has considerably de- 
creased. In February and Maroh, the average monthly rainfall is between 



900 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THU DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 301 

1 and 2 inohes everywhere. There is further increase in April, little over 

2 inches. In May the rainfall has more than doubled. 

The average annual rainfall in the Barasat-Basirhat Plains ranges be- 
tween 59 and 64 inches, the eastern side in the Ichamati valley receiving more 
rains than the western portion. Here the average monthly rainfall shows 
the same trend as in the Upper Hooghly Plain. 

In the Southern Plains the average annual rainfall is still higher, 67*44 
inches. There is a higher rainfall in each of the monsoonal months, the 
precipitation in winter (December) and in the hottest month (April) being > 
however, less than that of the Upper Hooghly Plain and Barasat-Basirhat 
Plains. 

The highest rainfall is received in the coastal areas of the Sunderbans, 
where four months have the average monthly rainfall of over 10 inches. But 
as in the Southern Plains the rainfall in April is considerably lower. 

Figure 7 shows the daily distribution of rainfall in the crop-growing 
season for two years, 1939 and 1940. A sharp variation in the amount of 



Fig. 7, Daily Distribution of Rainfall in the crop-growing season. 


rainfall from day to day is the most characteristic feature. It is seldom 
that heavy showers continue for more than a day. There was, however, 
one exception in 1939, when heavy showers continued for ten days without 
a break from July 26 to August 4, the heaviest (over 4 inches) occurring on 
daj. For the next ten days there was very little rainfall. The pre- 
cipitation in the year of deficient rainfall, especially if the monsoon arrives 
late, tends to oocur in heavier showers in the latter part of the rainy season. 

This type of rainfall with heavy showers alternating with rainless days, 
though helpful for ploughing fields and transplanting paddy seedlings, tends 




m 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


to water-log the land, making the drainage problem very difficult. Moreover, 
the problem of soil erosion also needs solution. 

Humidity 

The humidity of the atmosphere is another climatic element that has a 
direct relation to plant life. It is the relative humidity that determines 
whether the climate of a plaoe is physically moist or dry. 

Table V 

The Annual March of the Relative Humidity of the Atmosphere in 24-Pargana8 
Stations Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. 

Calcutta 89 84 81 79 78 84 87 88 87 86 82 83 

Sagar . . 90 86 83 81 81 84 87 89 87 86 86 87 

The mean monthly values of relative humidity as shown in Table V indicate 

that April and May are the driest months in 24-Parganas. With the advent 
of the rainy season the relative humidity increases considerably. It again 
decreases after the cessation or a considerable decrease of rainfall in October, 
thus relieving the inhabitants of the district from the oppressive heat. 

IV. The Pbessube of Population on Land 

24-Parganas ranks fourth in population among the districts of Bengal, 
but in area it is only the seventh largest district. The population of the 



(Note that am paddy i* grown mainly 
in the northern part, where rainfall i e 
deficient.) 






LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTBICT OF 24-PABGANA8, BENGAL 383 

district as recorded in 1941 census was 3,530,386. With this to be added the 
population of the city of Calcutta, 2,108,891, which will bring out the true 
intensity of the pressure of population on land. The total area of the district 
including that of Calcutta is about 3,730 sq. miles. Then the density of 
population comes out to be over 1,500 per sq. mile. For an agricultural 
area, where about 60 per cent of the working population earn their living 
directly from the soil, this density is undoubtedly very high and is primarily 
responsible for lowering the standard of living of the majority of population. 
The growth of population in this district was found to be more rapid than 
that of Bengal as a whole in every census year, which may be taken to mean 
that conditions have had been more favourable for agriculture and manufac- 
turing in 24-Parganas than most of the other districts of Bengal (Table VI). 

/ 

Table VI 

The Growth of Population in 24-Parganas and Calcutta as compared to that of Bengal as a whole 

Total Percentage of increase 

Population 

1941 1931-41 1921-31 1911-21 1901-11 1891-1901 1881-91 


Bengal . . 

01,460,377 

20*3 

73 

2-7 

7-9 

7-7 

7-5 

24-Parganas 

3,536,386 

28*7 

10-3 

7-4 

15-5 

9-6 

140 

Calcutta . . 

2,108,891 

81-2 

11*2 

32 

9-9 

23*8 

6*4 


Since 1921 the rate of growth of population in the city of Calcutta was higher 
than that of the district as a whole. In the earlier decades between 1891 
and 1901 a similar higher rate of growth was noticeable in the city. 



Flo. 10. Distribution of 'Arable Land Fl0 ' u - Dffluit y of Population V* 

under the Plough. (Percentages of crops square mile of cultivated area. 


in the total are of each thana.) 




584 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Figure 1 shows the distribution of population in the district: There are 
three zones of dense population. Of these the one along the bank of the 
Hooghly from Halisahar to Budge-Budge is the densest. It contains about 
one-third of the total population of the district, excluding the population 
of Calcutta. If we inolude the population of the city, this zone will be found 
to contain over 55 per oent of the total population. This extreme concentra- 
tion of population in the Upper Hooghly Plain is due to the emphasis on manu- 
facturing and trade. The density of population is over 4,000 per square mile. 



Fio. 12. Acreage for Holding. 



yet brought under the Plough. (Percent- 
ages of total area in each thana.) 


The second zone of dense population occurs south of Calcutta in the 
Southern Plains. It covers an area of about 800 sq. miles and is roughly circular 
in outline. This area contains about one-quarter of the total population of 
the district, the density of population per square mile being 1,500. The 
third zone with a density little over 1,000 extends from west to east between 
the Hooghly and Ichamati rivers covering the whole of the Barasat-Basirhat 
Plains. It oontains another one-tenth of the total population. Of the 
thinly populated areas, the Plains of Amdanga-Sarupnagar contain about 
700 persons per square mile. The reclaimed belt of the Sundarbans bor- 
dering the forested area, and extending from south-west to north-east, contains 
some 20 per cent of the population, though the density is the lowest. The 
area lying farther north which was reclaimed earlier oontains morejrdiHIB* 
population. The Sundarban forest proper occupies the south-eastern part 
of the district, and covers an area of over 1,000 sq. miles. The whole of these 
forests has been reserved and protected by Government, and hence no human 
settlement could grow there. 








LAND UTILIZATION IN THB DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 365 

The settlement patterns indicate the nature of land utilization. The 
linear pattern is very much pronounced along the bank of the Hooghly, 
where truck gardening is the main agricultural pursuit. A similar linear 
arrangement in the Baruipur-Jaynagar Plain is noticeable from Calcutta 
southward. The settlement here grew on the banks of the Hooghly, which 
was flowing then through this region. This area sends large quantities of 
vegetables and fruits to Calcutta markets. Further east in the agricultural 
zone proper the bulk of the population is found in large compact villages, 
spaced evenly all over the area. Even here the linear arrangement persists 
in some parts. In the reclaimed Sundarbans especially bordering the forests 
the population is very much dispersed, where compact villages have not yet 
been formed. 

In the northern part of the district the population is somewhat scattered, 
though the general tendency is to keep to the linear pattern. 

V. Manufacturing, Trade and Transport in relation to Land 

Utilization 

Manufacturing 

Table VTJ 

Degree of Industrialization in 24-Parganas 


Type. 

1. Important Industrie ! — 

Number of mills 

Number of workers 

Percentage 

Bengal 

24-Parganas 

Bengal 

24-Parganas 

of total 
workers 

J ute Mills including jute 

presses . . 

Cotton Mills including 
cotton presses and 

120 

80 

307,306 

186,041 

60 

hosieries 

• Paper Mills including 

71 

27 

32,716 

12,069 

37 

paper pulp industry 

4 

3 

6,917 

4,161 

70 

2. Agricultural Industries— 

Rice Mills 

3S1 

116 

16,690 

6,091 

36 

Flour Mills 

10 

6 

1,617 

619 

40 

Sugar Mills 

Oil Mills including 

11 

l 

3,184 

120 

4 

presses . . 

30 

6 

2,000 

497 

20 

Bakeries . . 6 6 

3. Industries using animal products as raw materials — 

1,066 

1,031 

99 

Silk Factories 

6 

6 

1,176 

1,118 

95 

Lac Factories 
♦Leather and Shoe 

6 

6 

892 

892 

100 

^ ^Factories 

2 

1 

2,913 

120 

3* 

Tanftries^, 

6 

6 

618 

618 

100 

Comb 

3 

1 

* 

176 

76 

43 


* This does not include the Beta Shoe Factors i**«*aj » 

largest of its kind in Indie* 


366 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Table VII — continued 


Type 

Number of mills 

Number of workers 

Percentage 
of total 
workers 

Bengal 

24-Parganas 

Bengal 

24-Parganas 

4. Industries that need considerable expansion — 
Match Factories . . 13 10 

4,835 

4,676 

96 

Rubber Factories 

16 

12 

6,635 

5,096 

83 

Soap Factories 

11 

10 

955 

837 

88 

Glass Factories 

15 

8 

2,371 

1,370 

60 

Tobacco Factories 

2 

2 

1,269 

1,269 

100 

Chemical Factories . . 

15 

11 

3,545 

3,000 

84 

Bone and Manuring Mills 

7 

5 

1,720 

719 

41 

Paint Factories 

7 

5 

1,424 

635 

43 

Potteries Factories 

9 

4 

2,396 

898 

35 

5. Industries consuming raw iron and steel- 
Railway workshop . . 25 

5 

26,285 

5,104 

19 

Ordnance Factories . . 

3 

3 

6,197 

6,197 

100 

Telegraphic workshops 

1 

1 

1,111 

1,111 

100 

Steam boat building and 
dockyard engineering 

works . . 

14 

5 

14,897 

8,327 

56 

General engineering in- 
eluding electrical work- 

shops 

174 

77 

26,623 

12,444 

46 

Steel Rolling Mills 

5 

2 

16,906 

258 

1 

Lead Rolling Mills 

1 

1 

183 

183 

100 

Tramway workshops . . 

2 

1 

945 

854 

90 

Coach building and 

motor-car repairing. . 

17 

17 

1,879 

1,879 

100 

Metal stamping 

7 

4 

1,377 

919 

66 

Kerosene tinning and 

packing 

11 

9 

2,485 

2,211 

88 

Carpentry and cement 

manufacturing , , 

9 

7 

799 

655 

82 

Others 

6 

4 

820 

556 

67 

6. Industries of public utility — 
Electrical generating 
and transforming 

stations 

9 

4 

2,456 

1,569 

63 

Gasworks.. 

6 

3 

708 

621 

87 

Water pumping stations 

5 

4 

1,440 

1,321 

92 

Gramophone 

I 

1 

820 

820 

100 

Mint 

1 

1 

887 

887 

100 

Laundries 

7 

4 

420 

293 

69 

Printing and book- 

hm/fong 

99 

85 

9,907 

8,850 

89 


Table VII shows a very high degree of concentration of the industries of 
Bengal in 24-Parganas. The extreme localization of such industries along the 
river bank is shown in Figure 2. A detailed account of their distribution 
within this region will be given later. Jute manufacturing is tl$ mQ gWui 
portent. About 60 per cent of the jute mills of Bengal are located in the 
district. His industry alone employs more than one-half of the total factoiy 
workers of the district, the average number of daily workers per mill being 
over 3,000. Cotton m a n uf a cturing ranks second, though it employs less than 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 367 


one-tenth of*the number of jute mill workers. The ootton mills of this district 
are of recent growth, and need muoh expansion. It serves as a good example 
of an industry that has been kept deliberately in the background despite 
the demand of home market, availability of cheap fuel, the long experience 
of a seotion of the population in the art of weaving cotton cloth. Silk manu- 
facturing has been neglected as well. There are only two mills, employing 
just over 1,000 workers. The first paper mill was established as early as 
1882, the progress of this industry has had been rather slow. The two paper 
mills in the district employ some 5,000 workers. Chemical, match and glass 
industries got a start during the last war period, and are developing rapidly 
in the present war-time. There are no iron and steel melting works in 
the district, though quite a number of engineering works consume large 
quantities of iron and steel. 


Fig. 14. Distribution of Unproductive 
Land. 

[Percentages of total area in each thana.] 




Fig. 16. Distribution of Aman Paddy 
Land. 

[Percentages of Net Cropped area.] 


Of the industries preparing agricultural products for food, rioe mills 
are by far the most important. Since most of them occur in the neighbour- 
hood of Calcutta, there are very few mills in the rural areas where they are 
most needed. In any industrial planning in future, this point should be taken 
into account. Since the majority of the population of the district eat rice 
as th eir staple food, not many flour mills are to be found in this district. • The 
oiFmflls ofrthe district mainly extract oil from mustard seeds, which is used 
as a substitute for butter or ghee. The tobacco industry is also fairly deve- 
loped in this district, employing over 1,000 workers per day. 

Of the publio utility servioes run on faotory lines the four water pumping 
stations of this district including the largest water works at Palta, the three 





308 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


gas works, inoluding the largest in India, the Oriental Gas Works, and the 
four power stations of the Electric Supply Corporation cater for the population 
of Calcutta and its satellite towns. 



Fig. 18. Production of Aman Paddy per 
capita. 



Fig. 17. Production of Aus Paddy per 
capita. 


Since the manufacturing industries mainly conoem with the processing 
of agricultural products, and olaim not much more than 20 per cent of the 
total working population, the pressure of population on the agricultural land 
of the district has not appreciably diminished. Moreover, the extent to which 
these industries are localized in one part of the district, could not possibly 
relieve the pressure of population from the greater part of the district. 


The percentage of the total working population engaged in trade is also 
extremely low, about 6. Most of the industrial towns are trade oentres as 
well, Calcutta surpassing all of them in the volume and amount of trade that 
it handles. Figure 2 also shows the location of the important centres including 
village markets and annual fairs in the rural areas. The important trade 
oentres outside the Upper Hooghly Plain are located either at a meeting 
place of a number of roads, as at Barasat, or at the terminus of an important 
road* m at Taki, or where different means of transport, roads, railways and 
water-ways meet each other, as at Basirhat. The navigable canals have also 
|m>vided sites for the growth of trade centres such as Bhangar, dn^TEte 
Southern Plainsthe main trade oentres are located either along an important 
road, or on the river bank. The smaller markets, known locally as hats, 
dotted all overly mainly along river banks, roads and railways. 

These function twice a week on certain fixed days. 






LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTEIOT OF 24-FABGANAS, BENGAL 


369 


Transport # 

Transport facilities in this district leave much to be desired. Figure 1 
shows the pattern of railways which radiate out from the city of Calcutta. 
The main section running north of Calcutta in the Upper Hooghly Plain was 
opened first as early as 1862, It oonnects most of the important towns of 
the district, thus serving only the urban population. There are no feeder 
railways to this important section. The central section of the Bengal - 
Assam Railway, which runs northeast from Calcutta, connects some of the 
towns of lesser importance situated in rural areas. A railroad of a much 
smaller gauge (2' 6*) runs through the Barasat-Basirhat Plains, connecting 
Calcutta with rich agricultural lands in the east. The total mileage of rail- 
roads operating north of Calcutta is some 130 miles, that is to say, only one- 
half of a mile of railroad per square mile of area. South of Calcutta all the 
railways excepting one turn westwards, serving roughly an area of 800 square 
miles, and lying mainly in the southern agricultural plains. The railroad 
between Port Canning and Calcutta is the second-oldest, and that between 
Calcutta and Diamond Harbour, the third-oldest in Bengal. They were 
opened in the latter part of the last century, when the port of Caloutta was 
in danger of being closed down due to silting of the bed of the Hooghly. The 
total mileage of railroads including the narrow-gauge Kalighat-Falta line 
comes to about the same as in the north, though serving a much larger area. 



Fig. 18. Distribution of Jute Land. 19. Distribution of Ploughs (per 

rEtfwentages of total area in each thana,] 1>000 acres). 

• • 


v The pattern of metalled roads more or less resembles that of railways 
(aefe Fig. 2). Thus practically the same area is served both by roads and 
railways. There are just over 400 miles of metalled roads, and another 300 
miles of unmetalled roads, the latter getting dusty in winter and muddy in 
*4 





370 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


the rainy season. Of the metalled roads whioh do not run par&llel to rail- 
roads two in the north, the Krishnanagar road and the Mathurapur road, 
and one in the south, the Baruipur-Matla road, carry large traffio. 



Fig. 20. Distribution of Carte. Fig. 21 . Distribution of Boats. 

(Per 1,000 acres.) (Per 1,000 acres.) 


In the absence of railways and good roads the agricultural and forest 
products of the southern and eastern parts of the district can be brought 
to Calcutta and other industrial towns only by water. There are three 
important water-ways connecting Calcutta with these parts of the district 
and beyond. The northern route is known as the Inner Sundarban Passage, 
the central one is known as the Outer Sundarban Passage. The southern 
route connects Calcutta with Assam through the Sundarbans proper and is 
frequented only by large steamers. To sum up, rapid land transport is not 
available, exoept in the urban and highly developed agricultural zones. 
This stands in the way of proper utilization of land of this distriot. The 
proximity of this district to Calcutta gives it a greater advantage over any 
other district of Bengal by providing a huge market for its agricultural 
products, provided such products, especially perishable commodities like 
vegetables, fruits and flowers, could be transported quiok from producing 
areas to consuming towns. 

VI. The Nature op Land Utilization and Agricultural 

Equipment 

Land Utilization 

Table VIII gives some indication of the utilization of the district frdb 1930 ^ 
to 1942. It is seldom realized that forests in this district occupy larger arp& 
than arable land. The percentage of its land area under the plough to the 
total area of the district is rather low, hardly 30, whereas forests occupy about 
one-third of the total land surfaoe. Even if we exclude the forested area* in 

24B 







LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 371 

the Sundarbhns from the total area of the district, the percentage of the net 
area sown does not rise much above 40. This low percentage of land in use 
accounts for the heavy shortage of foods when normal trade is hampered. 
The industries, howsoever concentrated in this district, are not so developed 
as to compensate the neglect of agricultural land. It is true that the acreage 
under the plough somewhat increased during the decade 1930-39, but the 
decline in acreage during 1940-41 was something serious, especially when 
some 300,000 acres of land were added to this district. The shortage of 
agricultural labour was perhaps responsible for the decline. 

Table VIII 

Land Utilization in 24-Parganas 


(Areas in acres) 







Arable land 

Marsh 
land, etc. 

Year 


Total 

Forests 




Cultivable 

Agricul- 

turally 

unpro- 

ductive 




area 


Net 

area 

sown 

Twice- 

cropped 

area 

Current 

fallows 

but not 
cultivated 
(culturable 
waste) 

1930 




1,089,516 

730,800 

91,300 

386,148 

) 

1 


1931 




738,500 

125,300 

349,726 

[ 328,731 



1932 




( 1,118,238 

779,300 

133,200 

307,826 

j 


> 572,645 

1933 




780,400 

131,400 

307,826 

307,826 


1934 

1935 



3,107,840 

1 1,047,221 

797.900 

773.900 

137.400 

136.400 

331.343 

355.343 

| 358,731 



1936 





764,300 

115,200 

369,030 

J 358,531 
| 358,661 


572,890 

1937 




[ 1,043,089 

780,400 

114,500 

353,010 


1938 




821,300 

113,000 

312,110 



1939 1 




J 1,043,090 

) 

925,000 

119,100 

208,400 



i 672,880 

1940') 

1 



910,500 

112,600 

223,175 

[ 631,840 


1941 



3,381,010 

V 1,042,815 

910,400 

105,400 

223,275 



1942 J 

1 



973,500 

116,695 

160,175 

J 





Food grains 

Cash crops 

Year 




Oil-seeds 

Spices 

Sugar-cane 

Fruits 

and 

vege- 

tables 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 # 

1934 

1935 

Iv36 * ^ . 

1937 

1938 

1940 

1941 

1942 

fl 


68,000 

09.000 

45.000 

42.000 

61.000 
57,100 

45.000 

53.000 

45.000 

40.000 

30.000 

45.000 
24,895 

1,700 

1,800 

» 2,000 

i 

1,900 

} moo 

] 1,500 

1,400 j 

SI 


16,800 

18,600 

| 18,400 

} 18,800 
17,800 
17,000 
18,700 
18,700 
18,400 
18400 
18,500 











372 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


. In a densely populated agricultural oountry, where arable 1 land is res- 
tricted in area, multiple oropping and intertillage should be practised. But 
in this district the acreage under more than one orop is rather small, occupying 
hardly more than one-tenth of the net cropped area. For the first five or 
six years during the period under consideration the acreage yielding more than 
one crop a year increased steadily, but from 1935 to 1940 it showed a decline. 
The twice-cropped area was less in 1942 than what it was ten years back in 
1931. 



Fig. 22. Density of Cattle per square 
mile. 



Fig. 23. Density of Sheep and Goats 
per square mile. 


The area classed as current fallow accounted for 160,175 acres in 1942, 
i.e. 16 per cent of the net cropped area. In the previous year it was much 
higher, 25 per cent. The highest acreage of current fallow was, however, 
recorded in 1930, 53 per cent of the net cultivated land. During the time of 
the last settlement operations of the district the percentage was as low as 4, 
though an upward trend was then noticed. 1 Land is kept fallow for preventing 
soil exhaustion and its ultimate destruction, unless land is refreshed every 
year by natural or artificial means. In England the practioe of fallowing was 
abandoned when there was a greater demand for food in the beginning of the 
«j gtit«anth oentury by adopting a rotation system and manuring the cultivated 
fields heavily. Since in this part of the oountry rivers are not depositing 
fertilizing silts in their flood plains, and the poverty of peasants is preventing 
them from using artificial manures on a large scale, it is neoessqfy tg keep 
a oertain percentage of the land fallow, but certainly not to the extent it was 
kept fallo w m 1083. The increase in Mow land in 24-Parganas was fouau 


> Final Report on the Survey and Settlement Operation* in the District of M-Paifanss, 
1924-98, page 82. 






LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 373 

partly due Ip the negleot of mud embankments, which when gave way allowed 
salt-water to enter into the fields, thus making it useless for growing crops 
any longer. The big drop in the fallow land area in 1942 may be due to the 
reclamation of those inundated areas as a direct result of the ‘Grow more food 
campaign’ of Government. But a more vigorous policy is needed to solve 
this problem. 



Hooghly Plain. 

The arable area, which was not brought under the plough from 1939 
to 1942, amounted to 631,840 acres, that is to say, about 65 per oent of the net 
oropped area. Part of it, about one-third, oontains groves of various kinds. 
The remaining portion is simply kept fallow. An attempt should be made 
to utilize this land. Before 1939 the area shown as oulturable but not cul- 
tivated in offioial statistics was much less. In one year (1932) it was less 
than one-half of the present area. This shows that it will not be so difficult 
to bring back the land under the plough whioh was onoe cultivated. 

The unproductive area also takes up a large proportion of our land. Prom 
1930 to 1942 the aoreage ranged between 572,645 and 572,680, the percentage 
of thepiet propped area in the total area being about 60 in 1942. Not much 
pf it is taken by homesteads, about one-fifth. It is, therefore, possible to 
reclaim a substantial portion of the land classed as unculturable waste today. 

The agricultural products of the district may be classed as food crops 
aqd industrial crops. The food crops are the most important. Bice is the 



374 


B, 0. LAW VOLUME 


most important food crop. It is grown everywhere, in small jplots in the 
north, in large fields in the reclaimed Sundarbans. The acreage under rioe 
or paddy was little over 10 lakhs in 1942, 99 per cent of the total cultivated 
area. This unusually high percentage of one crop leads not only to depletion 
of soil fertility but also to the growth of insect pests, and is responsible for the 
low yields, 14 to 20 maunds per aore. In 1932 the percentage of area under 
rice was 84 or lower than that of 1942. The tendency, therefore, in reoent years 
has been to bring more and more land under rice cultivation. Pulses and other 
minor food grains were grown on 21,100 acres in 1942, occupying only one- 
fiftieth of the area given to paddy. Jute is the most important industrial 
crop, the acreage under this being 24,895 in 1942. In 1930 it was almost 
three times of its present figure. Next to jute, are fruits and vegetables 
which find a ready market in Calcutta. The area under fruits and vegetables 
was 18,500 acres in 1942. Oil-seeds, spices and sugar-cane are grown primarily 
for home consumption, and on a small scale. The total acreage under these 
three types of orops was 6,400 in 1942. In 1930 the total acreage was slightly 
higher. 

In this district as elsewhere in Bengal exists a landed aristocracy. They 
own some 2,000 permanently settled estates, comprising more than one-half 
of the total area of the district. They are not directly in touch with the estates 
they own, but lease out their lands more or less on a permanent basis to 
different persons, who, in their turn, also do the same thing. In this way 
the subinfeudation of land goes on, though rarely extending beyond the third 
grade tenure holder, and ultimately the lands come to the cultivating tenants, 
who for all practical purposes can be taken as owner-cultivators. These 
cultivators now own 1,551,309 acres, more than one-half of the total area of 
the district, divided up into 811,350 holdings. Thus the average area per 
holding in this district amounts to 1*9 acres, very low indeed. The owner- 
cultivators also have to employ a large number of agricultural labourers to 
cultivate their fields, especially during the times of sowing and harvest. In 
1931 there were 199,157 agricultural workers in regular employment, that is 
to say, 40-2 per cent of the total cultivators. It is this class that was hard 
hit during the last famine, and due to the shortage of their number the acreage 
under crops could not increase substantially last year (1943). 

The Sundarban area is owned by Government, who in the past had 
divided up the area into blocks, and farmed them out by public auction, 
but that practice has now almost stopped, the forests being declared as a 
protected area. 

The Live-stock of 24-Parganae 

The cattle rearing and feeding do not seem to ocoupy much of the time 
of the cultivators of 24-Parganas, though the cattle are their best friends. 
The bullock is the chief work animal, dragging the plough in the country* 
(see Plate IXA), and hauling heavy carts both in rural and urban areas. ' In 
the towns the water-buffalo also works as a draft animal In 1940 there 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 375 


were some 079, 491 cattle in the district. 1 Of these the vast majority, just 
over ten lakhs, were in rural areas. The number of oxen and male buffaloes 
was 385,961, or 36 per oent of the total. In spite of their impressive number 
the cattle of the district is poor in quality. This is mainly due to the lack 
of proper care and dearth of feed crops. The grazing grounds for the cattle 
are almost non-existent. In poorer areas they feed on poor grass and stubbles 
of paddy straw after harvest (see Plate XIVB). The well-to-do peasants 
can, however, feed them on paddy straw out into pieces and mixed with 
oil-cakes and boiled kolai, a kind of pulse. The dairy industry of the district 
is founded on the milk cows, who numbered 440,517 excluding their calves 
in 1940. In recent years, however, it is developing as an organized industry. 
Milk, ghee and curd are the commercial products, reaching the market of 
Calcutta in large quantities. 

Goats and sheep are much less important than cattle. They numbered 
284,482, the number of sheep being less than 10,000. These animals provide 
mainly meat, and only small quantity of milk. 

Ploughs, Carts and Boats 

The peasant of this district ploughs with a wooden or iron tipped plough 
(see Plate VIIIA). This kind of plough does not really turn the soil upside 
down, but rather throws it out on both sides, which seldom does the proper 
function of ploughing. Moreover, it does not go deeper than 4 inches, and 
hence the yields per acre are low. Since this kind of plough is not very 
effective, the same plot of land has to be ploughed a number of times (see 
Fig. 4) before seeds are sown or seedlings are transplanted. The number of 
ploughs is also not sufficient. In 1940 they numbered 165,480, at the rate 
of one plough for ten acres of land. 

It has already been pointed out that the greater part of the country is 
• not served by good roads, with the result that the only means of conveyance 
available to the farmers are oarts and boats. In 1940 there were 33,576 
carts and 8,868 boats, hopelessly inadequate to serve their purpose. 

A Comparative Study 

Let us now study the nature of land utilization in different parts of the 
distriot (see Table IX). Figure 10 shows the distribution of the cultivated area 
as a percentage in the total area. Generally speaking, the northern part of 
the distriot and Southern Plains have the higher percentage of land under 
the plough, varying between 75 (Barasat-Basirhat Plain) and 77 (Southern 
Plains). The urban industrialized zone has the lowest, though even there 
about one-half of the total area is cultivated. The northern part of the 
Sund^rbans has a higher percentage (66) than the southern portion (61)* 
k The acreage under the plough oould be substantially increased in the Sun* 
darbans. 


* Report of the Live-stock Census of Bengal, 1940* 


376 


B. 0. LAW VOLtW* 


Tab u IX 

Land Utilisation in different regions of 24-Pargmu 



Per cent 
of 

culti- 

vated 

area 

Density of 
population 
per sq. mile 
of cultivated 
area 

Acreage pet l 
holding 

Cultiv- 
able 
but not 
culti- 
vated 

Un- 

cultiv- 

able 

1. Upper Hooghly Plain 

50 

8,355 

Highest Lowest 
1*33 0-62 

21 

29 

2. Amdanga-Sarupnagar Plains 

76 

903 

2-01 

1-68 

13 

12 

3. Barasat-Basirhat Plains 

75 

1,374 

1-77 

1*18 

10 

14 

4. Southern Plains 

77 

1,865 

1-73 

0-98 

10 

13 

5. Northern Plains of the Sun- 
darbans 

66 

1,238 

449 

1-39 

12 

22 

6. Reclaimed Sundarbans 

61 

883 

5-97 

244 

16 

21 


Figure 11 shows the density of population per square mile of cultivated 
area. This density is the highest in the Upper Hooghly Plain, over 8,000 per 
square mile. The agricultural regions have much lower density, ranging 
between 883 in the reclaimed Sundarbans and 1,875 in the Southern Plains. 
The Amdanga-Sarupnagar Plains in the north have a slightly higher density 
than that of the southern part of the Sundarbans, despite the fact that it 
was one of the earliest regions in the district providing sites for human settle- 
ment. One of the main causes of the sparse population can be traced to the 
deterioration of rivers. The plains lying further south have about the same 
density, which decreases slightly from north to south. 

Figure 12 shows the acreage per holding in different regions of the district. 
The greater part of the Sundarbans has the highest acreage per holding, the 
average sipe of each farm ranging between 2 and 6 acres. This area provides 
opportunities for using tractors and other agricultural machineries. Further 
north the average size slightly diminishes. In the rest of the oountry it ranges 
between 1 and 2 acres, except in the Upper Hooghly Plain, where it hardly 
rises above one acre. 

Figure 13 shows the distribution of arable areas not yet brought under 
the plough. It is very high throughout the upper part of the Upper Hooghly 
Plain, which shows that there is a considerable scope for developing track 
farming in that area. The rich Southern Plains of the district and the lands 
lying on both sides of the Ichamati are fairly intensively cultivated, henoe 
the percentages of unutilized agricultural lands are the lowest there. The 
second-highest percentage occurs in the eastern part of the reclaimed Sundar- 
bans, where more land could be easily brought under cereal crops. 

Figure 14 shows the distribution of the so-called unculturable land in the 
district. It is very high in parts of the urban region, and very low in the 
Amdanga-Sarupnagar Northern Plains. The lower percentage in the latter 
region reflects an intensive utilization in the past. The Southern and Baras$t- 
Basirhat Plains have also low figures, because of their intensive use in recent 
years. 







378 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Table X shows statistics relating to aus and aman , the two important 
varieties of paddy mostly grown in this district. Figures 8, 15, 16, 17 also 
show distribution of these two crops as percentages of net cropped area and 
their production on a per capita basis. Aman or winter paddy predominates 
over aus in every region. In the Southern Plains the percentage of acreage 
in the total area under aman is the highest and that of cropped area is the 
seoond-highest in the district. The reclaimed Sundarbans grow almost 
nothing but aman. The Northern Plains of the Sundarbans have over 80 
per cent of the cultivated land under aman , the third-highest figure in the 
district. The plains in the north do not grow as much aman , having hardly 
more than 60 per cent of cultivated land under aman. The industrialized 
zone of the district has only one-quarter of its cultivated land under aman. 
The northern part of the district grows more aus than any other part of the 
district. As to the production of rice per capita , it is the highest in the re- 
claimed Sundarbans, producing almost as much as the rest of the district. 
The Northern Plains of the Sundarbans also produce more than what is needed 
in the region. The other regions, exoept the Hooghly Plain, are either just 
sufficient or have a small shortage in regard to rice. The Upper Hooghly 
Plain is very much deficient, and draws its supply from the agricultural 
regions. 

Table XI shows the percentage of acreage under cash crops in the net 
cropped area in different regions. The distribution of jute, whioh is the 
most important of these crops, is shown in Fig. 18. Jute is grown mainly in 
the northern part of the district. Pulses and minor food grains are also grown 
in that part of the district, and in the Southern Plains as well. The highest 
acreage under fruits and vegetables is found in the Upper Hooghly Plain. 
Next come the Barasat-Basirhat Plains in the north. Fruits and vegetables 
are also grown in considerable quantities on a commercial scale in the neigh- 
bourhood of Baruipur and Bhangar. 


Table XI 

Minor Grope in 24-Parganas 


Regions 

Per cent of 
area under 
jute 

Per cent of 
area under 
pulses and 
other food 
grains 

Per cent of 
area under 
fruits and 
vegetables 

1. Upper Hooghly PUun 

4 

5 

35 

2 . Amdanga-Sarupnagar Plains 

14 

10 

8 

3. Barasat-Basirhat Plains 

19 

17 

* 10 

4. Southern Plains 

15 

12 

7 

5. Northern Plains of Sundarbans 

5 

5 

6 

6. Reclaimed Sundarbans . . 

Nil 

Negligible 

a* 

1 

# 


r 


Table XII shows the distribution of ploughs, carts and boats, which gives 
some indication of the agricultural conditions prevailing in different parte 
of the district. As to ploughs their density is the highest in the Southern 









LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 


379 


, Plains (see Fig. 19). The next highest number is found in the Northern 
Plains of the Sundarbans. The Barasat-Basirhat Plains have also a fairly 
large number of ploughs. The average numbers of ploughs in the reclaimed 
Sundarbans vary between 67 and 107, and in the Amdanga-Sarupnagar 
Plains between 24* and 98. The Upper Hooghly Plain does not need many 
ploughs; hence the number there is the lowest. 


Table XII 

Distribution of Ploughs , Carts and Boats in 24-Parganas 



Expressed 
per 1,000 acres 
of land 

Total numbers 


Ploughs 


Carts 


Boats 



Highest Lowest 

Highest 

Lowest 

Highest 

Lowest 

1 . Upper Hooghly Plain 

69 

Nil 

276 

3 

229 

Nil 

2. Amdanga-Sarupnagar 







Plains 

98 

24 

3,229 

727 

93 

61 

3. Barasat-Basirhat 







Plains 

116 

72 

2,936 

2,241 

361 

80 

4. Southern Plains 

138 

72 

831 

114 

1,145 

20 

5. Northern Plains of 







the Sundarbans 

131 

97 

1,776 

520 

817 

26 

6. Reclaimed Sundar- 







bans 

107 

66 

1,667 

8 

1,123 

141 


Figures 20 and 21 show the distribution of carts and boats. The density 
of carts is the highest in the Northern Plains of the district, where the road 
mileage including the village roads is also the highest. There are not many 
boats in this region. The greater part of the Southern Plains is intersected 
by navigable canals and hence depend more on boats than on carts. In some 
•parts of the Sundarbans agricultural operations are considerably hampered 
because of the lack of carts and boats. 

Figures 22 and 23 show the distribution of the live-stook in the district. 
The density of cattle is the highest in the Southern Plains, and the lowest in 
the reclaimed Sundarbans. There are very few sheep and goats in the southern 
part of the district. They are found mostly along the banks of the Ichamati. 

VII. Land Utilization in different Regions 
1 . The Upper Hooghly Plain 

This region extends from the extreme north of the distriot to Budge- 
Budge in the south, clinging to the river bank throughout. Its total length 
following thg meandering course of the Hooghly is about 45 miles. The main 
railway line may be taken as its present eastern boundary, thus the width 
of this region nowhere exoeeds 2 miles, and in the greater part of its length 
it is less than a mile wide. The right bank of the Hooghly river lies in the 
districts of Hooghly and Howrah. This river may appear to a stranger as a small 



$80 


B. 0. LAW VOLUM* 

edition of the Rhine in the Ruhr district of Germany. But the advantage® 
that the Rhine valley enjoy are laoking here. Goal from the nearby fields 
of Raniganj cannot be brought by river, because of the fact that the Bamodar, 
its only tributary coming from the ooal-producing areas, is not navigable 
throughout the year. Moreover, unlike in Germany the industries in the 
Hoogbly region have no deep roots. Neither the capital invested nor the 
labour employed is indigenous to Bengal. Most of the mills are owned and 
controlled by Europeans and most of the labour population are drawn from 
outside Bengal. It is then natural that such industries, however developed 
they may be, would fail to leave a permanent mark on the country where 
they thrive, and cannot be taken as a real index of the industrial prosperity 
of Bengal. 

All the jute mills of 24-Parganas are located in this region, extending 
from Halisahar in the north to Budge-Budge in the south. The first jute 
mill in this district was started at Gauripur near Naihati in 1852, and by the 
end of the nineteenth century as many as twelve mills were operating. Since 
then those mills more than quadrupled in number. They are not distributed 
evenly over the whole of the region, but are concentrated mostly in four 
places, two lying north of Calcutta, one around Calcutta and the fourth in the 
south, near Budge-Budge. One such concentration in the north of Calcutta 
occurs along a pronounced concave bend of the Hooghly between Bhatpara and 
Shamnagar, opposite French Chandemagore (Plate IB). The second con- 
centration is to be seen further south in the neighbourhood of Khardah and 
Titagarh. These mills make enormous profits every year, paying in some cases 
over 100 per cent dividend to their share holders, a large proportion of which 
is spent outside the country. In one year four mills of the first group made^ 
a profit of over one crore of rupees and two mills of the second group made 
another half a crore. It is not too much to ask these companies to spend a 
part of their profit in reclaiming marsh lands which almost border their foe-, 
tories. Even within the factory towns much improvements are needed. The 
workers live in wretched dwellings and do not enjoy amenities of life with 
which the workers in England, Germany or the United States are aooustomed 
(Plate IIA). It is because of this that the Bengali workers are not attracted 
to factory life. Had it been otherwise, the pressure of population on arable 
lands would have considerably decreased, and the problem of feeding thousands 
of workers, who have" come from outside the province, would have been less 
acute than what is today (1944). 

All the cotton mills excepting one are located north of Caloutta around 
Panihati and Garulia. The six mills occur near Panihati and KJiardah. 
The two paper mills are to be found at Titagarh and Kank i na ra near Bhat- 
para. There are eleven large chemical works in this region, including the largest 
one, Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works. These works are mainly, 
located in the eastern Canal Area of Calcutta. The majority of the glass 
factories also occur in that area. The match industry has developed consi- 
derably in reoeutyeare. Two of the ten match factories of this region employ 

0 4 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 381 

more than 1,000 workers per day. These are looated in the northern part of 
Caloutta. Most of the other smaller industries such as pottery works, soap 
factories, bone mills fertilizer works, paint works and lao factories ooeur in 
the Canal Area of Calcutta. 

Of the engineering works the railway workshops at Kanehrapara are 
the biggest. The general engineering works, numbering about 65, are mostly 
small concerns, none of them employing more than 1,000 workers and one -half 
of them employing less than 100 workers per day. Then there are steam boat 
building works, motor-car repairing workshops, and kerosene tinning and 
packing works, all consuming large quantities of iron. Of the engineering 
works utilizing metals other than iron, the lead rolling mill at Kamarhati, 
and the aluminium metal stamping works in the neighbourhood of Calcutta 
are the only works of the kind in this district. 

Most of the rice mills have also sprung up around Calcutta. The Calcutta 
and Eastern Canals are primarily responsible for their development. These 
have facilitated the transport of bulky materials like paddy from Eastern 
Bengal to the mill areas (see Plate IIB). Hence there is an extreme concen- 
tration of these mills in the Tollygunge area near Calcutta, about 50 per cent 
of the mills of the district occurring there. There is another concentration 
of rice mills on the banks of the canals in the northern suburbs of Calcutta — 
Shambazar and Ultadanga. The third concentration occurs on the east of the 
railway line extending from Talpukur to Chanok and Chandanpukur, that is 
to say, in the Titagarh-Barrackpore area. The rice mills are small in size, 
the average number of workers per mill being 60. 

There are only six flour mills in or around Calcutta, the majority employing 
less than 100 workers per day. For industrial purposes, there is one linseed 
oil mill near Naihati. The rest of the oil mills extract oil from mustard 
seeds, which is used for home consumption. There are also five large bakeries 
and biscuit-making concerns, and one brewary, all in the neighbourhood of 
Calcutta. One of the tobacco factories is located in a southern suburb of 
Caloutta and the other in Kamarhati. 

Of the leather factories and tanneries the one at Nangi, now known as 
Batanagar, about 14 miles south of Calcutta, was started in recent years by 
the Bata Company, and is fast becoming the centre of the leather industry 
in Bengal. 

The four power stations of the Caloutta Eleotric Supply Corporation 
are looated at Cossipore, Bhatpara, Mulajore and Garden Reach. The prime 
movers in these power stations are steam turbines, where coal is used as fuel. 

For the proper understanding of this region from the point of view of 
administration and utilization, it ought to have been separated from the rest 
of the Aiistr^t, and then sub-divided according to convenience. Actually, 
however, this region forms parts of three separate administrative units — the 
two sub-divisions of Barrackpore and Sadar and the district of Calcutta. 
The smallest administrative units, i.e. police stations or thanas, within eaoh 
Of the two sub-divisions also do not conform to areas having the same hupaan 



382 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


response. Hence the fourteen thanas containing this industrial region also • 
include large rural areas (see Fig. 2). f 

When we come to study the distribution of population in this region we 
find that the river bank contains a dense population, Which thins out in the 
east. Most of the larger towns of this district including the cities of Calcutta 
and Bhatpara are located here (see Fig. 1). These may be regarded now as 
satellite towns of Calcutta, though the majority of them were in existence 
before Calcutta took its present shape. Halisahar in the north of the district 
was a city of palaces and an important commercial centre at the time when 
the Mughals were ruling in India. In earlier times it was an important 
cultural centre of Bengal, known then by the name of Kumarhatta. The 
city has lost all its former importance with a consequent decrease in popula- 
tion. In recent years when most of the other towns showed a rapid increase 
of population, the population of this town was increasing slowly, and in one 
decade (1911-21) had experienced a decrease in population (see Fig. 24). 
The presence of stagnant waters in the neighbourhood of this town breeding 
anopheles mosquitoes (A. culicifacies ) and spreading virulent type of malarial 
fever is the main reason why this town has had a stunted growth. Naihati 
was the capital of the Moghul Emperor for some time. Its population is 
increasing rather slowly but steadily. Bhatpara is another historical place, 
and still is a cultural centre of Bengal. The starting of a number of mills 
in this town led to the rapid increase of population of this town since 1901, 
the number exceeding one lakh at the time of the last census. Titagarh is 
the only other town that showed rapid development since the beginning of this 
century. Khardah and Panihati are religious centres of Bengal. Barrack- 
pore owes its name to the presence of soldiers in barracks since the latter 
part of the eighteenth century. It was second only to Caloutta in population 
at the time of the first census, but its population did not increase materially 
in the next fifty years. 

The trend of population of Baranagar followed closely that of Calcutta, 
as greater Calcutta really extends as far north as Baranagar. The population 
of Calcutta increased by almost three times (see Fig. 24). Since the first 
census was taken, the city extended mainly southward as its development 
in the other three directions was not possible for one reason or other. The 
salt marshes in the east, the wide river barrier in the west, and the already 
crowded areas in the north are the main reasons for its growth southward. 
It is perhaps the only city of the world that stands amidst an undeveloped 
rural setting, and is in strong contrast even with the other urban centres of the 
provinoe. The expansion of Caloutta in the south is responsible* for the 
extension of the jurisdiction of the Corporation of Calcutta beyond the city 
proper in that direction. The ocean-going liners come as far as th» Gardei 
Beach of the Hooghly, where docks line the river bank, extending up ft 
Kidderpore. ilipore is the administrative headquarters of the district o) 
24-Parganas. Majarhat is an important railway junction, which is growing 
in importance because of its proximity to the Kidderpore docks and Alipore 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 383 


aerodrome. Ballygunge is the residential suburb of Calcutta, and its artificial 
lakes are bigger and more beautiful than those of the Hyde Park of London 
and of the Boi de Boulogne of Paris. Tollygunge is slowly developing, where 
a number of rioe mills oentre around the town especially in Italghata. The 
population of this town in the last decade increased more rapidly than in 
the previous decades. The southern suburbs of Calcutta extend up to Behala 
and Barisa. Both of them are historical towns. An ancient capital of Bengal 
was situated near Barisa. The northern suburbs are much less developed. 
They are not preferred as much as the southern ones as residential quarters. 
Dum-Dum has more open spaces, providing garden houses for the rich citizens 
of Calcutta. Moreover, this town is the Croydon of Bengal, The direction 
of winds may have something to do with this one-sided development of the 
city of Calcutta. Even within the city proper the south-faoing houses have 
a special charm because of the fact that the cool sea breeze comes regularly 
from the south or south-west in the hot season. Thus the areas lying south 
of the city of palaces have had a better chance to grow. Budge-Budge occupies 
the southernmost edge of this region. It is well connected with Calcutta by 
rail, road and river. A number of jute and cotton mills have recently sprung 
up in its neighbourhood, and have made it an important industrial centre 
of Bengal. Moreover, it is the main petroleum distributing centre in this 
part of India. South of this town all along the left bank of the Hooghly 
right up to Diamond Harbour there are excellent sites for starting new in- 
dustries, and it is expected that in the coming post-war period such sites 
should be explored thoroughly before starting new mills and factories in the 
already crowded northern areas. 

The greater part of the thanas containing the built-up industrial areas 
is, however, rural, and remains yet to be developed. Agriculturally they 
have immense possibilities, and should come first in any agricultural planning 
which the Government may adopt after the war is over. The marsh lands 
of the northern part of this region comprising the three thanas — Bijpur, 
Naihati and Jagaddal—are to be drained, and the old beds of rivers and canals 
which once used to join the Hooghly are to be resuscitated. The Mathura bil 
and its western extension the Bagher Khal, which run along the northern 
boundary of the region, should be excavated first, which would not only 
considerably improve the sanitary conditions of the towns of Kanohrapara 
and Halisahar, but would bring under the plough about one-third of the 
arable lands of the thana of Bijpur, which remains unutilized at the moment. 
South of Bijpur in Naihati and Jagaddal another east-west running channel 
l$ad dried up. Its probable course was through the small village of Bhaba- 
gaohi, Dogaohia and Madsail, entering into the Hooghly near Bhatpara. 
This ohanneMxas to be opened up, and the Iohapur khal which was constructed 
*5o drain the Bariti bil is to be widened. The northernmost part of the Bariti 
bil should be drained by another ohannel, wbioh did flow once through Mir* 
zapur and Shamnagar. These improvements will lead to the utilization of 
more than 10 square miles of arable lands either for market gardening or for 



B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


384 

spine intensive cultivation in the thanas of Naihati, Jagaddkl, Noapara, 
Barrackpore and Titagarh. In Khardah, which oocurs further south, a con- 
siderable portion of rich arable lands is lying waste, because of poor drainage. 
Part of it, especially the Kheba bil portion, is drained by a small narrow channel 
which enters the Hooghly at Khardah. This channel, and the Nawi Khal 
which flows southward draining the Bariti bil , should also be improved. The 
net gain will be the agricultural produce of some 10 square miles of area in 
this thana alone. The importance of the thana of Dum-Dum is mainly due 
to its proximity to Calcutta, and this is one of the two thanas of the industrial 
region that does not extend right up to the river bank and consequently 
large-scale industries have not so far been started. Since the greater part of 
this area is low-lying, a better drainage will transform about one-half of the 
thana into productive agricultural land. 

South of Calcutta the marsh lands occur in two places. The eastern part 
of Tollygunge area is marshy, which is really the continuation of the Calcutta 
marshes. A comprehensive scheme for developing this area should be spon- 
sored. The greater part of the Budge-Budge thana in the south of the Charial 
khal also gets water-logged during the rains. Here the Baita marshes are to 
be drained first. A number of dry water courses, independent of each other, 
occur in the southern part of the Budge -Budge thana, the remnants of a 
system of drainage channels. These need resuscitation. 

Table XIII shows the nature of land utilization and the degree of self- 
sufficiency in regard to the agricultural products in different parts of the 
Upper Hooghly Plain (see also Figs. 8, 10, 11, 13 to 18). 

The two northern thanas, Naihati and Jagaddal, and the three southern 
thanas, Behala, Maheshtala and Budge-Budge, have over 60 per cent of the 
land under the plough. In each of these areas the proportion of unproductive 
land is low indeed. In Titagarh and Khardah over 50 per cent of the lands* 
is cultivated. The proportion of cultivated land is below the regional average 
in the remaining portions of the Upper Hooghly Plain. Noapara and Barrack- 
pore in the north, and Tollygunge in the south, have the lowest acreage under 
the plough. Generally speaking, the smaller the area the smaller is the 
proportion of cultivated land, because of high concentration of industries 
along the river bank. 

It is interesting to note that the areas with a high percentage of cultivable 
but uncultivated land such as Bijpur, Noapara and Jagaddal had a considerable 
increase of population during the decade 1931-41, whereas the areas with a 
much smaller percentage of such land, that is to say, Behala, Maheshtala and 
Budge-Budge, could not have a substantial increase of population. The 
proportion of unproductive land was the highest in Barraokpojp, o^pr one* - 
half, and near about 40 per cent in Noapara, Baran&gar, Tollygunge and* 
Metiabruz. It will be remembered that these are either highly industrialized 
or very thickly populated. Tollygunge is perhaps the only exception, where 
marsh lands prevail. 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 385 



*5 



386 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 


387 




388 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


, lu the greater part of the district the percentages of the net 6ropped area 
producing more than one crop are very low. Only in the Budge-Budge 
thana, which is essentially rural, about one-fifth of the cultivated land produoes 
more than one crop. 

Of the crops cultivated, aman is the most important. In the southern 
part of the district over 80 per cent of the cultivated fields was given to that 
crop. North of Calcutta the highest percentage under aman was in the 
Dum-Dum and Titagarh thanas. Truck farming takes the second place in 
the agricultural geography of the region. In certain parts as at Barrackpore 
nothing but fruits and vegetables are grown. The three other thanas, Noapara, 
Baranagar and Tollygunge, have one-half of agricultural land under fruits 
and vegetables. Potatoes, onions and various kinds of vegetables such as 
brinjal, cabbages, cauliflowers and tomatoes are raised in this region. Aus 
is grown only in the northernmost part. Jute and other crops are grown in 
small quantities. The production of rice per capita was the highest in the 
southern part of the region, though even there not enough is produced to meet 
the local demands. The northern thanas are hopelessly deficient in rice. 
It is only in fruits and vegetables that the region is self-sufficient, but not in 
potatoes. The per capita production of other crops is very low. 

Pishing is a subsidiary occupation of the farmers of this region. Calcutta 
has valuable fishery of immense possibilities in the Salt Lake. 

Table XIV shows the distribution of the live-stock, ploughs, carts and 
boats of the region. The density of cattle is nowhere more than 500 per square 
mile, except in Baranagar where it is just over 700. Barrackpore in the north 


Table XIV 

Distribution of Livestock, Ploughs , Carts and Boats in the Upper Hooghly Plain 




Live-stock 



- 



Cattle 

Sheep and goats 

Ploughs 

Total number 

Thanas 






per 








1,000 





Total 

Density 

Total 

Number 

per 

acres 





number 

per 

sq. mile 

number 

1,000 

persons 


Carts 

Boats 

Bijpur 

Na&ati 


7,422 

496 

702 

28 

37 

120 

14 


7.321 

488 

934 

20 

— 

276 

36 

Jagaddal 


9,382 

426 

801 

8 

52 

261 

6 

Noapara 



492 

376 

12 

131 

46 

26 

Barrackpore 


362 

181 

36 

2 

Nil 

8 • 

1 

Titagarh 


4,602 

418 

646 

a 

Nil 

168 

9 

Baranagar 
Khardah . . 


4,988 

8,183 

712 

409 

1,020 

1,201 

12 

36 

16 

38 

2 st 

12 

11 

Dun-Dam . , 


6,248 

360 

996 

30 

63 

•184 # 

a 

^Uygunge .. 


■pi 

214 

345 

1,877 

940 

42 

21 

62 

48 

136 

98 

6 

27 

Maheribtaft . . 



169 

470 

12 

18 

22 

9 

Metiabruz 


■KJff 

316 

477 

60 

a 

8 

~~ 

Budge-Budge 

# 


EH 

442 

3,749 

40 

69 

197 

389 





LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 389 


and Mahesfttala and Tollygunge in the south had the lowest densityjsee 
Fig. 22). The number of goats and sheep per 1,000 persons was very low 
in most of the thanas, especially in the north. Tollygunge, Metiabruz and 
Budge-Budge had the highest number, but even there it never exceeded 
50 per 1,000 persons. The density of sheep and goats was the lowest in the 
northern part of the region (see Fig. 23). The numbers of carts and boats 
per 1,000 acres of land were also very low (see Fig. 20). In the north the total 
number of carts over 200 was found only in Naihati, Jagaddal and Khardah. 
Naihati also had the highest number of boats. 

2. Amdanga-Sarupnagar Plains 

It has already been mentioned that these plains were once drained 
efficiently by several north-south flowing rivers, which have in most cases 
dried up, with the result that the greater part of the region gets marshy in 
the rains. On the other hand, arable lands do not get enough water because 
of the silting up of the rivers. In the western part of the region the annual 
rainfall is also below 60 inches (see Fig. 8), which may account for the deteriora- 
tion of the rivers, especially from the time the main Ganges moved eastward. 

West of the Sunti Plain there are still traces of more than one channel. 
These are to be connected with each other, and deepened. For example, 
a channel used to flow southeast from the Mathura bil to the Sunti Nadi. 
A part of it is still noticeable especially near the Mathura bil , and the presence 
of a number of tanks, arranged in a line, certainly helps one to know definitely 
which way the channel used to flow in the past. The Sunti Nadi is to be 
straightened between Rajbaria and Metiagacha by some 5 miles. East 
of the Sunti Plain dry watercourse can be seen in the neighbourhood of Habra, 
through which the Padma used to flow once. North of the railway line and 
the Jessore road the deterioration of the Padma is complete. Something should 
• be done to this river channel in order to restore the agricultural prosperity of 
this area. The Jamuna should also be restored to its former bed. It is now 
confined in the northern part of the region, and even there it flows so sluggishly 
that it becomes difficult to distinguish between stagnant and running water. 
Near Gobardanga the channel has been partitioned by erecting bamboo poles 
to establish fishing rights of individuals (see Plate IHA). The Nangla group 
of bits almost enclosed by the Padma occupies an area of 26*36 square miles. 
East of the Ichamati the Balli bil area ocoupies another 21*46 square miles. 
The Padma roughly divides the region into two parts, having somewhat 
different agricultural problems to solve, more of irrigation in the west, and of 
drainage in the east. A number of important inter-district routes pass 
through'' this region, serving the important towns of the district. There 
exist al|o a ijumber of unmetalled roads, which are not motorable in the rains. 
. The water-ways assume some importance in the east, where there are very few 
roads. % 

The density of population in this region is rather low, ranging between 
587 and 652 per square mile. The eastern part is more thickly populated 



390 






LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 391 

because of *the Ichamati river, which is still active. Gobardanga^on the 
Jamuna — the largest town of the region — is one of the historical towns of 
Bengal. Its population has been, however, continually decreasing from 1872 to 
1932, and since then- showed some slight increase (see Fig. 25). About 4 miles 
east of Gobardanga an annual fair is held in Diara at the confluence of the 
Jamuna anil Ichamati rivers. Sarupnagar on the Ichamati, Maslandpur on 
the northern terminus of the Baduria-Maslandpur road, Jirat on the Sunti 
at the crossing of a north-south road and a east -west road, Habra on the 
Padma, are some of the prosperous villages of the region. The concentration 
of population occurs along river banks. 

Table XV shows the nature of land utilization and the degree of self- 
suffioiency in regard to the agricultural products of the region (see Figs. 8, 10, 
11, 13 to 18). The percentage of land under the plough is the highest in the 
eastern and western marginal plains, and the lowest in the central plains, 
but nowhere it comes even up to 80. Unlike in the industrialized Hooghly 
Plain the difference in densities per square mile calculated on the basis of total 
and cultivated area is not very much pronounced here. The percentages of 
culturable but uncultivated area range between 9 and 12, the highest in the 
central part, and the lowest in the east. The percentage of unculturable area 
is also the highest in the contral zone. About one-fiffch of the cultivated land 
produces more than one crop in the flood plains of the Ichamati; this per- 
centage is very low elsewhere. As to the crops grown in the region, the 
acreage under aman paddy, though the highest, is not as much as in the 
other regions. The smaller rainfall, sandy soil and deterioration of some of 
the perennial watercourses are some of the causes of decrease in the acreage 
of aman and consequent increase of that of aus. In the central part about 
one-third of the cultivated land is put under aus. This is also one of the 
important jute-growing areas of 24-Parganas. In the eastern part (Sarup- 
. nagar) considerable quantities of pulses are also grown. The per capita 
f production figures indicate that this region is self-sufficient in rice, and has 


Table XVI 

Distribution of Livestock , Ploughs, Carts and Boats in the Amdanga-Sarupnagar 
Northern Plains 


Thanas 

• 

i 

LlYE-fi 

Cattle 

{TOOK 

Sheep and goate 

Ploughs 

per 

1,000 

acres 

Total number 

Total 

number 

Density 

P* 

sq.mue 

Total 

number 

Number 

per 

1,000 

persons 

Carts 

Boots 

Amdanga 

21,010 

389 

4,099 

120 

98 

1,598 

93 

Habra 

48,228 

447 

9,162 

144 

95 

3,229 

51 

Sarupnagar , . 

6,945 

84 

1,610 

40 

24 

727 

84 













392 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


even exportable surplus, which is stored up in granaries (Plate £IIB). The 
entmTcrop of jute finds easy market in Calcutta, though there is some scope 
for establishing a jute mill on the Ichamati. The region is not self-sufficient 
in other agricultural products. 

Table XVI shows the distribution of the live-stock, ploughs, carts and boats. 
The density of cattle is the lowest in the eastern part of the district, and not 
much above 400 in other parts. The numbers of sheep and goats per 1,000 
persons and also per square mile are the lowest in the east. The central part 
has the highest number of carts, but the lowest number of boats (see Figs. 
20 to 23). 

3. The Barasat-Basirhat Plains 

These agricultural plains are the most productive in the northern part of 
the district. The southeastern part between the Bidyadhari (Batagachi 
Gang) and Ichamati rivers is fairly well drained, except a small area enolosed 
by the Singa Nadi. This area is included in the Basirhat thana. The north- 
eastern part has the south-flowing Ichamati in the east and the north-flowing 
Padma in the west, and contains large compact villages, which are within the 
jurisdiction of the Baduria thana. The central part of this region comprising 
the thana of Deganga is not so well drained. The Deganga bil looks like a 
part of a tributary which lost its connection with the main river. There are 
quite a number of such lakes running straight for some distance. The Bidya- 
dhari river (Nona Gang) which forms its western boundary is brackish during 
flood-tide and hence in the upper part it is known as Nona Gang. The western 
part is included in the Barasat thana. The northern half of Barasat is drained 
mainly by the Sunti and contains rich fields, but the southern half contains 
a number of marshes, which are drained by the Sunti and the Harua Gang* 
These bils and adjacent lands have been converted into fisheries by dividing 
them into several blocks, and then each being enclosed by mud embankments 
(see Plate IVA). Such fisheries are known as bheries. During flood-tide 
brackish water enters into these, and along with it enter fish of various kinds, 
but they cannot come out again, and are caught with fishing net or by some 
other device (see Plate IVB). During the time the author visited this 
part of 24-Parganas he could see clearly the evil effect of the embankments 
in preventing rainwater to reach cultivated fields, whereas brackish water 
could easily enter at high-tide, rendering the fields more and more unfertile. 
Agriculture is the main occupation of the population of the surrounding 
villages, though very few of them are owner-cultivators. They take to 
fishing or some other subsidiary occupation like gur (treacle)-making,. when 
they are not engaged in cultivation. The date-palm is cultivated iyi sandy 
fertile areas in this and most of the other regions of the district^ not for its 
fruits, but for its juice which is obtained by tapping the stem, just below the 
crown pf the leaves (Plate VA). The trees are tapped in autumn, soon after 
the harvest of aman paddy. It is by boiling this date juice in pans that gut 
is obtained, which is more delicious to taste than that made from cane juice. 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL 393 

This industry is unorganized at present, though attempts are being jnade ^to 

a plantation of date-palm on scientific lines with a view to manufacturing 
white sugar from date juice. 

The southern half of the plains in the east has the highest density of 
population per square mile. Here the concentration of population occurs 
mainly on Jhe right bank of the Ichamati, giving rise to Basirhat with a 
population of over 26,000, the largest town in the region. It is an important 
rice exporting centre of the district (see Plate VB), and daily growing in 
importance. Fig. 25 shows this point clearly. The population of this town 
grew rapidly since 1881. A sugar mill has recently been started in this town. 
Baduria on the Ichamati is the second largest town of this region. It is also 
an important trade centre, though its population did not increase appreciably 
since 1881. The town of Taki though included within the thana of Hasnabad 
occupies rather the southwestern extremity of the Barasat-Basirhat Plains. 
It stands on a concave bend of the Ichamati, which is being worn away rapidly 
by the force of water (see Plate VIA). Since 1921 the town is developing 
rapidly. Water-hyacinth has also invaded the tanks of this town (see Plate 
VIB). 

In the central plains the population is more dispersed. Deganga is 
the only town of some importance. Near it occur ruins of an old capital 
of Bengal. The western plains are more thickly populated than those just 
mentioned, the density of population being about 1,000 per square mile. 
Here the population is concentrated either along the Sunti Nadi or along 
some roads or water-ways. Barasat is a nodal town, a number of roads and 
two railways converging toward it. Despite the favourable location the 
population of this town could not show much increase since 1881. Madhyam- 
gram is another nodal village, lying south of Barasat. Dattapukur is noted 
for its milk products, chana and khir, which come to Calcutta market daily. 

^ Table XVII shows the nature of land utilization and the degree of self- 
sufficiency in regard to the agricultural products of this region (see also 
Figs. 8, 10, 11, 13 to 18). 

The density of population per square mile of cultivated area is also the 
highest in the Basirhat thana, and the lowest in Deganga. Over 70 per cent 
of the land is cultivated in all the four thanas of this region, the proportion 
of such arable land being higher in the eastern than in the western part. 
The northern portion of the eastern plains produces more than one orop in about 
one-third of its cultivated lands. In the southern portion of these plains 
only 15\ per cent of the cultivated land is twice-cropped. In the west the 
percentage decreases to 8. The percentages of unproductive lands in the 
total am of each thana, culturable but uncultivated and unculturable, are 
low in tms region. The western part has the higher percentage of the first 
. type, tlie eastern part having the higher percentage of the second type. The 
highest acreage of cultivated land is under aman as usual, but as in j^he plains 
of Amdanga and Sarupnagar, Baduria and Deganga have considerable acreage, 
about one-quarter of the cultivated land under cm*. 



394 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Table XVII 

Land Utilization in the Barasat -Basirhat Plains 


Than as 

Area in 
sq. 
miles 

Popula- 

tion 

(1941) 

Density of 
population per 
sq. mile 

Per bent 
of 

culti- 

vated 

area 

Density of 
population 
per 

sq. mile 
of culti- 
vated area 

Acreage 

per 

holding 

Basirhat 

100 

125,104 

83,684 

I 1931 
! 1,055 

1941 

1,239 

77 

1,380 

1*77 

Baduria 

80 

944 

1,033 

78 

1,078 

1*01 

Deganga 

78 


1,131 

829 

70 

967 

1,47 

Barasat 

104 

99,064 

796 

953 

71 

1,117 

1*18 


Thanas 

Per cent 
of 

cultur- 
able but 
not cul- 
tivated 
area 

Per cent 
of 

uncul- 

turable 

area 

Per cent 
of twice - 
cropped 
area 

Per cent 
of area 
under 
aman 

! 

Aman per 
capita 

Per cent 
of area 
under 
aus 

A us per 
capita 






Md. sr. ch. 


Md. sr. ch. 

Basirhat 

8 

15 

17 

65 

6 0 8 

6 

0 15 3 

Baduria 

8 

14 

31 

44 

4 2 1 

22 

1 23 2 

Deganga 

10 

14 

8 

46 

4 30 5 

25 

0 24 4 

Barasat . . 

16 

13 

7 

51 

5 34 3 

17 

1 14 1 


Thanas 

Per cent 
of area 
under 
jute 

Jute per 
capita 

Per cent 
of area 
! under 
pulses 
and 
minor 
food 
grains 

Produc- 
tion per 
capita 
pulses 

Minor food 
grains 

Per cent 
of area 
under 
fruits 
and 
vege- 
tables 

Fruits and 
vegetables 
; per capita 



Md. sr. ch. 


Md. sr. ch. 

Md. sr. ch. 


Md. sr. ch 

Basirhat 

19 

1 13 11 

19 

0 0 2 

0 14 1 

8 

0 22 12 

Baduria 

23 

1 3 7 

33 

0 1 15 

0 32 3 

9 

1 39 14 

Deganga 

19 

0 9 9 

8 


0 1 0 

}2 

1 36 2 

Barasat 

10 

1 15 5 

8 

0 0 4 

0 9 2 

15 

0 2 0 


Thanas 

Pbodtjction per capita or 

Fodder 
fsrops per 
cattle 

/ 

Condi- 
ments and 
spices 

Sugar-cane 

Potatoes 

00-gcedfl 

Tobacco 


Md. sr. ch. 

Md. sr. ch. 

Md. sr. ch. 

Md. sr. ch. 

M<Lsr^ph. 

sr. ch. 

Basirhat 

0 0 15 

0 15 4 

0 17 1 

0 3 14 


0 3 0 

Baduria , 

0 2 5 

0 31 0 

0 13 12 

0 1 6 


0 3 4 

Deganga 

Nil 

m 

0 4 1 

Nil 

| Nil 

0 1 16 

Barasat 

0 0 1 

0 0 4 

0 17 16 

0 0 3 

Nil 

0 0 12 



































LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS } BENGAL 395 

In Badflria in another one-third of the cultivated area is produce^ pulses 
^fcwUipinor food grains; considerable quantities of jute are also grovfi. Thus 
multiple chopping on large scale is practised only in this part of the region. 
Baduria, h^s, however, the lowest acreage under aman, though producing 
enough to satisfy local needs. Basirhat has the highest production of aman 
rice over 6/maunds, per capita, and hence it can export large quantities. 
Barasat has also large exportable surplus of rice. Basirhat and Baduria 
in the east and Barasat in the west produce more than one maund of jute per 
capita . 

Table XVIII shows the distribution of the live-stock, ploughs, carts and 
boats in this region (see all Figs. 19 to 23). The density of cattle is lower 
in the east than in the west. Basirhat, however, had the highest number of 
sheep and goats. The same area also had the highest numbers of ploughs, 
carts and boats. 

Table XVIII 


Distribution of Live-stock , Ploughs , Carts and Boats in the Barasat-Basirhat Plains 


Thanaa. 

Live-! 

Cattle 

3TOCK 

Sheep and goats 

Ploughs 

per 

1,000 

acres 

Total number 

! 

Total 

number 

Density 

per 

8q. mile 

Total 

number 

Number 

per 

1,000 

persons 

Carts 

Boats 

Basirhat 

32,699 

327 

17,799 

180 

116 

2,904 

361 

Baduria 

21,832 

270 

6,631 

78 

72 

2,241 

174 

Deganga 

29,640 

380 

9,326 

162 

109 

2,936 

92 

Barasat 

38,023 

366 

8,171 

88 

82 

2,686 

1 80 


4. The Southern Plains 

The Southern Plains form the richest and densely populated agricultural 
region of 24-Parganas. It is completely encircled by an embankment, so that 
brackish water from the tidal Sundarbans river may not have any access to 
this region (see Fig. 1). The relief and drainage conditions of these plains 
have already been described. The villages are compact and contain neat 
thatched oottages surrounded by pressed mud wall. The palm trees, bamboo 
groves, tamarind and other shady trees mark the sites of villages (see Plate 
VIIA)j» I Of the palm trees, date-palm and palmyra predominate and provide 
* good inobme to the owners. They can grow anywhere, though more properly 
aroun^a marshy area (see Plate VIIB). * 

The Baruipur-Jaynagar Plain, formed by the Hooghly in the past, con- 
centrates more on fruits, vegetable and betel than on cereals. Th% metalled 
Baruipur-Bishnupur read, which runs from Calcutta to Bishnupur through 
Baruipur and Jaynagar-Majilpur, enables these perishable goods to be trans- 




m 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


ported^apidly to Calcutta market by trucks. Baruipur, as its name indi- 
cates, is ^ one of the few places of the distriot where betel orchards cajuk^ 
seen (see Plate VIIIA). The betel plants are very delicate and grow only 
inside a thatched house. Baruipur is noted for its excellent juic^litchi fruit. 
The litchi trees grow well in a loamy well-drained soil (see Plate VIIIB). 
Here lower portions of the old bed of the Ganges are ploughed arid put under 
rice cultivation (see Plate IXA). For cultivating crops other than aman 
it is necessary to raise the ground to about 4 feet above the general level of the 
river bed, to ensure safety from inundation during the rains (see Plate IXB). 
The old bed of the Ganges is clearly recognizable as one proceeds from Jaynagar 
to Bishnupur. One of the banks has provided site for the road, and over the 
other runs a railway (see Plate XA). The greater part of the bed has not 
been reclaimed. It gets flooded during the rains, and hence a large area 
containing rich soil remains uncultivated. The excellent soils in the flood 
plains of the extinct river have given rise to a number of brick fields (see 
Plate XB). A number of tanks have been excavated in deeper parts of the 
old bed, which still retain all the sanctity of the Ganges (see Plate XIA). 
West of the Baruipur- Jaynagar Plain the country is drained by a number of 
canals, making it possible to utilize all the available land. Even where it is 
not drained properly, especially in the low-lying portions of the country, a 
number of ponds are excavated at different levels, and used as fisheries. Koi 
(Anabas scandas ), Magur and Singhi fish that love stagnant, dirty waters 
are cultured in these fisheries. The water is lifted up by long water buckets 
from the lower to the next higher pond and when it becomes dry such fish 
are caught by hand (see Plate XIB). The Kulpi canal serves the southern part, 
passing through rich rice fields. The date -palms invariably grow along the banks 
of this canal (see Plate XIIA). The soenery at the confluence of this canal 
with the Ganges is superb (see Plate XIIB). 

All the plains in this region are thickly populated and have a density 
of over 1,000 persons per square mile. The Kulpi Plain, which occupies the 
southernmost part of the region, is rather thinly populated, especially in its 
southern section. In the central part the population pattern is of dispersal 
type. Elsewhere it is arranged in a linear fashion, especially along the old 
bed of the Hooghly, where double-line of settlements can be seen. The whole ‘ 
of this region is well served by roads, railways and water-ways, and this accounts 
for its agricultural prosperity. Jaynagar-Majilpur is the largest town in this 
region. Its population increased rather slowly from 1872 to 1921 and since 
then has a more rapid upward trend (see Fig. 25). There are a number of 
beautiful temples in this town (see Plate XIIIA). Baruipur is thef second 
largest town in the district. This town had a stunted growth in J&e past 


(see Tig. 25). Magrahat is an important rice exporting oentre. The railway 
station is connected with a canal, to facilitate transport of rice (see Plate 
XIHB). , 

Table XIX shows the distribution of the live-stock, ploughs, carts and 
boats in this region* The percentages of area under cultivation in the total 



Table XIX 

Land Utilization in the Southern Plains 




398 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


o *-» 

jnOOOHOOO 

200000000 


.•a ft nsaaas 




jOOO^OOOO 


-oooooooo 


O -H rH 

^t'^N««NOJO 

Soooooooo 






2 D yTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANA8, BENGAL 399 

*thana vary between 61 and 83. In the central part extending 

P ur to Kulpi and comprising the four thanas, Bishnupur, iv|agrahat, 

Diamona™,rbour and Kulpi, the percentages of such land are over 80. In 
most of th^e plains none of the holdings exceeds 2 acres. The north- 
eastern part \Sonarpur) has the highest percentage of arable land, which is 
not yet cultivated. Bishnupur, Magrahat and Diamond Harbour have the 
lowest percentage of such unutilized land. The percentage of unculturable 
land is below 20 everywhere. 

The acreage under aman is very high in all the plains, over 90 per cent 
in most of the thanas. Sonarpur and Baruipur grow more fruits and vegetables 
henco the percentages under aman do not rise much above 80. The other 
crops are grown mainly for home consumption. The per capita production 
figures indicate that the region as a whole has a considerable exportable 
surplus of aman rice. The distribution of ploughs, cattle, sheep and goats, 
carts and boats show some interesting features (see Table XX). 


Table XX 


Distribution of Livestock , Ploughs , Carts and Boats in the Southern Plains 


Thanas 

Live-stock 

Ploughs 

per 

Total number 

Cattle 

Sheep and goats 


Total 

number 

Density 

per 

sq. mile 

Total 

number 

Number 

per 

1,000 

persons 

- 

1,000 

acres 

Carts 

Boats 

Sonarpur 

15,739 

297 

4,284 

80 

72 

268 

156 

Protapnagar 

9,201 

368 

1,682 

96 

129 

119 

133 

Bishnupur 

28,319 

345 

6,369 

60 

94 

390 

1,145 

j Baruipur 

30,199 

364 

5,258 

60 

114 

831 

136 

‘Magrahat 

53,551 

458 

8,749 

90 

115 

344 

604 

Falta 

22,307 

442 

4,407 

64 

115 

264 

20 

Diamond Harbour 

33,078 

494 

6,277 

66 

138 

188 

218 

Kulpi 

43,774 

405 

10,053 

90 

114 

114 

229 


The density of ploughs increases from north to south, that of cart decreases 
from north to south. The density of boats is the minimum in the oentral 
part. The distribution of the live-stock is more or less uniform throughout 
the region (see Figs. 19 to 23). 


5. Northern Plains of the Sundarbans 

ThJ essential features of these plains have already been emphasized. 
"South oxTaki at Hasnabad or little further south we get the first glimpse 
of the gundybans, which was put under the plough not very long ago. Wo 
•longer we see the familiar sight of compact villages under the cover 
trees, but scattered hamlets in wide open country. A tidal creek here and 
a low mud embankment there may occasionally break the monotony of these 
plains (see Plate XIVA). The country has been deforested so ruthlessly 



400 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


that all jhe typical trees have almost gone. The farm lands are mcfte extensive, 
and kno]m as abads. Each abad bears its own lot number. The' sca^ttw^a 
hamlets are slowly evolving into villages. The smaller villages h^ve not yet 
been given any name. They are also known by their lot numbers. The 
Gobra khal issues out from the Jamuna near Hasnabad and flows parallel to 
it for several miles before joining the Bidyadhari south of Sandeskhali. The 
low-lying eastern portion of the Hasnabad Plains drains into this khal. It 
also serves as an important water-way, and provides sites for human settle- 
ments, which are slowly growing. In the Harua Plain a number of rivers 
locally known as gangs join each other, giving rise to a typical braided type 
of river system. They eventually form one channel and enter into the Payna 
abad (lot 62). This abad, as its name indicates, used to be cultivated in the 
past, but ever since the embankments gave way they were not reconstructed 
with the result that the land got inundated and could not be cultivated any 
longer. In this way vast areas once reclaimed have reverted back to their 
original condition, thereby lowering the acreage under the plough. As for 
this particular abad and a few other abads like the Goabaria abad (lot 70) 
they were transformed into profitable fisheries and utilized as such. But 
there are numerous examples of rich cultivated fields losing their fertility 
and gradually becoming unproductive because of the neglect on the part of 
the landlord to maintain the embankments in proper order. The embank- 
ments get breached often, allowing brackish water to enter into the cultivated 
fields. The author could see the devastating effect of this at Amjhara a small 
village, opposite Port Canning. Here the villagers grow a poor crop of paddy, 
and no vegetables of any kind. The cattle are underfed, and graze on the 
stubbles of paddy after harvest (see Plate XIVB). The present embankment 
should be repaired, and another embankment is to be constructed to strengthen 
it. Moreover, at certain intervals the embankment should have brick- 
built sluice gates to drain out the interior fields. There was only one such 
sluice gate at the time the area was visited (see Plate XVA). The Bhangar 
Plain is intersected by a number of navigable canals, and contains compact 
villages unlike the central and eastern parts of the regions. There was a 
proposal to build a Grand Trunk Canal through the Bhangar Plain connecting 
Calcutta with the Harua Gang but the scheme did not materialize. Of the* 
north-south flowing canals the Bidyadhari khal is the most important. It 
connects the Harua Gang with the Bhangar kata khal. About a mile west of 
this khal occurs a group of bils, which runs from northeast to southwest, 
and was once continuous from the Calcutta marshes (salt-water lake* to the 
Bhubanpur marshes. Of this group the Kalinga and the Kada contajp water 
throughout the year in their deeper parts. These represent an old rfVer bed/ 
wjtfch needs resuscitation. Enormous quantities of goalpatta an£ hogla 
these marshes, which are extensively used for thatching purposes^ 
in various parts of the district (see Plate XVB). Further west occurs the low- 
lying Dhapa bil , from where enormous quantities of cabbages and oauli- . 
flowers come to Calcutta market in winter. 



Plate I 



h4sw° f ( ^ w r ftfter . 

Zi;° “ 0nly “ «— - ««-» - walTl^te "aSS 



«nk of the Hooghly betwm KmkijMttr^ BhX!L. W? P hot ' ogI *P h *<"*■ » Wt of the 
fifl «4the Titagari, Paper ^ 0 ^y « of the Kimldw^ 



/Plate II 



«» m ™ k *" n ~ <«*. ,, 



Pl^te III 




the rLVr^Lfr n Xabl^ 0nM 80 active ri ™'- Note that 

The bed has been partitioned by bamboo poles esLwkhiLTr ^ "“T ° nly middle - 

' eanoe and the last bamboo pole in the debt mark Z J r *' " g ° f individua > 8 - A 

water is not visible except at one place because of tj«^ ^ ° f 



B, Typical granary in the countryside. m Q t*th**m*~- ^ , 

Btmw, the other with corrugated tin sheet. Both are raised awTl* °** 18 ^ atc ^ d ^ 
storefl in them.) rat^ above the ground level. p ad <; 


!■ Plate Vt 



th. m-’-r 'S W “"““ Wn> *~*d »<™y tet by tb. html .mb, of 

— - Cs -r"’” T * ki - 3 - - ** «* 


V \ 



; ^ ; ; * >} - %. ' , *; : w -. ; f, * ' *;* V> v. , . s ; 

■> >;*■' ' ■ *\v ■*■ . 

• ** *•■ • • - 


•** V. * <J «V ^ 
•* - ■ •,*; ■ 


3 * J** 


M. Water by«taS> invading a tank at Taki. (Note th« beautiful fW«..) \ 



A. \icw of a charming typical farmhouse in the Southern Plains, north of Magrahat. 
(Note the characteristic vegetation: palm trees on the left and bamboo prove on the right. There 
are sprouts of coconut palm in the foreground.) 



View of a plantation of palm trees around a marshy arei 
Jn thrbackground . ) 


(The village of D1 



fXATE VII/ 



View of a typical orchard of betel near Baruipu 

nlnniy. 1 It - * 


to keep the plant,, under shade . Note the stieks jeftj th/roof^ “ th ” "TT 

wh.eh the creeper climb* up inside the hoU8 , a th ? P , 

b«en heavily manured and kept ready for a new plantation ) * ’ ' Ch '"* 8 





^ of an old bed of the Ganges near Baruipur, 

raiseyfod manured to grow vegetables,} 


'.Plate 3f 



A. View of the same old bed of the Ganges farther south. (Note that the dry bed is lying 
waste. A road runs on the left and a railway in the background on the extreme right. These 
two occupying the two banks of the river, now extinct.) 



i 








. A ashing device to catch fish that live in i 
From the lower tank, which has 1 


' i wafcer< (^ote the device to 
‘ f <Msateh.) 


Plate XTi 




Plate' XII] 



(Note the typical architecture 

* not very old. The oldest one is on the extreme left.) 




A. A typical landscape in the Northern Plains of the Sundarbans fi,„ 

nver, which is really a canal originally used for drainage 7 meandering 

countryside is almost bare of tree vegeWfom) " alm ° 9t 8ilted U P' T1 ‘« 


Elate XI/ 





dearth^ good land not only in «Amjh»r». k (There 

' TJLt ..tSEZS* 


PlatiS XV 



A. View of a sluice gate on the embankments surrounding Amjhara and neighbouring 
vi ages. (For draining the fields efficiently a number of such gates should be constructed.) 



B. i Thatching with goal patta obtained from marshlands of the Sundarbans. (Note Wat the 
leaves have beenapht up mto two halves before using them. This photograph waM^Tta 

KhatUra ’ whioh 8h0W8 *» wide use oTEs proZTo^ ^ 








Plate XVIII 


ooartrurted 
Sc cannot p&m over it.) 


Plate* XIX 



dr*L7 ie r of 7 ir t:r channel in the rwiaimed **>**»*. ia the 0 t 

a drainage channel and the countryside in the undeveloped part of the Sundarhans that has 
"" a *' “• ’*-* »*• *•» •- - 



culti* 


„. B j V r° fa ‘P 0 * 1 mud embankmfint at Kakdwip. (Such embankments are around 
ltiv^ed fields. Note the low height and narrow width of the embankm ent These are buffih ', ' 
Mid mad. Note also the efflorescence of salt on the soil away from the embankment!? 7 * 


Plate XX 



«™p™ will, W ","““7' K “W- IX°t* it. white,. 

rr;* “t-i: — - ’srszzzz tsr •s 



Plate XXI 



, ^ J<W of a typical farmhouse in the reclaimed Sundarbana (Note tw k 

s :r zrsx w -r r ^ 

rom the tvrw Tr y ' Th b 6 0f dense Vf « etetion near the house characterizes it 







^ Birfwlwip. (Thi* it 



Land Utilization in the Northern Plains of the Sundarbans 



36 


0 13 0 2 0 0 14 14 0 0 10 0 0 

Nil 0 0 5 0 6 11 Nil Nil 



402 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Table XXII shows the distribution of the live-stock, ploughs, carts and 
boats in this region (see also the relevant figures). 

The density of population gradually increases from east t^ west. The 
two eastern plains have 750 persons per square mile, the Bhangar 

Plain has some 900 and the Rajarhat Plain 1,200, because w of their proximity 
to Calcutta. The linear pattern of population becomes more .and more 
pronounced as one proceeds westward from the eastern Bidyadhari (Bata- 
gachi Gang). Hasnabad is an important fish-exporting centre of Bengal. 
Boats laden with fish and forest products of the Sundarbans come to this 
important market town (see Plate XVIA). From the railway station a side line 
extends right up to the fish market on the Ichamati, so that there may not 
be any delay in despatching fish to Calcutta (see Plate XVIB). Bhangar is also 
an important trade centre dealing mainly with vegetables and poultry. Matla 
or Port Canning stands on the Matla. The attempt to develop Matla into 
a port failed because of the sparse population of this region. The forest 
products of Sundarbans, such as Goran, Dhondal and Gewa poles, fuel wood 
and wax come to Canning first, and then transported to different parts of the 
district (see Plate XVIIA), are sold in Canning market. On the Port Canning 
side runs an embankment along the river, which is paved with bricks in the 
town, but further north it is built of pressed mud. Such an embankment, 
when breached, is protected with bamboo thatching (see Plate XVIIB). A 
portion of the river bed, which becomes dry at the low-tide, is enclosed by mud 
embankments and converted into bheries or fisheries. 

The percentages of the cultivated lands vary between 65 and 74. It 
increases from west to east. The difference between the densities of popula- 
tion calculated on the basis of total and cultivated areas is greater in the two 
western plains than in the two eastern. The proportion of cultivable but not 
cultivated area is the least in the Hasnabad Plain, only 6 per cent of the total 
area. It is about the same in the remaining portion of the region. The 
percentage of the unculturable area is the maximum in the Bhanga/ Plain. 
Of the crops grown in the region, aman is the most important. The percentage 
acreage under aman is well over 90 in the Hasnabad Plain, and ranges between 
82 and 85 in the Rajarhat and Harua Plains. It is the minimum in the 
Bhangar Plain. The per capita production of aman is very high. It is over 
14 maunds in Hasnabad, 11 maunds in Harua and little over 7 maunds in the 
two remaining areas. The Northern Plains of the Sundarbans, therefore, 
play large part in feeding the population of Calcutta. The Bhangar and 
Rajarhat Plains have also exportable surplus of fruits and vegetables The 
other crops are not grown on large scale in this region. 

/ >• The ^nsity of ploughs ranges between 97 and 131, the number being 
5&ss ir the west than in the east. The two western thanas have afso s nailer 
numfafs of cattle, sheep and goats and oarts. As to the density of >oats, 
it is th& ni^hest in the Hasnabad Plain, and the lowest in the RajarhatnPlain 
(see ^able iXXII and Figs. 19 to 23). 



LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL * 408 


Table XXII 


distribution of Livestocks, Ploughs , Carts and Boats in the Northern Plains of the Sundarbans 


\ J 

’ 1 > 7 *' 

• 

Thanas 

L Live-s 

Cattle 

JTOOK 

Sheep and goats 

[ 

Ploughs 

per 

1,000 

acres 

Total Number 

Total 

number 

Density 

per 

sq. mile 

Total 

number 

Number 

per 

1,000 

persons 

Carts 

Boats 

Hasnabad 

61,800 

399 

15,782 

176 

131 

1,579 

817 

Harua 

41,818 

346 

11,201 

144 

100 

1,775 

419 

Bhangar 

35,843 

282 

10,888 

110 

97 

1,525 

799 

Rajarhat 

11,993 

307 

2,929 

90 

98 

520 

26 


6. The Reclaimed Sundarbans 

The Sundarbans is named after its characteristic tree, Sundri (Heritiera 
minor). The belt of the reclaimed Sundarbans runs from northeast to south- ’ 
west. It is much wider in the west since in this part reclamation proceeded right 
up to the sea face. It is more easily accessible than the eastern part. One 
can go to Lakshmikantapur by train, and then proceed to Kakdwip by car. 
The road up to Kulpi is all right, but beyond that is in a terrible state (Plate 
XVIIIA). It is absolutely necessary to improve the Kakdwip-Kulpi portion 
of the Kulpi road, and until then no further development of this portion of 
region is possible. Just before reaching Kakdwip the road passes over a bridge, 
which during the time of the visit of the author’s party was almost on the 
breaking point (Plate XVIIIB). The roads are almost non-existent in other 
portions of the reclaimed belt, excepting in the Basanti abad where it runs 
. between Port Canning and Basanti. There exists a regular ferry service 
between Kakdwip and the Sagar island. A good metalled road runs the whole 
length of this island. The absence of road is somewhat compensated by a 
network of tidal water-ways which run in all directions, though such means 
of transport is very slow. The most important of these water-ways, which 
is used by steamers proceeding to Assam from Calcutta, runs unfortunately 
through the forested Sundarbans lying further south (Fig. 1). 

There are four main problems which stand in the way of proper utilization 
of land in this region. The problem of providing easy and rapid means of 
transport is one. The drainage problem is another. Because of the low relief, 
the trffaenoy of the land here is to get water-logged. It is true that a number 
age ohannels have been exoavated, but most of them are too narrow 
"to be Jf use (Plate XIXA). Such drainage ohannels are to t 
and ptvided with sluice gates for regulating water. The problem ofemWk- 
ing cultivated fields so as to prevent the salt-water to get into thejgns the „ 
third/ Most of the embankments have been constructed without imjy plan, . 
and do not serve the purpose now. They are too low to be of much useUnd- 



404 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


made of such flimsy materials that the salt-water ean easily percolate through 
them (Plate XIXB). The scarcity of drinkable water constitutes the fourth 
problem. Here all the rivers carry salt-water unfit for drinHng and the 
inhabitants have to depend on rainwater preserved with Qpasi<W&ble difficulty, - 
The problem becomes very acute in summer, when all tfiSponds containing 
fresh water dry up. 

The vegetation in the northern part of the region now mainly consists 
of low grasses and shrubs, the tree vegetation almost disappearing. In the 
midst of such a grass-land rises a conspicuous structure near Kulpi, which is 
now deserted. It looks like a temple, but is known locally as Kulpi pagoda 
or Manibibi tomb (Plate XXA). Nearer the tidal rivers grows mangrove 
vegetation with their roots above the ground (Plate XXB). 

A greater part of the Sundarban abads is cultivated by seasonal workers, 
who come mainly from the Midnapore district of Bengal, and return homo after 
sowing and transplanting rice. Hence, during the growing season large areas 
of rice field are left without a trace of human habitation. But in the south- 


western part the cultivators have settled near their farm land. They have 
built nice hamlets, built of dried mud bricks arranged in a characteristic 
pattern, and thatched the roof with thatching grasses obtained locally. The 
thorny leaves of date-palm serve as a fence, and are stuck in mud walls which 
surround the hamlet. There are very few trees surrounding the hamlets as in 
the Southern Plains (Plate XXIA). They use their cattle for threshing pulses 
and other grains (Plate XXIB). 

The population is very much scattered all over the region, thus necessitat- 
ing the holding of small hats at convenient places. The agricultural products 
of the region and the daily necessities of life of the farmers are sold in these 
markets (Plate XXIIA). Centres of dense population are non-existent in 
this region. Kakdwip is an important village, doing brisk trade in agricultural 
products of the Sundarbans. One of the oldest temples of Bengal is found in 
this village, which speaks of its former glory (Plate XXIIB). 

Table XXIII shows the nature of land utilization, and a very high degree 
of self-sufficiency in aman (see also the sketch-maps). 

The density of population varies between 201 and 623. The apparent 
higher densities in Sandeshkhali, Canning, Jaynagar and Mathurapur are due 
to the feet that parts of the Southern Plains and the Northern Plains of the 
Sundarbans have been included within those areas. The percentage of area 
under cultivation is the highest in Kakdwip, 73, and ranges between 53 and 
69 in other parts. The density of population per square mile of cultivated 
area is almost twice that of total area in all the thanas. The percentage of 
culturable but not cultivated area is the highest in Mathurapur, 24, ^nd 


little ov^lO in the remaining plains. About one-third of the are^ is uncul- ■ 
tural/e in the eastern part. In the remaining portion it comes to 'about 


4ural /jd in the eastern part. In the remaining portion it comes to 'about 
one-ft^h of the total area. Nothing but aman is cultivated in this legion, 

istricti 


exportable surplus is the highest in the whole of the district^ The 
[production of aman rice is 20 maunds or over in the four of the six 



Table XXIII 

Land Utilization in the Reclaimed Sundarbans 


LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OP 24-PARGANAS, BENGAL- 405 






406 


B. C. LA.W VOLUME 




LAND UTILIZATION IN THE DISTRICT OF 24-PABGANAS, BENGAL * 407 

ohanas. Since the agricultural workers bring their own ploughs from their 
home districts the number of ploughs per 1,000 acres is below 100 in all but one 
thanas. The density of live-stock’ is pretty low, considering the abundance of 
pastures. The density of carts is pretty low throughout the region, being 
the lowest in the western part. In such a region the density of boats should 
have been.much higher than what it is (see Table XXIV and Figs. 19 to 23). 


Table XXIV 

Distribution of Live-stock, Ploughs, Carts and Boats in the Reclaimed Sundarbans 


Thanas 

Live-e 

Cattle 

JTOOK 

Sheep and goats 

Ploughs 

per 

1,000 

acres 

Total number 

Total 

number 

Density 

per 

sq. mile 

Total 

number 

Number 

per 

1,000 

persons 

Carts 

Boats 

Sandeshkhali 

66,039 

239 

13,955 

140 

66 

1,292 


Canning 

79,178 

272 

14,735 

135 

77 

1,657 

458 

Jaynagar 

64,103 

285 

13,085 


99 

689 

1,123 

Mathurapur 

85,198 

257 

12,107 

120 

80 

369 

464 

Kakdwip 


318 

8,620 

135 

107 

34 

249 

Sagar 

22,940 

223 

3,311 

99 

79 

8 

141 


Conclusion 

To sum up, the Upper Hooghly Plain is deficient in food supplies, and 
hence looal labour is to be employed in the mills and factories as far as possible. 
Truck farming on a large scale is also to be encouraged. 

The Plains of Amdanga-Sarupnagar and the Barasat-Basirhat Plains 
produce enough rice to satisfy looal needs. These constitute the jute and aus - 
producing regions of the distriot. Irrigation and drainage are the main 
problems. Resuscitation of the Padma, the Jamuna and various other 
streams now completely silted up, is necessary. The Northern Plains of the 
Sundarbans produce more paddy than what is needed in the region. An 
improvement of the means of transport and the maintenance of embankments 
in proper order are necessary. The reclaimed Sundarbans is the chief grain 
supplying region of the distriot. It has yet considerable possibilities for agri- 
cultural development provided the four problems of transport, embankment, 
potalle water, and drainage, with whioh the inhabitants of the regions are 
oonffinted today, be solved. >> 

The author now wishes to express his thanks to his oolleagues, Di\B. N* 
MukAjee, Mr. D. R. Mitra, Mr. K. Bagohi and Mr. B. N. Ganguli fqjpfJhrti^ 
cipatJng in the field work. His special thanks are due to his formgTstudents, 
Mr. Birendranath Ganguli, Mr. Puma Chandra Chakravorti, Mr. &*bodK 






408 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Chandra Bose and Miss Binapani Dasgupta. Mr. B. N. Ganguli was entrusted 
with the photographic work, and had taken most of the photographs illustrating 
this paper, the rest were taken by the author himself. He also assisted the 
author in many ways from the start of the survey till the writing out of this 
paper. Mr. Chakravorti and Miss Dasgupta were entrusted with the soil 
analysis work and analyzed the soils mechanically. Mr. Subodh Chandra 
Bose determined the pH values of the soils and had drawn the population 
map under the direction of the author. 


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NEGATION IN HINDU PHILOSOPHICAL 

THOUGHT 

By 

Dr. Betty Heimann 

In India everything is religion, thus runs the general slogan. Perhaps 
one has to modify this statement, or rather to amplify it. Every religion is 
based on the presupposition of a world-view which has two aspects. Here on 
earth everything is transitory, relative and imperfect, while somewhere 
beyond there exists as a postulate something perfect with all the various 
predicates of the Absolute. Thus the religious man, everywhere in the world, 
lives on two levels simultaneously. In India this continuous double attitude 
pervades also all the spheres of knowledge, not only religion. 

Why, then, can this statement be applied also to our subject in hand, 
the extraordinarily frequent use of negation ? 

Negation presupposes in itself a double aspect: it denies something 
formerly known, and is as such in a higher sense also a positive statement, 
that of a oounter-position. 

There are sixteen recognized schools dealt with in the medieval Indian 
history of philosophical systems written by the Vedantin Madhava. The 
first, whioh means the worst, is the school of the Materialists, i.e. those who 
try to oppose the generally accepted doctrine of the existence of a transcen- 
dental world. As such they proclaim: ‘m para * there is nothing (what you 
all acoept) beyond. Here the negation is used to assert a one-sided view. 
Only one oounter-position is accepted, it is the negation of a positive statement 
(para) the existence of which is, in some way or other, acknowledged by all 
the other schools of Hindu thought. 

The second system according to Madhava is that of the Buddhists, still 
for away from the best and ultimate. Some of the Buddhist schools arv the 
Ndstika 8. the so-called Nihilists. They take once more a one-sided view, but 
this ti from the reverse angle. For them this whole empirical world does 
not ffttaally exist. The * para-asti \ the Beyond is the only Real, or a| any 
rate thebtfy permanent reality. Other Buddhist schools do not go so iar as 
to deny everything empirical altogether. It is true that, for instance, the 



HE SIGNIFICANCE OF NEGATION IN HINDU PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT* 409 


VijMna-Vadins do not aocept the reality of the external world, nor that of 
internal experiences, but there still exists for them an empirical Positive, 
the reservoir out of which our senses take their starting-point and into which 
our experiences flow: the abya (abode) of vijndna (consciousness) is for them 
the actual worldly reality. Our empirically working intellect is a positive 
factor in this world beside the transcendental positive — the world beyond. 
All other Buddhist schools keep to the assumption that the true reality, that 
is the constant reality, is in the Transcendental, while whatever happens in 
this world can only have a transitory momentary existence (Ksana). Thus 
all Buddhists are Ksam-Vadins. In the case of the Buddhist dogmatics, 
therefore, the negation is used to deny something which is without question 
accepted as positive by the average man’s experience, the HERE. 

The Advaita Vedantins, the last and highest system of orthodox Hindu 
thought, also work with negations in consequence of the fundamental double 
view. Their highest transcendental principle is the Brahman. The whole 
empirical world is an outflow of this transcendental reservoir which provides 
the material and, at the same time, the spiritual basis of all phenomena. We 
thus see that for them the interconnection between the Here and the Beyond 
is never questioned nor separated. It is assumed that there is not only an 
independent co-existence between both levels, but, furthermore, an inter- 
connected co-existence. If now these Vedantins also have to make use of 
negations, then not one side is questioned or entirely negated in its reality; 
both are real, but bf different grades of value and reality. The negation 
used has here but the significance of a limitation. The formula of these 
Vedantins for the divine qualities of the highest Brahman is its predicates of 
Sat-Cit-Ananda (absolute Being, absolute Consciousness, and absolute Bliss). 
Apart from these three absolute qualities, all further definitions or applications 
of distinct qualities are to be negated. Hence the famous statement that 
Brahman is NA-ITI, Na-Iti (It is not thus [only], it is not thus [only]). 
All our empirical definitions (i.e. limitations) take away the all-embracing 
vagueness, productivity and potentiality of the Absolute which is represented 
in Brahman alone. Here the negation is used for remoting from the Trans- 
cendental any limitation as presented in all, even the highest, empirical 
qualifications and individualizations. 

Another use of negation belongs to the same sphere of transcendental- 
empirical interconnection. If, for instanoe, Sankara, the advocate of complete 
identification between Atman and Brahman, advances the theory of the 
A-Dvaitam, the non-duality between the individual and the universal Soul, 
he uses the negation as a strong affirmation that no duality whatever (wrongly 
supposed by some other thinkers) can in any way exist. Here the negation 
is a ^futa^on of an otherwise assumed but — for him — wrongly assumed 
theory of separation between the Whole and its parts. \ 

Ihe A-dftfii, the invisible, is a generally acoepted postulate of something 
positive which is beyond the range of our eyes. As such the physics assume 
a substance immeasurably small and immeasurably great, both Jeyond the 



410 ' 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


v 

limited capacity of our perception. Their A-df$ta is material, the atom on 
the one side and the immense ether on the other. 

Other systems, in accordance with their aim of research, see their invisible, 
but concrete, postulate either in Fate or in effect not yet reached, etc. The 
negative expression designates something positive beyond the positive 
phenomenon. Negation and position, both are positive, but both of p. different 
type. 

Other kinds of negation are not full negations, but only limitations. 
Firstly, the negation of permanence throughout all stages of time. The main 
term of the Sankhya system is the A-Vyakta, the Not-yet- or No-more-manifest 
(Vy-akta, lit. the curved-apart). A-Vyakta is the potential reservoir of all 
empirical things out of which they all arise and into which they are all re- 
absorbed, but which in itself can be only deduced from its middle stage, the 
manifestations. 

Another aspect of limitation, expressed by negation, seems to underlie 
the cardinal term of A- Vidyd . The whole world of ours is only A-Vidyd , 
Non-knowledge, as it is generally translated. 

But how, then, can come out of the A-Vidyd the Vidyd reached in libera- 
tion, and how then could the A-Vidya arise out of the pre-empirical Vidyd ? 
Two reasons speak against this assumption. Firstly, one of the main dogmas 
of Indian thought is that nothing gets lost (after primary Vidyd) and that out 
of nothing (empirical A-Vidya) cannot arise something later on (final Vidyd). 
Secondly, the Vedantins, who preferably apply the term A-Vidya , maintain 
the uninterrupted interconnection and relation between this world and the 
Brahman of which the phenomena are a part only, not the Whole. Therefore, 
I venture to propose, in accordance with the similes constantly used, that the 
worldly, so-called Non-knowledge is only a veiled and dimmed Vidyd. Hence 
A-Vidya may be translated as ‘ incomplete ’ or ‘ imperfect ’ knowledge, stained 
by our empirical experience. A-Vidya , therefore, seems to imply not a bill 
negation, but only a limited negation. 

And now for the significance of double negations. Double negations 
are used in the Upani$ads and the Bhagavadgit& in a similar sense. The 
divine vagueness and width of the Highest is maintained in predicating the 
Brahman not only with a positive quality and not only with its negative 
counterpart, but through the negation of any empirioal quality and its 
opposite. Positive and negative, both are one-sided and therefore a negation 
of both empirical counterparts, shall suggest the all-embracing unlimited 
divine capacity. Or, a negation of a negation is applied to indicate something 
that is more than a plain emphasized positive statement and is more than 
a corroborated qualification through double negation which as suoh would 
also still belong to the world of our limited definitions. f } t5 

Efom the logical angle the polar negation means inclusion of both oounter- 
parts\lt is characteristic of Indian logic that not only the Bhdva (Being), 
but also the A-Bhdva (Non-Being) is attempted to be proved by a positive 
logical profess. The standard example is the non-pot on a plaoe where we 



THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NEGATION IN HINDU PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 411 


were accustomed to see a pot; we now find there the absence of the pot by 
exactly the same process of perceiving. As suoh A-Bhava (Non-Being) is in 
a way as positive as the Bhava. The Naiyayikas are true Ontologists, seekers 
for the two correlated principles, the Being and Non-Being, not only concerned 
with ‘Being’ and empirical beings, but with the positive and negative sides 
as interrelated general principles. 

One of the fundamental dogmas of Hindu thought is that of identification 
or, at any rate, similarity, between macro- and micro-cosmic parts of the 
Universe. I may venture to try and give an explanation from this angle 
of the ambiguous word ‘No’ in the Rgveda. It is still an unsolved problem 
how in the Rgveda the very same word ‘No’ can assume the meaning of a 
pure negation and, besides, that of a comparison (= iva). If one does not 
want to take the easy way out to accept the unlikely falling-together of two 
unrelated words of exactly the same formation in the Rgvedic ‘No*, one has 
to consider whether the very same word ‘No’ can perhaps also take the 
significance of a comparison. 

It may well be that the unexpected meaning of ‘No’ as a comparison is 
based on the general presupposition of identification between the different 
parts of the Universe, and that the negation in this case would only refer to 
a complete identification, but still implies the possibility of a positive- 
negative statement of similarity. Here the negation would then be used in 
the sense of a limited identification. 

Besides the examples of negations given above, expressed by static logical 
terms o- and no, the dynamic trend of the Hindu thought preferably indicates 
negation by other prefixes like vi , nir and ati, or sama. 

Ni (corresponding to Latin dis) expresses negation in the sense of trans- 
formation, i.e. dispersion of the former shape, but not an actual polar counter- 
position. Sometimes instead of a mere prefix full verbal forms are used like: 
vita, gone away, or rte, gone. This is in accordance with the basic Hindu 
thought that nothing empirioal remains unchanged in its conditions, though 
in its being. Everything is in continuous transition from generation to 
destruction and vice versa. However, not always vi, vita or rte indicate the 
full way of approach to the polar opposite, but stops short somewhere on the 
stages between. 

As to the prefix Nir , it expresses the same idea of transformation, but 
yet in a stronger way of dispersion in a kind of explosive manner (cf. Nirvana , 
the blown asunder). The prefix Ati has not a dispersive meaning, but plainly 
indicates transgression in the sense of ‘ beyond’. As suoh it is used, for instanoe, 
in the term ‘ ati-jana ’, lit. beyond human beings, for an empty spot where there 
is nobody, but where there might have been somebody or may be somebody 
in the%tur8. 

The prefix Sama , on the other hand, has the peculiar meaning of combining 
the Jpposites and negating both of them. For instanoe, 
kham\ lit. where fortune and misfortune are lying together, expresses some- 



412 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


thing which is indifferent towards these opposites and in this way gives the 
negation of both, position and oounter-position. 

There are other means, too, to express a full negation, limited negation 
of indifferentiation. The greatest philosophical achievement of the other- 
wise less philosophically, and more practically, minded Jains is the so-called 
* Syad-vada’, the assertion of the ‘may be’. In the five-fold, or ^even-fold, 
members of the ‘ Syad-vada ’ the various conditions of things are either stated 
as limited negations (that what is now and has not been in the past and will 
not be in the future), or there are negations in the sense of correlative exclusion 
or inclusion. 

Another form of negation is used in the sphere of theological thinking. 
It is implied in the dual, or multiple, combination of the names of several 
deities, for instance, in the Rgveda. Indra is addressed together with the 
second main God as Indra-V arunau or Varuna is venerated together with 
Mitra as Mitra-V arunau. Or else, Indra and Varuna or Agni are praised 
together with the ‘ VUve-devds\ the All Gods. Here in the apparently 
positive statement an inner negation is expressed. It is the fundamental 
law of Hindu thought that no uniqueness of any individual form, even of a 
God, is sufficient to express the absolute Divine. The dual, or rather the 
plural form of deities serves to indicate that no single ‘He’ and no single ‘She’ 
can completely represent the Absolute. Only the ‘It’, undifferentiated as 
it is, the Ne-uter, can embrace all individual forms. It is noteworthy that 
even in the so-called later monotheistic forms of Hinduism, the one God who 
is adored is only an ‘ Igfa-devata ’, a chosen, a favoured deity. Selection pre- 
supposes existence of a choice, of more than one given possibility. 

Negation has not always to be expressed by a negative form of a former 
positive statement. The negation can lie in the very verb itself. For instance, 
the dissolution of all individual forms in the final re-absorption of Liberation 
is significantly called ‘ Pra-laya ’, the melting-together into the super-personal 
reservoir. On the other hand, a negative term like ‘fenny a' or ‘Abhva' can 
contain a transcendental positive statement. Abhva means the immense, 
the counter-position to the l bhva' (from root bhU, to become). It is beyond 
the range of the continuously changing empirical being, fe&nya , most 
probably from the very same root as feuna, excessive, means similarly some- 
thing beyond the limited empirical shape. As such Abhva and feunya indioate 
a positive something, not a nothing, but not a single thing. 

In a way there lies in India’s fundamental concepts of productive ambi- 
guity also a kind of implicit negation, the negation of one-sided fixation. 
It is no accident that terms like ‘ Varna ‘Khya ’, etc. embrace more than 
one sense perception. Varna means: colour and sound; khyd is: to see and 
to say. 

^ #* 

Other possibilities of expressing such kind of ambiguity are provided, 

for instanoe, in terms like ‘Dharma’. It means ‘fixed position’. But all 
fixed positions an, in true Hindu manner, if valid, not one-sidedly *fixed. 
Dharma hap a doable aspect, a subjective and objective one, and as suoh, 



SARVlSVlRA 


* 413 


in a way, a positive and negative angle. Dharma implies duty and right, 
obligation of maintaining one's own right and that of others as well. Here 
the implicit negation is given through mutual Imitation . 

There are also other kinds of implicit negation, expressed, for instance* 
in Sankhya thought. Theoretically position and counter-position are given, 
but actually only one of them is aotive. I think of the two principles, of 
Matter and Spirit, of Prakrti and Purusa. Both are assumed for the trans- 
cendental sphere, but in reality only the one, i.e. Prakrti , is active, while the 
Puru§a merely indirectly stimulates Prakrti to display her productive powers 
through her manifestations. In the sphere of empirical functions it is not a 
full negation, but only a partial obstruction is assumed for the activities of the 
one principle, i.e. for the Purusa. 

And now a last subdivision of negation, once more implied in a kind of 
ambiguity. It is not only an artistic, but a general necessity of Hindu 
thought that the Indians so frequently apply in their poetry and in their 
religious literature the means of tilesas, intertwinings of meaning, a kind of 
pun. Ambiguous expression represents the value of more than only one 
possibility of meaning. 

To conclude : the use of negations is in India employed not only as a logioal 
means, but as a necessary expression of a basic double view of transoendental 
and empirical duality. Therefore we can trace in Sanskrit more varied and 
subtle shades of negations than in any other language. 

However, not a fundamental negative tendency in India’s religious and 
philosophical thought can be deduced from it. On the contrary, negations 
serve to show India’s fundamental outlook that more than one position is 
always possible and operative. 


SARVASVARA 
(Is it SarvamEdha ?) 

By 

Dewan Bahadur Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, M.A., 

Ph.D., F.R.A.S.B. 

It is generally known that in the preliminary part of the drama Mrccha- 
katika , there oocurs the gloka describing the life-work of the author &udraka, 
whioh broadly states that, having received the education prescribed for 
princes and securing thereby, by God Siva’s favour, a clear vision and a noble 
outlook as a result of that education, he ruled long happily, had the good 
fortune to see his own son installed on the throne, performed the Advamedha 
saorifige productive of much spiritual good. It is further said that he attained 
to the ripe age of 100 years increased by 10 days. King j§udraka then en- 
tered the fire, as a glorious culmination of a life of achievement. 1 

\ Mfcchakafika ili. 


414 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


I a m not proposing to disouss whether 6udraka Vrote this ffloka or some- 
body else, whether the whole of the introduction is posthumous or whether 
we could regard it as having been written by 6udraka himself. These are 
questions that have been much discussed, though it may be that no generally 
accepted conclusions have perhaps been arrived at. What I am concerned 
with in this note is the statement in the last line of the sloka that, after the 
glorious achievement through a long life, Sudraka threw himself into the fire. 
There is a parallel instanoe of a Maukhari king entering the fire, and other 
kings putting an end to their lives by entering the water in holy rivers or holy 
bathing ghats. The statement here that a king full of achievement should 
enter the fire, rules out suicide of whatever kind. Has it any special signi- 
ficance? One of the commentators on the drama calls this performance 
Sarvasvara. 

My enquiry as to the meaning of the term Sarvasvara failed to get a reply ; 
as far as my search went, no dictionary or encyclopaedia accessible to me, 
seems to explain the term. There is an illuminating comment by one com- 
mentator on jSudraka’s drama that this act of entering into the fire was 
similar to that of Rishi 6arabhanga, who, according to the Ramayana, gave 
up the body, limb by limb, by offering it as an oblation into the fire, and that 
his soul thereafter passed to Heaven, soon after Rama had visited him. The 
R&mayana commentator does not seem to offer any explanation of this, or 
give a special name to the kind of sacrifice ^arabhanga made. From the context 
and the manner of description in the sloka it would seem inappropriate to 
describe it as suicide by fire, as in fact it would be in the case of $arabhanga 
where the attendant circumstances make it clearly impossible to count it 
suicide. Sarabhanga’s performance seems to partake of the well-known 
performance of good souls, offering the body into the fire as oblation and as- 
cending to Heaven. Did Sudraka emulate that example ? 

Whatever that be, Sudraka’s performance which, one commentator at 
any rate, describes by the term Sarvasvara, does not appear to explain itself. 
Is it what is called Sarvamedha? The Mahabh&rata in the preliminary 
chapter to 6anti Parva refers to the sacrifices generally performed as reducible 
to three principal ones as the most important among them, namely, Rajasiiya, 
Aivamedha and Sarvamedha. Is this Sarvamedha equivalent of Sarvasvara, 
the sacrifice made by Sudraka and possibly that by Rishi Sarabhanga ? 1 


1 The Srauta Sutras, however, mention thee© two sacrifices in different contexts and clearly 
distinguish between them.— E.g. IHCWTW glTTW^fW (Kdfydyana, XXII, 184); 

qfonHW (Kdtydyana, XXI, 19). Also, vide Baudhdyana, XXIV, 11 on WitTO— JBd. 



THE BflHANNANDIKESVARA AND THE NANDIKElSVARA 

PURANA 

By 

Dr. R. C. Hazra, M.A., Ph.D. 

I 

The Brhannandikedvara Upapurana is mentioned, along with the 
Nandikedvara-p. (also called Nandidvara-p. and Nandikeda-p.) 1 in the lists of 
Upapuranas given in the Brhaddharma-p. and the Ekamra-p. In the former 
work it is called ‘ Brhannandidvara ’ , and in the latter, c Brhannandi’ . 2 The 
list of Upapuranas, ascribed to the Kurma-p. in Raghunandana’s Malamasa- 
tattva and in the Sabda-kalpadruma, mentions the ‘ Nandikedvara-yugma ’ (i.e. 
two Nandikedvaras), which Ka6Irama Vacaspati, in his commentary on the 
Malamasa-tattva, takes to mean the Brhannandikedvara-p . and the Nandi - 
kedvara-p . 3 In one of the two lists of Upapuranas given by Hemadri in 
Caturvarga-cintamani , the alternative reading ‘ nandikesvara-yugmam ca’ 
for ‘caturtham 6ivadharmakhyam ’ is found in some MSS. 4 * So, it seems that 
it was only at a comparatively late date that an attempt began to be made 
to raise the Nandikedvara-p. and the Brhannandikedvara to a position of 
authority and antiquity by thrusting their names even into the established 
list of Upapuranas. 

As the Brhannandikedvara is drawn upon in Gadadhara’s Kdlasara , 
Raghunandana’s Durgapujd-tattva i and Sulapani’s Durgotsava-viveka , and 
is mentioned, along with the Nandikedvara-p., only in the Ekamra-p . and 
the Brhaddharma-p and as Jlmutavahana mentions neither the Nandi- 
kedvara-p . nor the Brhannandikedvara in the section on Durga-puja in his 
Kdlaviveka , it must have been written earlier than 1000 A.D. but most probably 
not before 850 A.D. 

The facts that it is only the authors of Bengal and Orissa 6 who are found 
to have first recognized the Nandikedvara-p. and the Brhannandikedvara as 
Upapuranas and utilized the contents of these two works in their Nibandhas, 
and that the method of Durga-puja, given in these two Upapuranas, is followed 
only in Bengal, 6 show that these' two Upapuranas must have been written in 
this province. 


1 For information about the Nandikedvara-p . see the next section. 

* Brhaddharma-p. (VahgavasI ed.) I, 25, 24. Ekamra-p, (Dacca University MS. No. 4492), 
fol. 2b. 

8 Malamdea-taUva (ed. Candloarana Smjtibhu^ana), p. 213 — •naadikefivarayugmaip bfhan- 
nandike6varapur&narp nandike6varapur&naip ca. 

4 Caturvarga-cint&mani, II, i, p. 21. See also ABORI , XXI, p. 42. 

8 Of* the Smrti- writers of Oriasa, it is only Gad&dhara who is found to quote two verses 
from the Bfhannandikedvara-p . in his Kdlaedra , pp. 151-2. 

6 It is only the Sxnj*ti-writers of Bengal who are found to utilize the contents of the 
Nandikedvara-p . and the Brhannandikedvara in connection with Durgft*puj&. Gad&dhara’a 
quotation from the Brhannandikedvara relates to the time of N&r&ya^a’s assumptiol of the form 
of the Boar, and not to Durg&-puj&. Moreover, there is a priests* nmm ial oaUedWtomumdi. 



416 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


As regards the contents of the Brhannandikebara-p . we know almost 
nothing. In his Durgapuja -tattva , p. 8, Raghunandana quotes 26 metrical 
lines, in which Devi (i.e. Durga) herself speaks to someone (NandikeSvara ?), 
addressed as ‘putraka’ and ‘nara-pungava’, on the method and the results 
of her own worship in the month of Alvina. According to these verses, of 
which some are found quoted in &ulapani’s Durgotsava-viveka , an earthen 
image of Devi is to be worshipped for three days from the Saptami to the 
Navami Tithi during the bright half of Alvina. On the Saptami Tithi the Nava- 
putrika is to be constituted with different plants named in a verse, and wor- 
shipped. On the Astami Tithi, Devi’s great bath (mahasnana) is to be 
performed with different articles (viz. the five products of cows, holy waters 
of the Ganges and the different holy places, waters into which certain herbs, 
gems, flowers, etc. have been thrown, and so on), this rite being attended with 
vocal and instrumental music as well as dancing (gita-vaditra-nrtyena) ; and 
the deity is to be worshipped with the offer of different articles as well as 
of jet-black he-goats, buffaloes, etc. and with the performance of ‘homa\ 
On the Navami Tithi also, Devi is to be worshipped specially with the offer 
of animals and the performance of vocal and instrumental music as well as 
other kinds of merry-making. 

In his Durgapuja-tattva , p. 3, Raghunandana quotes the following four 
verses with the mention of the ‘ Nandikehara-p * as their source: — 
nau-yanair nara-yanair va nitva bhagavatim sivam / 
sroto-jale praksipeyuh krida-kautuka-mangalaib // 
parair naksipyate yas tu param naksipate tu yah / 
tasya rusta bhagavati 6ap&m dadyat sudarunam // 

and 

rksa -y oganur odhena ratrau patri-prave^anam / 
visarjanam vaoayed yah sarastrafi sa vina^yati // 
bhagavatyafi prave^adi-visargantas ca yah kriyafi / 
tithav udayagaminyam sarvas tah karayed budhah // 

All these verses are again quoted by him on p. 44 but are ascribed to the 
* Brhannandikeivara-p . ’ 6ulapani also quotes the first two verses in his 
Durgotmva-viveka , p. 24, and ascribes them to the Brhannandikebara~p. But 
this ascription to the Bfhannandikebara-p . must be wrong, because (1) in these 
verses Devi is not the speaker, and (2) the third verse is quoted as from 
1 Nandi-p . ?1 in Durgotsava-viveka, p. 8, and the fourth verse is ascribed to the 
Nandikeivcvra-p. in Sfllap&i^’s Durgotsava-viveka, p. 9 and Vasanti-viveka , 
p. 28. The line ‘bilva-p&trair ghrt&ktaii ca tila-dh&nySdi-samyutaih ' is 
ascribed to the Nandikeivara-p . in Durgdpdjd-tattva, p. 38, but to the 
BfJiamandikeivam in Durgotsava-viveka , p. 22. 

0 

of which all the MSS. hitherto discovered belong to Bengal 
and are written in Bengali characters. See footnote 2 for information about these MSS* 

i In thaDacca Univomty MSS. Nos. 938D, 1642, 2116A (dated 1746 £aka) and 4222 (dated 
' 1762 6aka) Jf the DurgoUava-tnv*ka this verse is ascribed to the ‘Nandi-p. ' 




THE BRHANNANDIKE^VARA AND THE NANDIKE^VARA PURINA ‘ 417 


Though no tract on Vrata, Mdhdtmya , etc. is found to claim to fye a part 
of the Brhannandikeivara-p ., there are MSS. of an anonymous Smrti-work 
oalled Brhanmndikdvarapurdnokta-durgdpujdpaddhati . 1 2 3 

II 

It has already been said that the Nandikeivara-p. (also called Nandiivara-p. 
and Nandikda-p.) 2 is mentioned, along with the Brhannadikeivara , in the 
lists of Upapuranas contained in the Ekamra-p. and the Brhaddharma-p ., 
that in the & abda-kalpadruma and in Raghunandana’s Malamasa-tattva a list 
of Upapuranas has been given from the * Kurma-p .’ with the mention of the 
‘ Nandike&vara-yugma' , and that in Caturvarga-cintamani II, i, p. 21, there is a 
list of Upapuranas in which the ‘ Nandikehara-yugma 1 is found mentioned in 
place of the ftivadharma in some of its MSS. So, the N andikdvara -p . cannot 
possibly claim an early origin. As this Upapurana is mentioned in the 
Ekamra-p . and the Brhaddharma-p. and is drawn upon in the Samvatsara- 
pradlpa and in Kamalakarabhatta’s Nirnayasindhu , Govindananda’s Varsa- 
kaumudi, Raghunandana’s Tithi-tattva, Ahnika-tattva, Jyotis-tattva t Ekadail- 
tattva and Durgapuja-tattva , and i^ulapani’s Durgotsava-viveka and Vasantl- 
viveka , as Mitra MiSra, who lived far away from Bengal, not only draws upon 
it but also describes it as a work of wide acceptance (mahajana-parigrhlta), 8 
and as it must have preceded the Brhannandikehara (of which the very title 
is indicative of a comparatively late date and which must have been written 
earlier than 1000 A.D. 4 5 ), it cannot be dated later than 950 A.D. It is highly 
probable that this Upapurana was composed between 850 and 950 A.D. 
Such a late date for this Upapurana is supported not only by its non-mention 
in the section on Durga-puja in Jimutavahana’s Kdlaviveka but also by the 
fact that the method of Durga-worship given in it had Tantrie elements. 6 * 


1 Haraprasad Shastri, Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS., ASB, in, p. 836, No. 2828. 
Hrishikesh Shastri and Sivachandra Gui, Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in the Calcutta 
Sanskrit College , n, p. 309, No. 334 (‘a very old ’ MS.). Dacca University MSS. Nos. 2261 (modem 
and incomplete) and 4066 (worm-eaten, and missing some of its folios; dated 1678 f$aka). In 
the Dacca University MSS., the work is called ' Brhanmndike&>arapurdndnicgrhita-bhavisya- 
purdrwkta-durgdpujdpaddhati ' . 

It should be mentioned here that all these MSS. are written in Bengali characters. 

2 The VahgavasI ed. of the Brhaddharma-p. (I, 25, 24) names the Nandikeivara-p . as 
' NandUvara-p.' ; the ASB. ed. and the Dacca University MS. No. 4199 (fol. 716) mention it as 
‘ NandikeSa-p. } ; and the Dacca University MSS. Nos. 319 (fol 44a) and 4649 (fol. 96a) name it as 
' NandikeSvara-p .’ In Samvatsara-pradipa, fol. 476, a verse is quoted from the * NandUvara-p.' 

3 Vira-mitrodaya, Paribh&9&-praka$a, pp. 14-15 — - 

ra&teye— a9$da$abhyas tu prfchak purSnam yat tu dj$yate/ 

vpanldhvaip dvija-6re^has tad etebhyo vinirgatam//* vinirgataip 

. samudbhutam/ yatha mahajana-parigi-hlta-nandike^varapuran&dipurapa-devlpurft- 

nftdlti samk?epal/ 

4 See under Bfhannandikebara-p. above. • 

5 Varfa-kaumudi, p. 420— ‘ nandike6varapur&ne tu— dak^a-yajfia-vinfi&nyai inah&ghor&yai- 

yoginl-kotf-parivrt&yai bhadra-k&lyai hrbp durg&yai naraafc/iti mantrap/’ 

27 



418 ' 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


We have shown elsewhere that the Nandikehara-p. was a work quite 
different from the Nandi-p . 1 It must not also be taken to be the same as the 
&ivadharma and the Sivcdharmottara* with which we shall deal later on. 

As to the contents of the Nandikebara-p., our knowledge is very meagre. 
Of the 41 lines quoted from this Upapurana in the Samvatsarapradipa 8 
and in the works of Kamalakarabkatta, 4 Mitra Misra, 5 Govindananda, 6 
Raghunandana 7 and Sulapani, 8 two are concerned with Devi-worship in 
the spring, 0 and twenty -four deal with the proper time and method of Devi- 
worship in autumn. The method of worship, as given in these 24 metrical 
lines, consists mainly of the following operations: Devi’s ‘bodhana’ and her 
‘adhivasa’ on a Bilva tree on the Sukla§asthl Tithi; Patrika-praveSa on the 
following day; Devi-worship with animal-sacrifice, etc. on the Astami and the 
NavamI Tithi; immersion of the image of Devi in a current of water after 
causing it to be carried there on boats or by men, and the subsequent merry- 
makings by using abusive words against one another on the Da6aml Tithi. 10 
The Mantras to bo used in this worship had often Tantric symbolism. 11 The 
remaining 15 lines (which are contained in the Samvatsara-pradlpa and in 
Mitra Mirra’s Vira-mitrodaya and Raghunandana ’s Tithi-tattva and Ahnilca- 


1 This point has been dealt with in our article on the 'Nandi-p.' which we have contributed 
to the Journal of the Oanganath Jha Research Institute , Allahabad. 

2 R. L. Mitra, in his Notices of Sanskrit MSS., VI, pp. 272-4 (No. 2208), describes a MS. 
of a work which he styles as * NandikeAvara-samhitd alias NandikeAvarapurana alias Sivadhar - 
mottara'. But actually this is a MS. of the S'ivadharma and S'ivadharmottara combined. It is 
for this reason that the final colophon of this MS. runs as follows: iti nandikefivara-samhitayaip 
6ivadharmottare ekavim§atitamo ’ dhyayah/ This MS. is the same as Haraprasad Shastri’s MSS. 
of the S'ivadharma and S'ivadharmottara described in his Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS., 
ASB , V, pp. 718 and 723-733, Nos. 4084 (I and II) and 4085 (I and II); and it has nothing to 
do with the NandikeAvara-p. 

In ViAvakoqa (a Bengali encyclopaedia edited by Nagendra Nath Basu), IX, pp. 640-7 and 
649 also, the NandikeAvara-p. has been wrongly identified with the S'ivadharma and the 
Nandipurdna. 

8 Samvatsara-pradlpa , fol. 47 b (nadttvara-purane — kftva lifigarp maheSasya sarva-pSpaifi 
pramucyate/ sapta-janmarjitair deli! mano - vakk&ya - karmabhi h //) . 

• Nirnaya-sindhu , p. 128 (bhagavatyah pra ve^adi - visarganta^ oa yah kriyalj/ 

....// iti tithi-tattve nandike4varapuranac ca /). 

6 Vira-mitrodaya, Paribha?a-praka£a, p. 219. 

6 V arsa-kaumudi, pp. 367, 375, 420. 

7 Smjti-tattva I, pp. 69, 76, 86-87, 91, 131-2, 467, 012; II, p. 85. Durgdpdjd-tattva, pp. 2-3, 
7 and 38. 

• Durgotsava-viveka, pp. 7, 8, 9. V dsantl-viveka, pp. 28, 29. 

• V dsantl-viveka, p. 29. 

10 Durgdpuj a - tattva, pp. 2-3 — 


Aravanena da6amy&ip tu pranipatya visarjayet // 
nau-yanair nara-y&nair va nltvfi bhagavatlip 4iv&m / 
sroto-jale prak^ipeyulj krida-kautuka-mafigalail? // 
parair nak?ipyate yas tu paraip n&kjipate tu yalj / 
tasya ru$a bhagavatl 6aparp dady&t sud&rupam // 

t 

11 See fo^note 6 above. 

27B 



THE BRHANNANDIKE^VARA AND THE NANDIKEl^VARA PURINA • 419 

tottva 1 ) deal with the following topics: benefits of worshipping a 6iva-lifiga; 
Siva-worship with the offer of food materials especially on the Krsna-caturda6I 
Tithi; benefit of repeating hundred times a hymn called Indraksi-stava, which 
was given in the Nandikeivara-p.; benefit of even telling others about the 
results of avoiding meat; and the characteristics of marriageable and non- 
marriageaj)le girls. 2 * * * * * It is to be noted that in none of these verses Devi 
appears as the speaker. The title of this Upapurana, however, shows that it 
was most probably Nandike^vara who narrated the contents of this work. 

MSS. are found of a work called ‘ Kaldgnirudropanifad’ which claims to be 
a part of the Nandikeivara-p . 8 This work, which is practically a Tantric 
text, deals with the worship of Kalagnirudra and ‘the propriety of putting 
across the forehead three carved horizontal marks called Tripundra in Sanskrit, 
this being indispensable to the worship of Kalagnirudra’. In his Jammu 
Catalogue , p. 201, Stein notes an early MS. of the ‘ ftiva-stotra’ belonging to the 
Nandikehara-p. 

The Nandikeivara-p. seems to have derived a large number of verses from 
other earlier works. For instance, the verse ‘avdrayam bodhayed devim’, 
which is quoted as from ‘ Nandikeivara-p.’ in V arsa-kaumudi , pp. 367 and 375, 
is ascribed to the Devl-p. in Durgotsava-viveka , p. 4 and to Vyasa and Satya in 
Kalaviveka , pp.511 and 514 respectively; the line ‘saptamyam mula-yuktayam’, 
of which the source is mentioned as ‘ Nandikeivara-p.’ in Durgapuja-tattva, 
p. 2, is ascribed to the Devl-p. in Durgotsava-viveka , p. 8; the line ‘mulabhave 
pi saptamyam’, which is ascribed to the Nandikeivara-p. in Var§a-kaumudi, 
p. 367, is quoted as from ‘ Lainga ’ in Durgotsava-viveka , p. 8, and so on. It 
should be mentioned here that the sections on Durga-puja in the Devix-p., 
Linga-p ., etc. were written much earlier than 1000 A.D. 

For further information about the Nandikeivara-p. see above (Section I). 


1 See Smjti-taUva I, pp. 69, 91, 131-2, 467 and 612. 

2 Smjii-taUva I, p. 612 — * 

nandike6vara-purane — 

6yama sukeSl tanu-loraar&jl 

subhruh suiila sugatih sudantA / 
vedlvimadhya yadi parikajaksl 
kulena hlnlpi vivahanlya // 
dhrgta kudanta yadi pingajak?! 

lomna samaklma-samahga-yagtih / 
madhy© ca pu 1 ?^ yadi raja-kany& 
kule’pl yogyk na vivahanlya // 

* Haraprasad Shastri, Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS., ASB, V, p. 800, No. 4146; 

Keith, Cat, of Sans, and Pkt. MSS. in the Library of the India Office, II, i, pp. 913-4; P. P. S. 

Shastri, Tanjore Cat., XV, pp. 7176-76, Nos. 10682-83; and so on. 



FURTHER LIGHT ON COLA-SAILENDRA RELATIONS FROM 
TAMIL INSCRIPTIONS 

(11th-13th centuries) 

By 

Mr. K. R. Venkata Rama Ayyar, Historical Records Officer, Pudfukkottai 

The impulse that actuated Balaputra, a king of 6ri Vijaya, to build a 
Buddhist vihara at Nalanda was responsible for a later king of &ri Vijaya, 
Sri Culamanivarmadeva of the Sailendra dynasty starting the construction of a 
vihara at Negapatam in the 21st year (1006 A.D.) of the reign of Raja Raja 
C6la I. This vihara , named Cularmni-varrm-vihara , was completed by his son 
Maravijayottungavarman. Raja Raja granted the village of Anaimangalam 
for the maintenance of the monastery and the palli or temple attached to it, 
which was named Rajarajapperumballi after him. His successor Rajendra I 
confirmed his father's grant in an edict 1 that he issued shortly after his 
accession. 

The friendly relation that subsisted between the Colas and the Sailendras 
did not continue for long, and about the year 1025 A.D., Rajendra carried out 
a naval expedition against the kingdom of Sri Vijaya. In the words of 
Krom, 2 * the campaign began with an attack on the capital Sri Vijaya 
(Palembong) in which the king was taken prisoner, and was followed by the 
occupation of two important points on the east coast of Sumatra, the conquest 
of Malay Peninsula, and finally Atjeh (Lamri) and the Nicobars on the way 
back home; and all this was summed in the fall of Kataha (Tamil — Kadaram 
or Kidaram). Kadaram, being the first port of call for ships from India to 
Farther India and China, was the place best known to the people of the Tamil 
country, and hence Tamil inscriptions refer to the campaign as the conquest 
of Kadaram, and the king of Sri Vijaya as Kiddrattaraiyan. King Sangrama 
Vijayottunga Varman, who was taken prisoner, acknowledged Cola suzerainty. 

About 1068 A.D. Vlrarajendra 8 again conquered Kadaram and settled 
the succession to the throne which was in dispute. The smaller Leyden copper 
plates, 4 dated 1090 A.D., record an embassy from Kadaram to the Cola court 
at Ayirattali. Raja Vidyadhara and Abhimandttunga, the ambassadors from 
the Kidarattaraiyan, solicited Kul5ttunga C$la I to issue an edict confirming 
all the previous grants and specifying the privileges conceded to the Cujdmani- 
mrmavihdra and Rajarajapperumballi at Negapatam and to the newly built 
Rajendraiolappuramballi , which was named after Kuldttufiga, who bore the 
name Rajendra before his accession. 

The names that the Colas gave to towns and villages often proclaimed their 
conquests. After the conquest of Kadaram, Pufijai (Tanjore djstric^) came 


1 The larger Leyden grant. 

2 H.JJ2., pp. 250-1, quoted in K. A. N. Sastri’a &ri Vijaya (B.E.F.E.O.). 

« S.I.I., HI, No. 84; M JO. 175 of 1894 ( 8.I.I . , V, No. 468); Saatri, 06b$, I, p. 882. 

* 2?.J.,^Xn, pp. 267-71. 



^FURTHER LIGHT ON OOLA-SAILENDRA RELATIONS FROM TAMIL INSCRIPTIONS 421 

to be known in the inscriptions as Kiddramgonddn and Narasirigapuram 
(Chingleput) as Kidararngoufkihlapuram . 2 An inscription at Tondamanad, 
near Kalahasti (Chittoor), mentions a grant of the village of Kiddran^onMola- 
puram , i * * * * * * 8 obviously in the neighbourhood of Kalahasti. A village on the gulf 
of Mannar coast in the Ramnad district is still called Kidaram. 4 

One of the sons of Rajendra Cola II was called Kadaramgonda-Cola. 6 
The god in the temple of Karaivajivalliyur in Kalavaipparru, an old CSla 
territorial division of which Kalavai (North Arcot) was the headquarters, 
bore the name of Kiddrangonda S dUivaramudaiyar 6 (the Lord of Kidaran- 
gonda-C5lisvaram). 

Inscriptions 7 of the reign of Raja Raja I up to his 15th year refer to 
Manimangalam (Chingleput) as Lokamahadevl CaturvHirmngalam , 8 called 
after his queen Lokamahadevl, but inscriptions 9 recorded after his 15th 
year, and in the reigns of his successors down to the reign of Kulottunga I, 
call the village Rajacularnani Caturvedirmngalam . One will not fail to be 
struck by the fact that the change in the name of the village was made about 
the time when Culamanivarman, king of Sri Vijaya-Kadaram, built the 
vihdra at Negapatam. Four inscriptions at Kullapuram 10 (Madura) register 
grants to the temple of Raja Raja-Isvaramudaiyar at Kudalur, which was 
then known as Raja-CuMmanimturvHiimn^alam. 11 Here the mangalam was 
called after Culamanivarman, while the god in the temple after his ally Raja 
Raja. 

These are instances of place-names and names of temples commemorating 
the triumph of the Colas in their wars with Kadaram, and the earlier alliance 
that subsisted between the two powers in the reign of Raja Raja I. 

It is generally accepted that the construction of viharas in India by 
Sailendra kings is a clear proof of the presence in this country of people from 
Sri-Vijaya either as itinerant pilgrims or as permanent settlers. 12 Likewise 
there were South Indian colonists 18 in Sri Vijaya as the presence of inscriptions 
in South Indian characters in different parts of the kingdom testifies. One 
such inscription in Sumatra refers to the activities of the famous guild of 
South Indian merchants, the Aifinurruvar or the ‘Five Hundred’. There are 
half a dozen inscriptions in the Pudukkottai State whioh relate to a family of 
chiefs, whose tradition was bound up with Kadaram. 

In an inscription 14 dated (1010 A.D.) in the reign of Raja R5.ja I, the 
god of the Siva temple in Tiruvengaiva^al is called Tirumerrali Mahadeva or 


i M.E.R., 188, 191 and 196 of 1925. 2 M.E.R., 244 and 245 of 1910. 

3 M.E.R., 232 of 1903. * M.E.R., 91-95 of 1905. 

5 S.I.I. , III, p. 62. 8 Gudimallur— M.E.R., 416, 418 and 419 of 1905. 

7 Cf. M.E.R., 289 and 292 of 1897 and 7 of 1892. 

8 (gaturv^iiraangalam is a village granted to Brahmins well-versed in the four Vedas. 

» Cf. Ill, Nos. 28-30. io M.E.R., 146-149 of 1908. 

ii Cudamani is another form of Ctil&mayi. i2 Saatri — ■S'ri Vijaya, pp. 277 and 284. 

18 Ibid., pp. 289 and 305-10j Sastri, Vofas I, p, 208; II, pp. 29-30; R. Majumdar, 

Suvan^advipa, 1, pp. 188-90. 

l* P.S.I. , 88. 



422 • 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


the ‘Mab&dSva of the Western shrine*, while in another, dated in the reign of 
Rajendra, 1 2 * Raja Raja’s successor, he is called Cularmnividangan , 2 which 
again suggests the close alliance between Raja Raja and Culamanivarman. 
What is perhaps of greater interest is that a chief, who called himself a 
Kidarattaraiyan, installed another lingam in the temple in the time of 
Rajadhiraja II. This lingam was named tiadiravidangan 8 after $adiran 
Rajan (IraSan) KulSttufiga CSla Kidarattaraiyan, who is referred to as an 
araiyar of Peruvayil and Kunriyur nadus, two old territorial divisions, now 
included within the Pudukkottai State. Two of his descendants, Udaiyan 
Udaiya Peruma) Kidarattaraiyan and Udaiyan Viramalagiya Tribhuvana 
Kidarattaraiyan, made endowments for the worship of the lifigam and for 
festivals. 4 * 

The titles Rajan and Udaiyar , borne by these chiefs, indicate their high 
rank. They were in charge of the administration of two strategically important 
districts of the Co]a empire. Two inscriptions at Pinnangudi 6 record grants 
by $adiran Rajan to the &va temple in the village; and one of them records 
that during one of his official visits to the village &adiran Rajan inquired into 
the affairs of the temple, and on the unanimous representation of the residents, 
ordered additional grants to be made to meet the growing expenses of the 
temple. 

Copper-plate inscriptions refer to the ruler of &ri Vijaya-Kad&ram as 
tiri Visayddhipati and Katdhddhipati in Sanskrit and as Kidarattaraiyan 6 in 
Tamil. The Kidarattaraiyans of the Pudukkottai inscriptions, however, were 
only Co}a vassals administering districts in the CSla country; and the question 
naturally arises how they came by this title. 

The Kallars emigrated from Tondaimandalam to the C5la and Pandya 
countries; and their migration, which started in the early centuries of the 
Christian era, received greater momentum under Pallava rule. They came 
south in the wake of the conquering Pallava armies, and those who settled 
in the south became military commanders or administrators of nadus or 
kdframs . They later served the Colas and Pandyas, and distinguished them- 
selves in their campaigns. The principal Kallar settlements are now dis- 
tributed in the districts of Tanjore, Trichinopoly and Madura and in the 
PudukkSttai State, where they now form about fifty endogaraous sections called 
nd^us , 7 and each nadu is subdivided into exogamous clans or septs. Among 
them there is a clan called Kidattiriyan — now belonging to the Varappur 
nadu. Kidattiriyan is obviously a corruption of Kidarattaraiyan. The 
names of some of these clans bear testimony to the offices that their ancestors 
held. Malava-araiyan (now corrupted into Ma\avardn) means a chief of the 


1 PJ3J., 100. 

2 Vidangan is a natural UAgam not hewn by a sculptor. 

« PJ3.I., 139; 246 of 1914; P.S.I . , 195. 

4 PJS.J., 195. # p,SJ. t 141 and 169. 

• Araiyan or Aroian is the Tamil form of Rdjan. 

7 2 Wd$u here means a tribal division and not a territorial division. 

I 



^HETHER LIGHT ON OOLA-SAILENDRA RELATIONS FROM TAMIL INSCRIPTIONS. 423 

Majava country in South India; Pdndiyaaraiyan (corrupted into Pandrayan, 
or Pandurdn) and P a ncava -araiyan 1 (Panca varan), chiefs of districts in the 
Pandya country; and feolattaraiyan (Solattirayan), a chief in the Cola country. 
Chiefs, who participated in foregin campaigns and were in administrative 
charge of military camps or foreign territories under military occupation, 
were designated araiyans of those territories; and such designations include 
Ilattaraiyan or ‘araiyan of IJam or Ceylon’, Kalingattaraiyan or Kalingardyan 2 
or ‘araiyan of Kalinga’ and Kiddrattaraiyan or ‘araiyan of Kidaram*. 

Virarajendra, as we have seen, conquered Kadaram and placed a protege 
of his on the throne. There must have been at that time an army of occupation 
operating in some parts of the empire of &ri Vijaya. We have the testimony 
of the smaller Leyden grant that ambassadors from Kadaram visited the 
court of Kulottunga I, and his longer praAasti mentions that ‘at his palace- 
gate stood rows of elephants showering jewels sent as tribute from the island 
kingdoms of the wide ocean*. There is a reference in the Kalingattupparani 
to Kulottunga’s destruction of Kadaram, and there is also the fascinating 
suggestion 3 that Kulottunga spent some years between 1063 and 1070 in 
Sri Vijaya restoring order there. Whether there were any further Cola 
campaigns subsequent to these reigns wo have at present no data to decide ; 
nor are we in a position to decide whether Sadiran Rajan participated in 
any foreign campaign. We hear of him only in inscriptions of the reigns of 
Rajadhiraja II and Kulottunga III. He bore the surname Kulottunga and a 
descendant of his, probably a son, took the surname Tribhuvanavira, one of 
the titles of Kulottunga III ; and the family perpetuated the title Kiddratta- 
raiyan. Sadiran Rajan must have therefore been a descendant of a chief, 
who participated in the Kadaram campaigns, and was honoured with the 
title Kiddrattaraiyan. 

An inscription at Tiruvorriyur 4 (Chingleput), dated in the 3rd year of 
Vijayagandag5pala, a contemporary of Raja Raja III, records a gift of land 
to a Saiva monastery by a certain Kidarattaraiyan (Kidaratturaraiyan). It 
is not dear whether this Kidarattaraiyan of the Tiruvorriyur inscription was 
identical with either of the two ohiefs mentioned in the Pinnangudi inscription 6 
of the reign of Raja Raja III. 

1 PaUcavan means Pdnjya. 

2 It may be mentioned that not only generals were honoured with this title, but a throne 
was given this name. 

3 Journal of the Greater India Society, Vol. I, pp. 87-8. See Sastri, Colas , II, pp. 26-9 
and Majumdar, Sumrnadvipa, I, pp. 186-88. 

4 M.E.R., 239 of 1912. 6 P.S.I . , 196. (See above.) 

Abbreviations. 

B.E.F.E.O. ~ Bulletin de L’Ecdle Franoaise D’Extreme-Orient. 


E.I. 

= Epigraphia Indica. 

H3T.Q. *• 

= Krom : Hindoo - J a vaansche Geschiedenis. 

M.E.R. 

— Madras Epigraphical Reports. 

P.S.I. 

= Pudukkottai State Inscriptions. 

S.I.I. 

» South Indian Inscriptions. 




BUDDHA 

By 

Madame A. C. Albers 
Kapilavastu 

A sylvan summer night, the pine trees swayed 
Their emerald arms gently in sighing cadence 
Mellow, diaphanous, the moonlit air 
Now waved its element in gentle breezes. 

Laden with mingled perfumes, wafted sweet 
By jasmin, lilac, rose and violet, 

And on the garden and the palace walls 
A silver moonlit peace guarded the slumber 
And rested the fair queen in royal hall 
On silken cushions, white, lavender soented 
(White silver moonlight played upon her bed) 
Virgin and holy, and into her dreaming 
A mystic ray of rosy vision stole : 

A starlit elephant, shining in glory 
Thrice trumpeted and vanished in her heart. 

Then came an untold peace upon her being 
And an all hallowed bliss filled all the air. 

Sweetly soft, whispering voices holy anthems 
Foretold the coming of a great event. 

And knew the Queen she was a chosen mother 
A glorious being would descend to earth. 

Lumbin! 

A garden, where in silver melody 

Soft spirit voices whispered amid branches, 

Laden with bloom of lavender and pearl, 

Where lithe gazelles brouzed upon emerald grasses 
And violet bordered brooklets joined their lay 
With carols of soft-throated plumed musicians/ 
While humming birds with topaz wing outspread 
Whirled love-charmed round a honey laden lotus. 
All, all was peace and spirit harmony. 

Here neath a tree, whioh bore a lightsome burden 
Of chrysophrase and lilac-rose-hued love./ 

There stood a lady, graceful, tall and slender. 

The lovelight of her soulful midnight eyes 
Outshone in splendour all that garden-beauty, 
field all the mystery of suns and stars. 

And the fond branches, deep in worship bending 



BUDDHA 


• 425 


Formed over her ft shading canopy. 

And on her form, in mellifluous showers 
Rained fragrant bloom of lilao and of rose, 

While neath her feet gold waves of flowers burgeoned. 

And stood the Queen erect in majesty ; 

# Nor felt a pang or pain that holy moment. 

Thus came He forth, Buddha, the holy child. 

But could the world not hold her; her life’s mission./ 

Being fulfilled, upon the seventh day// 

That marked the advent of the Heaven hero/ 

Queen Maya closed her eyes to earthly scenes. 

The infant Prince received the name, Siddliartha, 

His mother’s sister took Him in her care. 

Upon the child’s form were the signs of Lordship 
Which marked Him Master over men and gods. 

And wondrous things foretold divining sages : 

He would leave home and wander lonely forth 
To find the path that leads unto salvation 
For men and gods and for all living kind. 

Which hearing, King {Wdhodana, the father 
Felt sore at heart, sought to outgo stern fate. 

Gave orders that before the Prince be uttered, 

As he grew up, no single word of woe. 

He should not know that in the world is sorrow. 

For him was but the happiness of life, 

Built gorgeous palaces and pleasure gardens 

Where the young Prince should spend His childhood’s days. 

Childhood 

Then grew the child from babe to sunny boyhood, 

Full ripe in mind, and mastered He the lore 
Of books and scroll, and all that wise instructors 
Could place before Him, and it soon was found 
The teachers were the pupils of their pupil. 

Yet was He ever meek and courteous 
But was it seen that with advancing years 
He courted loneliness and silent plaoes 
And once while sitting thus in fond dream stale 
In still repose in sylvan garden bower, 

He did behold on high a fleeoy cloud 
Swift moving and of sointillating whiteness: 

A flock of noble swans on northward flight 
Steered towards Himalayan height; their snowy plumage 
The lovenotes that they sent through the still air 
The slender grace of their soft swaying movement,—* 



42ft • 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


All these touched deeply the young boy’s full soul 
And looked he long upon that scene of beauty, 

Whenlo, from that white cloud of winged love 
A still form dropped, its pure snow stained with crimson. 
Then stirred deep anguish young Siddhartha’s heart. 

He took the bird, loosened the deadly arrow 
And stemmed the crimson flood with skilful hand. 

But now appeared his kinsman, Devadatta, 

With haughty mien and speaking angry words, 

‘Give me the bird: the prey goes to the hunter, 

My arrow brought the swan unto the ground.’ 

But spake Siddhartha gently, ‘Nay, my cousin. 

You killed, but I restored his gasping breath. 

Greater than death is life, and he who givoth 

Life to a dying form does better deed 

Than does the black hand of the wanton slayer.’ 

Then nursed the bird back unto health and strength/ 

Till it could join its tribe in the free ether. 

The Bride 

jWdhodana, remembering prophecies 

Liked not the brooding mind of young Siddhartha, 

And on advice of the State Ministers 
Arranged for the young Prince His early nuptials. 

Then went the royal mandate through the land: 

The youthful maidens of the Princely houses 
Were told to come to Suddhodana’s Court 
And they appeared, a glorious procession : 

The golden dew of budding maidenhood 

The rosy buds of young life’s glowing spring time. 

Each was to get a present from the Prince. 

And robed in garments bright and iridescent, 

That vied with rose beauty of each face 
They passed the Throne shyly their lashes lifting 
And then moved on, blushing with timid smile 
Till came the last flower of that golden garland, 

The fairest of the Princely maidens all, 

Ya4odhar§, a spring of laughing water 
Not timid she, but frankly stepped she forth. 

The deep look of her eye, her very presenoe 
Awakened memories in Siddh&rtha’s mind 
Of a great love in long forgotten ages, 

And each saw in the other’s soul revealed 
Its own pure higher self, its greater being. 

And was Yafodhara the chosen bride. 



BUDDHA 


427 


But in those days, when princes wooed a maiden 
They had to win the prize by feat of arms. 

Then were the heralds sent through all the kingdom 
And came the young Knights for the tournament. 

But none surpassed the Prince in manly vigour, 

# In courage and in military skill 
And now the bridal of unequalled splendour, 

And then fond home days in the palace walls 
In time a child was born, a son, Rahula. 

The good king’s father-heart at last felt peace. 

‘My son has found His own, His heart is happy.’ 

He knew not the great soul of his own son. 

The Four Signs 

Siddhartha felt anew His life’s great mission, 
Expressed a wish to see the world outside 
Then were the roads made bright by royal mandate 
Garlands and waving flags welcomed the Prince. 

But in celestial hall the gods held counsel. 

And well disguised appeared upon the road 
An aged man feeble and palsy stricken 
He cried in agony, held trembling hand 
Pleading for alms to still his gnawing hunger 
Scarce could he speak, his voice was choked by cough 
Then driving on beneath the swaying garlands, 

They saw beside the road a writhing form 
In pain and agony weeping and groaning. 

‘Help’, cried he feebly, ‘help me, Oh good Prince, 

Or I shall die ere dawns another morning.’ 

Shuddered the Prince at the woe-stricken sights, 

And ever more felt all the world’s deep sorrow 
And asked He sadly of His charioteer, 

‘When ills and weakness can hold out no longer, 
What follows then ? ’ ‘Then follows death, my Lord. 
The final which awaits all living beings.* 

‘And what is death ? I never heard that word* 

But soon He saw, a group of weeping mourners, 
Lamenting and bemoaning bitter fate, 

Came down the country road in slow prooession. 

.And at their head walked four, with solemn step, 
Bearing a cot decked with a snow-white cover. 

4 And who lies there so still that sheet beneath 1 * 
•That is a corpse, my Lord, stiff, cold and lifeless 
An empty shell from whioh the soul has fled.* 



m • 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


A ghastly flame, that gleamed by the near river 
Soon told the tale : the end, — the end of all. 

The Lord looked at the gruesome scene and questioned 
‘Is there no way then out of all this woe ? ’ 

‘Ah, no my Lord, from this there is no rescue/ 

Then driving home, they met upon the road, 

One, calm and stately, peace upon his features. 

‘And Channa, who is this’ thus asked the Prince 
‘ Upon whose face rests such a deep contentment ? 1 
‘ That is a monk, who did forsake the world, 

And found his peace within the realm of silence/ 

Then knew the Prince of men His time was ripe. 

The great world called Him and He could not linger. 


The Farewell 

And as He went to leave parental halls, 

His strong heart felt its manly pulses throbbing. 
Then hushed and solemnly with noiseless step 
He walked the long porphyry pillard passage 
That led into a hallowed sanctuary, 

Well sentinelled by gold-edged samite curtains. 

And pushing with light hand the folds aside 
He gazed upon that star -blessed scene before Him. 
Here lay the Pearl, that His heart’s inmost core 
Had cherished through unnumbered passing ages, 

A love that bore the test of centuries. 

And He beheld again, with inward vision 
Fond golden days of long forgotten lives. 

So calm she lay, her waving hair half hiding 
The mystic, occult beauty of her face. 

And resting on her heaving, ivory bosom, 

Clasped in the lily softness of her arms, 

His only child, eye-lids in slumber drooping. 

And heaved the pulses of His manly heart. 

But heard His soul beneath this fond love-vision 
A low voiced whining, weeping, burning sobs, 

Saw wringing hands and ghastly, gore-stained faces 
Curses and tears upon the soughing wind: 

The bleeding soulcry of all vast creation. 

Then burned His heart in anguish and He went, 
Kingdom and power and wealth and love forsaking. 
And tarried He no more, but with firm step 
Took the bleak roadway of the homeless wanderer. 



BUDDHA 


* 429 


Buddha Gaya 

Now onward wandering from place to place 
Met many sadhus, each holding a doctrine. 

Among these were five pious mendicants, 

In a sequestered grove near Uruvela. 

Their lives were pure, but their austerities 
Extreme and stringent beyond human reason. 

Here stayed the Lord sometime, but soon He found 
Not here could He accomplish His life’s mission, 

And grew His frame so weak that in the end 
He fainted, lay exhausted by the wayside. 

A herdsman came that way, driving his flock. 

He saw that noble form all prostrate lying. 

Then from the teeming udder of a ewe, 

He pressed into His mouth its milky substance. 

And lo, the Lord revived and opened His eyes. 

Still felt He weak and neatli the sylvan verdure 
The cooling foliage of a shading tree 
He found a seat. Here deep in meditation 
Sujata saw Him, pious herdsman’s wife, 

Unto whose mother-heart the gods had granted 
The longed for precious gift of a sonchild. 

She sought a holy man, to whom to offer 
A gift prepared by her own pious hand : 

A bowl of milk -rice, served in golden basin. 

She saw the Lord in glory neath that tree, 

Thought Him a god and prostrating in worship, 

She placed the bowl of milk-rice at His feet. 

The Lord partook and felt His body stronger. 

And now comes the great moment of His life ! 

Behold ye suns and moons the &akyamuni : 

The time has come, He sits beneath the tree. 

Behold the tree, laden with glowing clusters 
Of vivid bloom, brilliant in soft-tinged rose 
Veiled in a lustrous chrysophrase, and blending 
Its hue and fragrance with young spring’s full life. 

Bend the green branches down in fond obeisance. 

A hallowed murmur runs from star to star, 

And stand the gods hushed in mute expectation, 

.IJMe through the land of downfall and black sin 
Strange whispers pass of hope and coming freedom, 

And undulating waves of occult foroe 

Flow through all throbbing hearts from brute to human. 

Now Mftra, seeing, comes with his mad hosts 



430 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


On the winged wind of an unbridled fury, 

And opens all the flood-gates of his hate. 

But fire and curses, all hell’s gruesome torrents 
Cannot subdue the Prince of gods and men. 

The victory shines on His imperious features 
And from the wellspring His valiant heart 
Am unquenched fire of love and peace is flaming. 

All Mara’s hosts of lurid screaming ghouls 
Cannot do harm e’en to his spotless garment. 

Now turns in tenfold wrath the evil one 

‘You have not made the five great gifts Siddhartha. 

My teeming hosts bear witness unto me. 

Speak now you, Sakya-prince, who is your witness.’ 
Then rose ten million voices from the soil, 

And spake the mighty earth in roaring thunder, 

'We bear Thee witness, dauntless Sakya-prince.’ 
Now fled all hell’s wild hosts in dread confusion. 

The morning dawns , the victory is won. 

And oh, the glory of that love-charmed morning 
O’er all creation hung the silver veil 
Of a great dream, where rosy beacons glimmered 
Inviting to a world of mellow rest, 

Where pain is put to sleep pearl oases, 

The wind filled sails of all unquenched desire 
Are furled. The craft playing on waveless ocean 
Will find its harbour on a starlit shore, 

That tranquil land of dew-kissed lustrous silence, 
The morning isle of a perennial dawn. 

The Deer Park 

Now in the fulness of His Buddhahood 
He walked the road that led unto Benares 
Where the five comrades of His former days 
Were keeping rest. Seeing His form approaohing, 
They whispering spake, ‘Behold He has oome back ! 
But we will not now greet Him as Preceptor.’ 

But when they saw His soul’s full majesty, 

Upon His noble brow wisdom’s bright splendour, 
Those deep eyes with unfathomed glory filled, 

They bowed their heads in reverent obeisanoe, 

And fell in adoration at His feet. 

And here, near Kashi, in the sylvan deer park 
He set in motion the great ‘Wheel of Law’ 

That Wheel that sent its beaoon through the ages 
And left its golden stamp on many lands. 



BUDDHA 


' 431 


The pebbly desert bears eternal witness, 

The sages of the South and northern Lakes, 

Live by the Law, tell morbid world-tired seekers 
Of an effulgent Life that cannot die. 

Calmly He sat, His hand elate in blessing. 

.Drawn by the magic of those towering words, 

The flaming devas from supernal regions, 

The groaning dwellers of the lampless pit, 

And all the speechless dwellers of the forest 
Assembled at that grove in harmony, 

Joining the five, all listening in mute rapture 
The sylvan harpstring of this rhythmic speech 
The mellifluent notes of silver cadence 
That from the wellspring of His diamond soul 
Gave hope to man and beast and sobbing spirits 
And sent its echo over worlds in space. 

That was the night of a world stirring rapture, 

That filled the heaving air with cosmic force, 

A spring from which flowed forth an eightfold river, 
Which waters still a thirsty world today. 

Ku, SINARA 

Near Ku£inara in sequestered grove 

Four Sal trees stand, their crowns in rhythm swaying, 

A mystic murmur passes through the air. 

The young twigs weep and sigh their rosy blossoms 
The melancholy crowns wave doleful dirge 
Mingled with the soft sobbing of the leaves, 

The falling tears of foliage laden branches, 

The sighing lutestrings of the soughing wind 
Adding a sad refrain in soulful cadence. 

Nature is stirred unto its inmost core. 

The heaving earth, the waves of distant oceans 
Call forth mysterious voices from the deep, 

And unknown mysteries rise from dark caverns ; 
Strange occult forces, unknown all to man, 

Join in one mighty world encircling anthem, 

And blend their voices in a requiem, 

While o’er the earth the pall of death is hanging. 

But is the ground a carpet of gold bloom 
That fall from vivid height in gorgeous showers, 
Laden with scent of lavender and myrrh; 

And fragrance wafted from celestial gardens 
Send waves of light in a transcendent stream. 

The air is kindled with love-blazing beauty. 



4S2 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


The gods are sending from their unseen realms 
A glorious welcome to a world-tired pilgrim, 

Who soon will travel through their sunny land, 

Into Vastness of unconquered Silence. 

And under these four sal trees stands a couch, 

Around whioh stand in pale and stricken anguish 
A multitude, who turn their tear-stained eyes 
Upon that couch in poignant adoration. 

There in serene, unstricken majesty 
Solemn and calm the conqueror is resting. 

Halos of glory from His body shine, 

Still speaks His voice, the love-notes gently flowing 
In mellifluent cadence, golden stream, 

Bidding farewell in those fond, tender accents 
That, ah, so oft have made their hearts rejoice. 

But now, on every word hang silver teardrops. 

‘Weep not for me, my friends, the Law, the Doctrine 
That I have given you, shall be your guide, 

Be steadfast on the path that I have shown you, 

And be ye each a lamp unto himself. 

I now go to my final home, Nirvana 
The weary pathway in Samsara’s round, 

My searching aching feet no more shall wander. 

And you awaits the same great Destiny.’ 

Then came the moment of majestic stillness, 

Hushed was the hour, — His great heart beat no more. 
The conqueror had gone to His Dominions, 

That land of bliss beyond all time and space, 

Where only love and unchecked thought can follow 
Where change and weeping sorrow are no more, 
Where in perennial cosmic silence shrouded 
Eternal life rests in transcendent bliss. 

Now quaked the earth, the rivers swelled in torrents 
And mystic forces filled the atmosphere. 

Down from supernal heights reigned flaming garlands 
In golden showers on that holy bier. 

Now they who mourned turned to their last-love-duty 
With weeping hearts and bitter burning tears. 

But spake the voice within, that roused to aotion I 
‘Forward, go carry on the flaming torch, 

O’er land and seas shall flow the fiery banner, 

The world shall know the Lovelight of the Law/ 

And thus the Wheel of the great Law is rolling 
And will roll on as long as time does last. 



THE ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 

By 

Dr. H. Goetz, Baroda 

The art of the Marathas is still a neglected field of Indian archaeology. 
As a result of certain traditional prejudices most scholars have dismissed, a 
priori, the idea that it might be worth investigation or appreciation. 

The first prejudice is that the Marat ha raiders had been too rude soldiers 
to be capable of bringing forth an art of their own. Yet the same argument 
might have been brought forward against Tamerlan, the Ghaznavids, Saljuqs, 
Ottoman Turks, many conqueror hordes of China, the early Mediaeval kingdoms 
of Europe, etc. The barbarism of conqueror hordes can go hand in hand 
with an appreciation of cultural values amongst their leaders, encouraging a 
distinct class of scholars, artisans, religious men. Such an appreciation, 
however, had existed amongst the Marathas from the very beginning. There 
was the religious renaissance of the Marathi saints, of a Tukaram, Ramdas, 
etc., there was a traditional cultivation of Sanskrit learning amongst the 
Deccani brahmins, there was a rural art going back to the Hemadpanthi style, 
and echoes from the court arts of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar. There was, since 
the conquest of Hindostan, a desire to vie with the splendours of the Mughal 
and Rajput courts. 

The second prejudice consists in the idea that the Maratha hegemony 
represents the sunset of Indian greatness, the last flare-up within a general 
decadence. This is true in a sense. But on the other hand it is likewise 
true that political decadenoe is not identical with cultural decadenoe, though 
it colours cultural life in a special manner. Impoverishment and disintegration 
of the open country can go parallel with the splendour of courts and aristo- 
cracies. Then art beoomes an esoapism, but this escapism can create wonderful 
dream worlds, sensuous as well as mystic-religious. The Italian and Spanish 
Baroque or the French Rococo were such like dream worlds, and Indian art 
of the eighteenth and early nineteenth oenturies is another one. 

A third prejudice is direoted against the aesthetio qualities of such like 
arts, and through the Viotorian art critics it has up to the present day influenced 
the current judgments on late Indian art. But modem criticism has since 
long reversed that verdict, and it is high time to do so also in this country. 
Art criticism of the nineteenth century demanded solely simplicity, harmony 
and naturalness, the characteristics of young and hopeful times. But the 
man of decadent periods is torn and emotional, his art seeks the stronger 
contra^s ofjjis own life, a rioh symphonio orohestration of devalued traditional 
forms, the show of strength besides the masquerade of conventions, an extreme 
emotionalism at the side of a i&thematioal purity of forms, fervent mystioism 
besides gross sensuality, exuberant ornaments besides utter simplicity, brilliant 
lights contrasted with deep shadows, glamourous oolours and patterns, balanced 

28 



434 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


by a sense of unreality, of the illusory character of all those dearly loved earthly 
things. 

If these aesthetic problems Maratha art has in common with that of the 
later Mughals, Rajputs and Sikhs, another criticism specially levelled against 
it is that of eclecticism. But this, too, is a prejudice. Art is not a flower which 
somewhere, sometime mysteriously springs from a mystic national soil as 
certain romantic art critics would like to make us believe. National arts are 
nowhere born as pure virgins, they are the products of chaotic agglomerations 
of cultural elements, national as well as foreign, contemporary as well as 
old ones. Only with growing maturity they develop a personality of their 
own, become pure and apparently unstained by any foreign influences. The 
refined Minoan civilization of ancient Crete and the barbarian art of the 
Danube basin, imports of Assyro-Babylonian art by Phoenicians, Lydians and 
Cyprians, the late Egyptian art of Sais have all contributed to the tradition 
leading to the masterpieces of the Parthenon and of Pergamon. Siberian 
nomads and Iranian cavaliers, Indian Buddhists, Greeks and Thai barbarians 
have enriched the stagnant Chinese civilization inherited from the Chou, so 
that the grand classic art of China of the Teang and Sung emperors could 
be bom. At the roots of the pedigree of the Taj Mahal there stand Pathan 
traditions from Delhi, Malwa and Gujarat, influences from Bengal, Rajputana 
and the Deccan, and new imports from Persia and Turkistan. What has made 
all of them great, was not the virgin purity of their origin, but the strong 
national or social consciousness which oould assimilate these many influences 
into one new, self-contained style of outspoken personality. The 'eclecticism ’ of 
Maratha art is only that of all young arts, also of classic Gupta art during 
its formative stage in the Mathura of the late Indo-Scythians. Maratha art 
has in the course of time likewise evolved its own personality and charac- 
teristic style. But this is too often overlooked because the lifetime of its 
mature style had been brief, whereas the formative elements have been 
overemphasized, as they still are better known than the style finally bom 
from them. 

But just this makes Maratha art so interesting. For as it is near to us, 
we are in an exceptionally good position to study the mechanism of its growth 
and the forces behind the latter. Let us, therefore, study the questions: 
First, which social forces have formed Maratha art ? Then, which elements 
have contributed to its formation? Thirdly, what has been the selective 
process and what the hierarchy of types in this agglomeration? Finally, 
what are the characteristics of the style into which they were fused ? 

As already observed there existed a certain cultural tradition in the 
Maratha country already before 6iv&ji raised the banner of rebellion against 
the Muslim rulers of Bijapur and Delhi. Nay, this local culture Jiad bjpen the 
prerequisite condition to render his ambitious dreams practicable at all. 
For no national consciousness and still less any national enthusiasm are 
possible Without a distinct cultural tradition differentiating its carriers from 
the neighbouring nations and States. On the negative side, this distinctive 



THE ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 


* 435 




consciousness was created by the common protection offered by the foot- 
hills of the Western Ghats to the heirs of the $ilaharas and Hoysalas, and the 
refugees from Deogiri and Vijayanagar against the slow, but persistent advance 
of the Islamic powers, Khiljis and Tughlaqs, Bahmanis, Nizamshahis and 
Adilshahis. On the positive side it was created by the Maratha saints, 
Tukaram, Ramdas, etc. 

This civilization was rural and simple, its architecture a faint echo of the 
Hemadpanthi temple style combined with the Western Decoani peasant house, 
its sculpture and painting of that very crude type which we can trace every- 
where as the oldest one after the crisis of the Muslim invasions. Then, with 
the rise of Maratha jagirdars in the service of Bijapur, Ahmadnagar and Delhi 
and finally with the kingdom of 6ivajl (1646-80) higher demands for luxury 
and pomp came up which, however, were still simple enough. It seemB that 
they were satisfied by second-olass artisans from the surrounding Muslim 
centres. This attitude changed with the rise of the Peshwas. The great 
pillaging campaigns all over India brought home many art treasures; king Sahuji 
(+1749) had the leisure of a peaceful life which always encourages the protec- 
tion of the arts; the Peshwas Bajirao I (1729-40) and Balaji Baji Rao (1740-61), 
proud and ambitious, had the desire to exhibit their growing power in buildings 
and pompous ceremonies; artisans and dancing girls were imported from the 
North, though there still prevailed a haughty disdain against the toy things of 
the weak and corrupt Hindustanis, comparable to that of the Romans against 
the ‘Graeculi’. 

But under Madhav Rao I (1761-72) and II (1774-95) and the long regency 
of Nana Farnavis (+1800) Maratha life had become refined. There still 
continued a certain immigration of artists from Rajputana and even from 
China, but on the whole Maratha art had already found its own style, with a 
certain variation in the North where the connections of Mahadji Sindhia 
(1761-94) with the Mughal court and Jaipur had created a much stronger 
Mughal influence, and at Tanjore (since 1679) in the South where South Indian 
civilization predominated. Sinoe the reign of Baji Rao II (1795-1818) the 
disintegration set in. With the break-up of the Maratha federation also its 
art was dispersed over many looal oentres whioh fell under the influence of 
their surroundings. And finally European influence became strong when 
British suzerainty had made Western art fashionable. But also the latter 
has undergone curious vicissitudes, penetrating in mixed and archaio forms 
before its genuine contemporary aspects could find acknowledgment. 

At the beginning of Maratha art there stands a style which may somehow 
have been derived from Hemadpanthi architecture. But the connection is 
not strict, for after the Muslim invasions it can be traced almost everywhere 
and mjy better be regarded as a primitive rural style whioh alone survived 
when the great temples had been overthrown and their beautiful sculptures 
mutilated. It is true that this richer temple architecture was revived in the 
fifteenth to seventeenth oenturies, but as far as our evidenoe at present goes, 
this seems to have been the result of a conscious renaissance whereas the 



436 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


development of the primitive type finally led to Rajput architecture and its 
Mughal offshoots under Akbar and Jahangir. But in the Maratha country 
this primitive style survived so long that its fundamental characteristics were 
preserved into a later and richer age. Its characteristics are cellas and closed 
mapdapas of almost plain walls, and rather low step roofs. These roofs may be 
interpreted as a simplification of the miniature storeys of the classical Mediaeval 
mandapa roofs back to a clumsy corbelled dome of crude stone beams. Open 
mandapas or Nandi mandapas generally have simple quadrangular pillars, 
with hardly a suggestion of a capital. In more elegant examples the 
rectangular ground plan has received a certain enrichment by receding comers, 
niches in the interior, a simple door moulding and pillars changing from a 
lower quadrangular to an upper octangular cross-section. In the first half of 
the eighteenth century (Satara, Purandhar, Panhala, etc.) the type has been 
further refined under Mughal-Rajput influence, the roof assumes the shape of 
a tent, early Muslim battlement ornaments decorate the cornice, the door 
looks an archaic mihrab, the ceiling has assumed the sixteenth century Rajput 
type (Amber, Orchha, Datia) of superimposed rows of sloping slabs, with a 
lotus ornament in the centre, the niches belong to the same style, and in the 
South (Kolhapur, Panhala) lathe-turned Deccani-Hindu columns are intro- 
duced. . Still later examples (e.g. temple of Sawai Madho Rao at Purandhar) 
show in the interior rich Mughal arches, niches and ceilings, and on the exterior 
a lotus knob instead of the amalaka. But then the type seems to have quickly 
degenerated. 

Parallel to this temple architecture goes a house style consisting of stone 
terraces surrounding one, two (ladies’) or more courts over which halls, galleries 
and rooms are constructed by heavy wooden columns and beams, with inter- 
stices filled in with brickwork and plaster. In the whole Deccan peasant 
houses of this type are to be found, and the later Maratha palaces are dis- 
tinguished from them only by a greater number of courts and storeys (generally 
two storeys with a third in front) up to six (Shanvarwada, Poona) and seven 
(Indore), and rich wood carvings, wall paintings and plaster ornaments in a 
style evolved from Mughal-Rajput art. 

The architecture of the Bahmanis, Adilsh&his and Nizamshahis had been 
known to the Marathas from the many hill-forts erected since the reign of 
Mahmud I BahmanI (1378-97) and further improved under the successive 
dynasties of the Bahmanis. Generally speaking, this Deccani-Muslim architec- 
ture of the hill-forts is of a stem and rather plain type, though the mosques, 
tombs and gates often have elegant arch and pilaster mouldings and some 
floral motifs and knobs on top of the arches. 6iv&jl continued this tradition, 
but after his death it seems to have died out. The utter distress of Mughal 
pressure and of civil war had not been favourable to new building pctipties. 

Only when the victorious advance of the Maratha armies after the death 
of AurungzSb (1707) gave peace to the Maratha country and pride to its 
leaders, tie-arts began to flourish again. It seems that the first impulse had 
been given by the Peshwft B&j! Rfto I (1720*40) when in 1780 she started to 



THE AET OF THE MARAT HAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 


* 437 


erect his own fortified Wada in Poona. But not before 1740 building activities 
seem to have assumed a greater extent, until the crisis of 1761 and the death of 
Balaji Baji Rao (1761) made a temporary end to this first heyday of Maratha 
art. We may call it the Eclectic Period. For no genuine Maratha style had 
yet developed. Artisans were summoned from all sides so that the art of this 
period is a real sample collection of Indian styles. In the South, at Kolhapur 
or Mahuli near Satara, the temple architecture of Mediaeval Warangal or 
Kanara is taken up again, the royal samadhs at Mahull reflect the styles of the 
Faruql dynasty of Khandesh and of the Nizamshahls of Daulatabad, inter- 
mixed with ornament motifs from Gulbarga, Bidar and Vijayanagar. The 
fortifications of the Shanvarwada in Poona and of the old Bhonsle Wada in 
Nagpur, Baji Rao Vs Gate at Purandhar, or the OmkareSvara Temple in 
PooDa, the galleries of the BhavanI Temple in Aundh, of the Vi6ve6var Mahadev 
and Krishn6svar Mahadev Temples in Mahull, the Khandoba Temple at 
Jejuri, etc. follow a simple vault style of which it is difficult to say whether 
it should be defined as early Rajput, degenerated Deccani or provincial Mughal. 
At the Samgame^var Temple at Sasvad Mughal ornaments again are intro- 
duced into an else pure Hindu renascence architecture. Balaji Baji Rao’s 
great temple at Trimbak finally resumes the Mediaeval Gujarati-North-western 
Deccani tradition in all its splendour, and also in the temples of Nasik, especially 
in the Sundar Narayan, Gujarati features are strongly in evidenoe, whereas the 
Mahakala Temple of Ujjain represents a rather clumsy renascence of the 
North Indian temple type. 

Of the secular architecture of this period we know so far only little; 
but the palace of Ranoji Sindhia (1726-46) at Ujjain is a rather plain Maratha 
building, with a bangaldar roof over the closed pavilion on top of the fagade. 

It is still too early to define the sculpture of this time. It seems to be a 
more or less slavish imitation of classical Mediaeval models, careful in detail, 
but generally the figures are too short, especially the legs, and stiff and expres- 
* sionless. More we know about pictorial art. The museum of Aundh has 
.very old illustrated manuscripts of two style types. The first might be 
described as a very primitive variety of the Southern Rajput school of 
Jahangir’s time, the other as a degeneration of the seventeenth oentury Bijapur 
school. But under the first Peshw&s both types were superseded by the works 
of provincial Mughal artists of which especially the collection of the Bharat 
Itihas Samshodhak Mandal at Poona possesses a representative collection. 

The second half of the eighteenth century forms the zenith of 
Maratha art. The disaster of Panipat (1761) had ohastened the minds. 
Though there remained sufficient egoism, cunning and unscrupulous brutality 
amongst many army leaders, a certain idealism had nevertheless oaught the 
minds. The three Peshwas, M&dhav R&o I (1761-72), N&rayan Rfio (1772-73) 
and Saw&i lft§dhav Rao (1774-96), tried their best to be exemplary rulers, 
N&na Farnavls, the crafty statesman behind the scenes, likewise realized the 
importance of Hindu dharma as authority of the regime, and Ahalya B&i of 
Indore (1764-96) was a genuine saint. An intellectual atmosphere had 



438 ' 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


developed fostering a characteristic art in which all the elements still discernible 
in the preceding period were fused into one style. 

In the temples of this later period brick and plaster dominate as they 
are more adaptable to rich forms. The starting point of these late temples 
is the post-Mughal architecture of Rajputana. Already the Rajputs had 
transformed the Mughal style into a Hindu art, i.e. they had dissolved the 
essentially functional-structural Muslim interpretation of forms into a symbolic- 
sculptural one, reduced the subordinate parts to mere moulded ornaments, 
amalgamated them into new composite forms, and multiplied them into 
complicated symphonies of reduplications. 

This tendency was taken up and continued by the Marathas. The 
Mediaeval 6ikhara formed a composite of a plain central spire along which 
innumerable small Sikharas, slim and broad ones, rose upwards, until that 
vertical movement was finally capped by the heavy horizontal amalaka. 
The Maratha 6ikhara forms a similar system, not of spires but of miniature 
Deccani and Mughal bangaldar chhattris and minarets. But whereas in late 
Rajput temples these chhattris still are genuine pavilions, in the Maratha 
temples they are grouped together in row after row, in bundles and column 
bundles until the top is capped, not by an amalaka, but by a miniature fluted 
bulb dome rising from a lotus, like the cupolas of the later Bijapuri mausolea. 
In the Maratha temples of the Deccan this lotus-dome Amalaka is on the four 
sides often supported by big Nagas, apparently a heritage from &ilahara 
architecture. Only very few of these miniature chhattris are genuine pavilions, 
most of them are massive structures whose niches are filled with the modelled 
or painted figures of gods, saints and angels. The niches of the cellas are 
generally enclosed by the traditional Mediaeval Gujarati framework, but 
their columns not seldom are of a Muslim type, a cusped arch is set into the 
frame, and the jali filling is as often as not of Muslim origin. Smaller niches not 
seldom show a simple pendentif work evolved from a prototype common in the 
Tughlaq period. The border of the platform supporting the mamjapa is often 
decorated with stone reliefs of those heavy rings, at which the Mughals used 
to fasten the ropes of their shamiyanas. For the mapdapa and ardhamapdapa 
proper the Gujarati cupola has become the rule, often supported by late 
Mughal arches, and with a low or lotus-bud exterior dome. Along the cornice 
a miniature Mughal pent roof is added, often crowned by a Muslim battlement 
frieze. Another very characteristic type of mandapa simply is the hall of the 
Maratha palace erected in front of the cella, as on the other hand many real 
durbar halls end in the shrine of the Ish$a Devatfi of the Sardar or royal family. 
Thus Maratha temples in most cases also are enclosed in a court of the usual 
Maratha type, the halls of which serve as naqqar-kh&na, dharmi&l&, schools, 
priest quarters, etc. 

Civil buildings have retained the traditional Maratha type. But their 
decoration has become very rioh. The gigantic heavy woodwork of the 
public palape courts often is plain as it had originally been covered with 
brocades. But in the more intimate interior courts, especially in the ladies 1 



THU ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 


439 


quarters with the tulsi flower-stands and ‘Mughal’ fountains in the oentre, 
it is delicate and generally beautifully carved. The wooden colunfns are a 
last development of the late Mughal type as it had evolved since Aurangzeb 
and Muhammad Shah. The arches, though cusped like late Mughal arohes, 
are low, broken in the centre and end in heavy knobs so that they seem to be 
not so much an evolution from the latter, but rather a cross-breed between 
the Mughal-Rajput arch and the Southern Hindu bracket. The origin of most 
of the other wood carvings can be traced to the Muslim (also pre-Mughal) 
tradition, Gujarat and Rajputana (peacock motif in several variants). The 
walls between and behind these heavy, almost black wooden arcades are 
decorated with small late Mughal niches or large wall paintings. Also on top 
of the arcades, friezes of small paintings were sometimes added (Shanvar and 
Konkerwadas, Poona), whereas the wooden ceilings were deoked with a 
wonderful ornament work of thin, carved wood ledges. The fountains in the 
courts and halls have not the shallow basins of classic Mughal architecture, 
but are narrow and deep, like those of Akbar’s and Jahangir’s time, with 
complicated bundles of Mughal columns crowned by lotus buds for the water 
jets. The arrangement of the basins, often with a thin, curved brim, is very 
beautiful, and reveals a thorough acquaintance with the Mughal Charbagh. 
Palaces of this type are common in Poona, but can also be found in the whole 
area of Maratha expansion, Satara, Aundh, Kolhapur, Nasik, Chandor, 
Baroda, Indore, Maheshwar and Nagpur. 

In Indore, however, Mughal-Rajput influence had already been very 
strong whereas in Gwalior and Ujjain it aotually predominated. Ahalya 
Bai’s buildings, it is true, strictly follow the simple Maratha tradition, but the 
temples of her successor Yeshwant Rao Holkar (1795-1811) represent an inter- 
mediate form between the Maratha (genuine 6ikhara) type and the late Rajput 
temple with its broad pent roofs and open chhattris. The enclosure of these 
temples belongs to the pure North Indian tradition, and likewise many samadhs 
at the Chhattri Bagh of Indore. The Gorkhi palace of Daulat Rao Sindhia 
(1794-1827) at Gwalior is pure Mughal architecture. His and Jankojl IPs 
(1827-43) shrines at Gwalior, that of RanojI (1726-45) at Ujjain and the 
‘Chhattri’ Temple of Baija Bai at the same plaoe might as well have been 
erected at some Rajput court, except for small details revealing their Maratha 
connections. 

Sculpture and painting of this time are not of special quality, but they 
have a fresh original note. The imitation of Mediaeval sculptures is, wherever 
possible, overoome and, perhaps under Rajput or Gujarati inspiration, super- 
seded by an attempt towards a realism describing contemporary life, especially 
in the figures of dwarapalas, gandharvas and apsaras. Thus the chief entrance 
of later Maratha temples is generally decorated with rather stiff and gaudy, 
realistic statues of contemporary Maratha warriors, standing or sitting on 
elephants. The figures of dancing girls and musicians, generally in the late 
Hindu or Delhi-Lucknow dress, not seldom have a considerable charm. Also 
purely mythological sculpture has become infeoted by these tendencies where 



440 , 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


especially the Rfidh&-Krishna cycle, fully developed first in Rajput art, gave 
full scop6 to the inventiveness of the mason. 

In this time also a genuine Maratha sohool of painting finally developed- 
Mughal and Rajput painters have continued to be fashionable at the rich 
courts deep into the nineteenth century. These paintings stand nearest to 
certain types of the Jaipur and Jodhpur schools, and it is well possible that 
from there artists went over to the Maratha service when as a result of civil 
wars and the Maratha devastations those splendid art centres passed through a 
period of misery and desolation. At our present stage of knowledge these 
paintings are difficult to identify, but often betray themselves by architectural 
and dress features characteristic for the Maratha tradition. Besides this 
refined court art, however, a popular school grew up, apparently trained by the 
just mentioned masters. For the whitewashed brick walls of the Maratha 
palaces invited to a decoration by wall paintings. Yet these walls also 
demanded a large and rather summary treatment which left no scope for the 
technical subtilities of the miniatures, but encouraged the same naive natural 
freshness which characterizes contemporary sculpture. And in imitation of 
these wall paintings also a new type of miniatures developed, of rather crude 
technique, summary treatment, but good observation of life. The figures 
are heavy, if not fat, eyes rather over-enlarged, legs generally too short, the 
standing posture often out of balance, but else expression and movements are 
vivid. Landscape remains undeveloped. Favourite colours are blue, green 
and yellow. It is at present difficult to say how much the Maratha school of 
Tanjore has contributed to this style, or has been shaped by it. But so much 
we can say that early in the eighteenth century the court style of the Tanjore 
paintings still had been late Mughal. On the other hand are oertain charac- 
teristics of the popular Maratha pictures to be found not only in Tanjore, but 
in the whole South of that time, especially the summary treatment, the pre- 
dilection for round lines and fat figures. And at least we have one case of 
an monographic type migrating from the South up to the Panjab Himalaya 
via Tanjore, the Maratha country, the Vallabhaohaiya temples of Rajputana 
and Mathura : the image of the baby Krishna lying on a lotus leaf and sucking 
its toe. 

The industrial arts have not yet been explored systematically, but they 
seem to have received strong influences both from Rajputana and Tanjore, 
and to have undergone the same transformation towards a rioh, but heavy 
type ' 

From the death of the second Madho R&o (1795) to the middle of the 
nineteenth century we may reckon the last phase of Maratha art, that of 
decadence and disintegration. One source of this decadence was the demorali- 
zation of Maratha society, extreme individualism, corruption and licentiousness. 
Its counterpart in art was a wild and exuberant degeneration of forms in 
which the organic function of forms was sacrificed to the whim of fancy, and a 
not less unbridled absorption of foreign imports, North Indian, Chinese and 
several types of European art. Against purists it must, however, be stressed 



THE ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 


* 441 


that not this absorption of foreign inspirations was the morbid aspect of this 
decadence; it was actually the last healthy self-defence. For not purity of 
form, but creative capacity is the sign of a living art. And the petrifaction of 
forms following on the heyday of a pure style is the real decadence, the inner 
death against which those ‘exotistic’ experiments represent the first progress 
on a way through a long crisis towards a new creative art. We should, there- 
fore, not despise them. 

The temple architecture of the last period is represented by two degenerate 
types and one last, poor renascence type. In the first the system of super- 
posed sham chhattris has been reduced to a single storey, whereas the amalaka- 
lotus dome has grown to excessive dimensions. In the second the 6ikhara has 
been simplified to a fluted cone crowned by a small lotus dome or by a genuine 
amalaka, the latter a loan from the next type. For the renascence Sikhara is 
again an imitation of the Mediaeval type, but without its elegant forms; it 
has lost that perfect parabolic contour, symbol of a perfect balance of masses; 
its outline now passes from a rigid vertical into two simple circle segments. 
Better, however, are some temple enclosures such as that of the Gopal Mandir 
at Ujjain (1833). The dynamic intensification of its late Mughal-Rajput forms 
from the latter wings towards the facade of the central entrance would have 
aroused the enthusiasm of every European Baroque architect. 

This overwhelming invasion of late Mughal-Rajput forms, especially of 
the innumerable slim bays and balconies so characteristic for the Hawa Mahal 
at Jaipur or the Moti Mahal in Jodhpur Fort, is the main feature of the first 
phase of late Maratha palace architecture. But they are cramped between 
the traditional Maratha half-timbered work with its completely opposite 
style tendencies of linearism and simplicity (Chief Gate of Indore Palace, 
Western Naqqar-Khana of the old Bhonslewada at Nagpur, Nana Fama vis’s 
house in Poona, etc.). And the effect is anything but satisfactory, in spite of 
the gigantic dimensions of some of these buildings. In the woodwork, 
especially at the Vishram Bagh at Poona, an outspoken Chinese influence 
becomes evident, originally imported probably via Goa where we have a 
Maratha temple with Chinese roof at PondA, then via Bombay. This Chinese 
influence seems to be responsible also for the later type of Maratha brackets 
at Baroda, though they have quickly become completely Indianized. And 
finally also for certain heavy furniture from Vijapur in Baroda State. 

The next stage brings an invasion of eighteenth oentury Frenoh 
architecture and even furniture in an already half-Indianized form, mainly 
via Lucknow. As both eighteenth oentury French and Indian art represented 
late styles, the adaptation was easy, and the amalgamation and mixture of 
the individual elements remarkable. The French decorative forms were 
simply imjjosed on the traditional Indian architecture system, in many oases 
replacing similar Indian forms, in exactly the same manner in which in the 
North European Renaissance of the sixteenth century an Italian decoration 
had been grafted on a Frenoh, German, Spanish or English late Gothic tradi- 
tion, or in which the French Rooooo had been grafted on eighteenth and early 



443 < 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


nineteenth century Ottoman-TurJdsh art. A curious feature of this architec- 
ture lies in certain pseudo-Chinese buildings, inspired not directly from China, 
but by the ‘Chinoiserie' of Rococo Europe, the Western counterpart of the 
exotisiic tendencies which in India the Lucknow Rococo and Louis XVI 
^Georgian) style represented. An example in Lucknow is the Sikandar Bagh, 
a Maratha one, the pavilions of the Tulsi Bagh in Nagpur. The chief 
heritage of this period in Indian furniture consists of the big lustres everywhere 
to be found in Maratha palaces and temples. They represent a simplified imita- 
tion of the famous Venetian glass lustres, and were later on often replaced by 
genuine Venetian imports. The Victorian English style, however, came into 
fashion only about 1830-50. It was never genuinely absorbed and spelt the 
final death of late Indian, including Maratha, art. 

In the sculpture of this time two tendencies can be traced. One was the 
decay of traditional sculpture down to a completely degenerated type reminding 
of negro fetishes. The other was the introduction of a misunderstood Western 
naturalism grafted on the traditional Maratha ideals of beauty. This unplea- 
sant product lacks the strength of life expression which is the prerequisite of 
beauty in a naturalistic style, but also the perfect pattern which alone raises 
a mere artisan tradition to the level of genuine beauty. This clay sculpture 
has been used for the funerary dolls of the Maratha samadhs and many house- 
hold and procession idols, and its tradition is still alive. 

In the paintings the balance between debased Mughal-Rajput and popular 
Maratha style remained the same. Of this time we have luxurious rooms in 
the Moti Bagh at Indore, the Tambekarwada and the Vitthal Mandir at Baroda, 
etc. decorated with wall paintings as well as varnished wooden panels. The 
details leave much to be desired, but the general effect is charming. An 
interesting feature lies in the copies from European art, English prints of the 
Regency and French ones of the periods of Napoleon, the Restauration and 
Louis Philippe. In the ‘Adalatwada at Satara, for instance, we can see, 
amongst other pictures, the entry of Napoleon's armies into Berlin in 1806. 
Occasionally also copies from Chinese paintings are to be found. But whereas 
all these copies have had no influence on Maratha art, Chinese underglass 
painting in that time created a new Maratha school of Indian painting. In 
China this technique was known at least since the later Ming dynasty. It was 
introduced in Europe towards the end of the sixteenth century, but was popular 
only in folk art. It turned up in Poona first during the last years of N&n& 
Famavls as a purely Chinese import, even with Chinese subjects. But soon 
we find also portraits of Maratha rulers and sardars, prinoesses and fashionable 
dancing girls. Then also the style became more and more Indian and spread 
over the whole sphere of Maratha influence, from Nfigpur, Gwalior and Baroda 
to Kolhapur; Seringapatam, Mysore and Tanjore. The origin of the Mica 
pictures of Bengal has not yet been explored, but it seems probable that they 
were inspired by this school of Sino-Maratha underglass painting. With the 
growing influence of English civilization in the wake of the railways also under- 
glass painting withered away, like all the late schools of Indian pictorial art. 



■ 443 


THE ART OF THE MARATHAS AND ITS PROBLEMS 

This survey ha. made it sufficiently clear that Maratha art represents a 
special and distinct style of Indian art, indeed the last one brought forth 
before the collapse of the nineteenth oentury. There remains to us only the 
task to define its characteristics, the relation of its component elements and 
the spirit welding them together into a distinct style. The basic fact for our 
analysis must be the realization that the Maratha empire represented not only 
a national movement, but also a Hindu revolution against Muslim supremacy. 
Its cultural ideal, therefore, had to be a Hindu renaissance. It was, however, 
not an arohaistic attempt to revive the past, but a living renaissance in the 
spirit of its own time. Therefore the Maratha attitude was disoeming and 
selective. In military architecture the Muslim tradition was, on the whole, 
continued, for before the coming of the French and British it was the best 
and most up-to-date fortification system. Neither was civil architecture a 
revival of the past. The Hindu rural house of the Maratha country was 
developed, on the model of the many-storeyed palaces of Bijapur, into a new 
palace type, retaining the national half-timbered system of halls on stone 
terraces, closed by whitewashed brick fillings. But the national rustic temple 
architecture had been too poor as to revive the splendours of past Hindu 
glory. Thus here alone a conscious revival was attempted with the help of 
such traditions as had survived in the Karnatik, Gujarat and Rajputana. But 
neither here a slavish imitation of the past was envisaged, and after the first 
eclectic reconstructions soon an original style developed. 

The chief factor in the making of this new style was the introduction of 
contemporary Indian court art in the decoration of those basic architectural 
types of the national Hindu renaissance. Only at the start we can distinguish 
between Hindu and Muslim elements. For to whatever roots we may trace 
the individual motifs, in eighteenth century Indian art they were fused into 
one style employed likewise by Hindus and Muslims. We may even say that 
by that time even the classical Mughal style had become more Hindu than 
Muslim. For it had been taken over by the Rajputs and was developed by 
them in a new, national Hindu spirit, with its symbolic sculptural inter- 
pretation of architectural forms, its system of decorative organization by a 
multiplication of devalued original motifs, and its musioality of simplified 
lines in painting. Thus the Mughal-Rajput style — which had absorbed also 
the Deccani tradition — had become acceptable to Hindus, and formed, as the 
luxury style of the period, the chief stock of all decoration amongst the 
Marathas, especially in masonry, plasterwork, painting and small luxury 
articles. This explains also its decisive influence on the transformation of the 
Sikhara of the Maratha temple. For as the Sikhara had been a composite of 
small decorative motifs, it could so easily change its character from a spire tower 
to a ohhattri tower. Only in wood carving the stronger Gujarati tradition 
predominated, until it, too, was swallowed up by the new tendencies. But 
besides these leading currents there always remained a flotsam of archaic 
motifs, heritage of the originally provincial oharaoter of Maratha art. This 
survival of arohaic motifs in provincial art is a very important problem which 



444 ' 


B. 0. LAW VOLUMB 


needs further study end will change many of oar conventional identifications 
and chronological allocations in Indian art history. 

But what was the spirit welding these forms together into a unity 1 The 
Marathas had been a nation of frugal herdsmen and tillers of the soil. They 
had become mighty not as an emigrant aristocracy, but as raiders, for a long 
period always returning to their home country, and even when settling down 
far away, still with their hearts in the poor, but healthy Maratha highlands. 
Peasants are conservative, and a renaissance movement again is conservative. 
Maratha art has been conservative. Peasants are simple and practical, not 
sophists nor ideologists. Maratha art has never had a doctrine, it was eclectic 
and assimilative in all minor questions. Peasants, especially hillmen, preserve 
a certain heavy coarseness. This coarse heaviness and solidity have likewise 
been characteristics of Maratha art. The Maratha empire builders, however, 
had also been children of their time, of a declining Indian civilization, tom 
between brutal power politics and dharma, poverty and luxury, traditionalism 
and search for new inspirations, sensuality and mysticism : An Indian Baroque 
Age I And Baroque is the character of Maratha art, not replete with quiet 
harmony, but full of tensions : tension between stasis and movement, simplicity 
and excessive decoration (as in the Spanish Churrigueresque style), grossness 
and religiosity, national and foreign elements. And as the European Baroque 
ended in the playful form dissolution of the Rococo and in the exotic 
Chinois erie, likewise the Maratha Baroque dissolved at the end of the 
eighteenth oentury into a fancy style and then into an exotism of partly 
Chinese, partly Rococo- Western origin. It was the last national art of pre- 
industrial India. It was not one of the highlights of Indian civilization, but 
in any case an art deserving careful study and appreciation. 


RUDAKl, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 

By 

Db. M. Ishaqtts 

In the roll of famous poets and writers to whom Iran is indebted for the 
revival of her language and literature, Rfidakfs name deserves the first plaoe. 
He refined the language, enriched its vocabulary and made it capable of 
expressing all kinds and shades of thought. He is not unduly revered as the 
father of neo-Persian poetry — the inaugurator of the new era of poetic com- 
position in Persian. 

Irfin came under the Arab sway after the decisive battle fought at 
Nahavand in A.D. 642. The Arabic language and literature reigned supreme 
in the country for wefl over two centuries. It was only during the T&hirid 
period (AJX 820-72) that the Iranian Muse began to sing again after her age- 
long silence 0 . * The $aff&rids (A.D. 888-903), being of Iranian origin, by their 
patronage gave a strong impetus to the beginning of Persian poetry. Nq poet 



BDDAKl, THE FATHER OF NEO-FBRSIAN FOETRt 446 

of outstending merit is known to have appeared during these two periods. The 
manid princes (A.D. 874-999) undoubtedly played a glorious rdle in that 
they furthered the revival of both Persian prose and poetry by liberally 
patronizing the literary luminaries of the period, and it was in their magnificent 
court that Rudaki and Daqlqi, the precursor of Firdausi, flourished. 

The name of the poet, as given by ‘Awfl, is Abu ‘Abdu’llah Ja'far 
Muhammad ar-Rudaki as-Samarkandi. 1 Different Tazkira (memoir) writers 
have given his name differently. Sam‘ani in his Kitabu'l Ansab has given the 
name as Abu ‘Abdu’llah Ja‘far bin Muhammad bin Hakim bin ‘Abdu’r- 
Rahman bin Adam ar-Rudaki ash-Sha‘ir as-Samarkandi. 2 Ahmad Manini has 
adopted this name in his commentary on the Ta'rikh-i Yamlnl. 3 Daulatshah 
in his Tazkira records his name as ‘Abu’l-Hasan Rudagi. 4 * 

The poet was a native of Banuj, a village in the district of Rudak near 
Samarkand. He adopted his pen-name as ‘Rudaki’, because he hailed from 
Rudak. Some writers have sought to explain the term ‘ Rudaki ’ by saying 
that the poet was so called because he could play on rud 6 7 (harp). This 
explanation is obviously wrong, because in that case, as pointed out by Sa‘id-i 
Nafisi, 6 the poet would have been called RudI (and not Rudaki) or rather 
Rud-nawaz, Rudzan or Rudsaz which is the term for one who can play on rud. 
Rudak, a diminutive form of Rud, has not been met with. The term ‘ Riidagi \ 
as spelt by Jackson, Browne and other orientalists, is obviously erroneous. 
As the poet passed most of his life in the court of the Samanid kings at BukhArA, 
some of the memoir-writers think that he was a native of Bukhara. 

The exact date of birth of the poet is not known. But by a rough calcula- 
tion made from the internal evidences at our disposal, it may be said that he 
was bom about the middle of the third century of the Hegira. According to 
Sam'ani he died in A.H. 3297 The following verses of the poet himself go to 
show that he lived to a ripe old age 8 : — 

4 » f sy* y j ju 

> 

y j jj l/* 

Grown so old am I and thou too art not young, 

Full of wrinkles is my bosom and bent art thou like a bow. 


1 ‘Awfl, Lubdbu'l-Alb&b, ii, 0, ed. E. G. Browne, in the Persian Historical Texts Series, 
Leyden, 1903. 

1 ‘Abdu’l-Karfm b. Muhammad as-Sama‘&nI, Kitabu'l-Ansdb (Arabic text, facsimile), 
published by the E. J. W. Gibb Memorial (Vol. XX, 1913), fol. 262. 

• Abroad Manini, Alfathu'l-Wahbt • Aid Ta'rilch-i AH Natri'l-'Uto, i, 62. 

4 Dawlatah&h, TadhJcircUu'sh-Shu' 1 ard, p. 31, ed. Browne, in the Persian Historical Texts 
Series, Leyden, 1901. 

• Ibid., p. 31. 

• Afywdb & Ash'dr-i Abd *Abdu'Ud h Ja'far Muhammad ROdaH Samarkand*, Vol. II, p. 445, 
Tehran, 1810 A.H. (solar). 

7 Sama'&nl, Kit&bu'l-Ansdb (Arabic text, facsimile), published by E. J. W. Gibb Memorial 
(VoL XX, 1913), fol. 262. 

8 AsadI, LughcU-i Furs, p. 24, ed. Paul Horn, Berlin, 1897 and p. 76, ed. *Abbft« Iqbil; 
Tehran, 1319 A.H. (solar). 



446 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Elsewhere he says: 

y Ji V j\£s ^ jJ j y jl 4% y> cJ^o j } j a j~j ! j 

*y jbl j & jL» L qp j?* O* J ws~2lT 4)*Uj j y$ 

Wore out and fell all the teeth I had, 

They were teeth, nay they were bright lamps ; 


Now the time hath changed and changed am I, 

Get a beggar’s stick, for ’tis the time to have a stick and a wallet. 

And again he writes : 

c-^ y ££& OjJ ji jju 
1 ijl yr t j* jl 

Exceeding old and decrepit I had grown 
His favours made me young anew 1 . 

From these verses we understand that the poet’s skin got wrinkled with 
age. He had lost all his teeth and had grown so decrepit that he needed a 
stick for support. The age of a man of this description should be between 
seventy and eighty, if not more. If we suppose that he lived for seventy years, 
then it may be said that he was bom about the year 259 A.H. 

‘Awfi says that RudakI was bom blind. ‘Abdu’r-Rahman JamI in his 
Bahdristdn , Amin Ahmad Razi in his Haft-i Iqlim and Reza Quli Khan Hidayat 
in his Majmau* l-Fu§ahd have shared ‘Awfi’s view. But their view is not 
correct due to the following facts* : — 

(i) His similes are so exact and true that they cannot be expected to 
be from the pen of a person who is bom blind. 

As for example : 

kSjj J** j) j b 

jl & JjLa*- j\!y? 

Off and on the Sun peeps out of the cloud 
Like unto a lover hiding from his rival. 

1 AsadI, Lughat 4 Fun, p. 14, ed. Paul Horn, Berlin, 1897 and p. 85, ed. 'Abb&e Iqb&l, 
Tehran, 1319 AH. (solar). 

* The Egyptian writer Jam&lu’ddln Muhammad b. Nub&ta in hit work Sarhu'L'Uyiln /I 
Sharh-i Bitdlat-i ibn-i Zaidun , while dealing with the biography of BaahahAr b. Burd (put to death 
in A J). 783), says that the poet who was born blind used such similes as could hardly be expected 
from a blind poet and adds that the poet when asked how he could use such similes replied that 
when the physical eye was unable to see, the power of the eye of the mind was intensified* 

j s-liB j j* {J* JUi difc & JL- j ^ jJ* V U 4Jb $ j 

< 

O' £ jii & 4 J Jse* m U» J*4l 

[p. 155, Alexandria, A.H. 1290]* 




BUDAKi, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSlAN fcOETRY 


* 44 ? 


Elsewhere he says ; 

^ J/ y »-Lj ^ $ 

*5 ^ jj*, A* 

That tiny mouth of thine is, as it were, a pomegranate cut 
open. 

(ii) Colours play an important part in some of his verses, viz. 
j* lS-Av. y / JL t* J j>- } y* j JjJj’l 

c<C*>* jl j> I d ***! ^ x i* j ^ 


The Sun would hide itself, if thou unveilest thy face red as 
tulip 

And that chin would at once resemble an apple if the apple 
had a black mole on it. 

Also 


XX 


i j. 6 J* 
j ^ j' 


One who saw that red wine confused it for molten ruby. 

In the following verse he praises the beautiful white set of teeth 
he had in his younger days : 


y o Wv* j j * 5 j y Xy** 

$ j*, 6 j }y ^ 

They were as white as pure silver and resembled a row of pearls, 
They were as bright as the Morning Star and as clear as the 
drops of rain. 

(iii) The word (i.e. I saw) used in some of his verses definitely 
proves that he was not bom blind; e.g. 

djta Oy$ jtaljul jt* 

cu^l*** (j iSy* 

At daybreak I saw the Sun, as it shone, hastening westward 
from Khurasan. 

Again elsewhere he says : 

j\> Oj# j' c-C^l ij**” ^ Xj> * U^y 

b*W oT */ ^ lJjj j\ {Xj> 

Near Sarakhs I saw a hoopoo, its cries would pieroe the clouds, 
I saw it clad in a little mantle of variegated hues. 



448 ' 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


(iv) Both Daulatshah and Hamdu’llah Mustawfi are silent so far as 
the blindness of the poet is conoemed. 

From these arguments we come to the conclusion that the poet was not 
blind from his birth. But it may be said that he became blind in his advanced 
age. Manlnl in his commentary on the Ta’rikh-i Yaminl, following Najatl, 
says that the poet was blinded towards the close of his life. 1 If that be so, 
he must have been blinded either on account of some eye-disease or by way 
of punishment then prevalent. He might have been punished for his close 
association with the minister Abu’l-Fazl Muhammad Barami (d. Safar 10, 
329/Nov. 14, 940) who was deprived of his office in A.H. 326/A.D. 937-38 for 
his leanings towards the Isma‘ili sect. 2 

Another important point that may be considered here is that later poets 
like Daqlql, 8 Abu Zarra‘a Mu'ammari 4 and Na§ir-i Khusraw, 6 while speaking 
of Rudald's blindness, have said nothing about his blindness from birth. 

From the different accounts at our disposal, it appears that the poetic 
effusions of RudakI was very great. ‘Awfi says that according to a narrator 
the verses of RudakI filled one hundred volumes,® while Jam!, on the authority 
of the Sharh-i Yaminl , states that the poet composed a million and three 
hundred thousand verses. 7 The poet Rashid! 8 of Samarkand says that he 
counted the verses of RudakI and found that they amounted to one million 
and three hundred thousand and adds that if counted with greater care the 
verses might be found to be greater in number. Of this fabulous output, 
only a scanty remnant has come down to us. The Teheran edition of the 
so-called ‘ Divan-i RudakI * 9 contains only a few poems that may be accepted 


1 Asadi’s Lughat-i Furs, ed. P. Horn, 65 and ed. Iqb&l, p. 270. 


i - 

8 Daqlql says: 


CM u^Jj # J2 r <jT J JM.'f 

a Abu Zarra‘a Mu‘ammari of Gurgan, a poet of later Samanid period, when aaked if he 
could write poems like RudakI, is said to have replied: 

f + $*JJ $ d* S>JJ V 

>x j/ u* / Jf. J 'j jf « i 'r! (to /' 

fU* j'j* J.J J" JP t*"* 6 j’ f $ i P* 

[*Awf!, il, p. 10]. 


8 N&fir-i Khusraw has a reference to Rudakl’s blindness in the verse : 

** Cr-JJ (A '■£ & X. J 4»i PtS 

[DitxSn-t N&jir-i Khusraw , p. 323, Tehran, A.H. 1304-7 (solar) ]. 

* Lubdb, ii, 7. 

’ Bahdristdn, p. 01, Tehran, A.H. 1311 (solar), e a 

8 The verse referred to is: 


• s Kdfted by Sadrul-KnttAb Ibrihlm b. Muhammad b. ‘All Amull, dedicated to Farldftn 
Mhraft and pubhshed in AJBL 1315. 



RTTBAK!, THE FATHER OF NEO -PERSIAN POETRY 


' 449 


as Rfidakl’s compositions. 1 Eth6 has collected fifty-two fragments amounting 
to two hundred and forty-two couplets. 2 To these we should now add the 
lines quoted by AsadI (d. A.H. 465) in his Lughat-i Furs. In this oldest 
extant lexicographical work, Rudaki has been cited one hundred and sixty-one 
times. Among these quotations which are mostly single rhymed distichs there 
are sixteen couplets 8 of the lost Masnavi ‘ Kallla va Dimna \ Twenty-nine 
distichs are also available in al-Mu'jam ft Ma‘ayir-i Ash'ari'l-'Ajam by 
Shamsu’d-Dln Muhammad b. Qais ar-Razi. 4 


1 See the article 'Rudaki and Pseudo-Rudaki * by E. Denison Ross published in the Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , October, 1924, pp. 609-44. 

2 Hermann Eth6, RudagI, der Samaniden dichter, in Nachrichten von der KOniglichen 
Gesellschaft der Wissenschafter su Gottingen, 1873, pp. 678-742. 

8 See Paul Horn’s Introduction to Asadi’s neu persisches Worterbuch (Lughat-i Furs), 
Berlin, 1897. 

4 A treatise on the Prosody and Poetic Art of the Persians written early in the seventh 
century of the Hegira, edited by Mirza Muhammad Qazvlnl and E. G. Browne and published 
in the E. J. W. Gibb Memorial Series, Vol. X, 1909. 

The ‘ Kallla va Dimna ’ holds a prominent place in Arabic and Persian literature and is 
tho source of many fables which abound in the two languages. So, a brief notice of the work 
will not be out of place here. A copy of the original Sanskrit work was taken from India to 
Iran by a learned physician named Burzuyeh (Burzoe) under the orders of the Sasanian King 
Khusraw I, better known as Anushirwan tho Just (A.D. 531-79). It was immediately 
translated into Pahlavi. From the Pahlavi version, the book was translated into Syriac under 
tho title ‘Kalllag wa Damnag’ by Bud about A.D. 570. It was translated into Arabic about 
A.D. 570 by Ruzbih better known as ‘Abdu’Uah Ibnu’l-Muqaffa' (d. circa A.D. 760) under the 
patronage of the second ‘Abbasid Caliph Murmur (A.D. 754-75). From Arabic it was rendered 
into Persian under the orders of the Samanid Na§r II b. A^mad (A.D. 913-42) and clothed 
in verse by Rudaki. Again, it was translated from the Arabic version of ‘Abdu’llah by 
Abu’l-Ma‘all Na^ru’llah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abdu’l Hamid MunshI under the title ‘ Kallla va 
Dimna' in A.D. 1141-44 under the order of the Ghaznavid Sultan Bahrain Shah in (A.D. 1118-62) 
and this revised translation under the name of Kalila va Dimna has since been current in Iran. 
Although the Pahlavi translation has been lost, the Arabic version is still extant and may be 
verified with the help of the translations into Latin, Greek, Syriac, Turkish, Hebrew, Italian, 
French and English. The next Persian version is that made by Husain b. ‘All Wa‘iz-i-KashifI 
towards the end of the fifteenth century A.D, It was dedicated by him to Amir Shaikh Aljmad 
Suhayll, the Minister of the Sultan Husain Mirza, a descendant of Tamerlane. The version is 
therefore entitled 1 Anwar-i~SuhaylV (the Lights of Canopus). Although the author aimed at 
simplifying the earlier version by Na$ru’llah, his style is more florid and bombastic. The next 
Persian version is that made by Abu’l-Fa?l b. Mubarak ‘AllamI (d. A.D. 1602), the Minister of 
Emperor Akbar, in A.D. 1687-88. This version is based on Na§ru’llah’s translation and is 
characterized by its plain and elegant language and is known by the name of the ‘ ‘/ydr-t Danish * 
or ‘The Touchstone of Wisdom*, which as a popular version has retained its place as a standard 
work in Persian literature. 

Very few books in the world has attained so much success or have been translated into so 
many languages as this work. It has undergone careful and critical examination at the hands 
of the Orientalists who have come to the definite conclusion that the original text of the work 
is the Pahchatantra of Sanskrit literature. The name ‘ Kalila va Dimna * has been taken from 
KarataJ^k and,Damanaka, a fable in the Pahchatantra. The original Sanskrit work is said to 
have been composed by a Brahmin of Ceylon named Bidpay under the orders of a king named 
Dabshalim. 

For further details see Sir John Malcolm’s Sketch ee of Persia, pp. 71-74, ^ondop, 1861, and 
The Ocean of Story (Somadeva’s Kathd Sarit S&gara ) tr. by C. H. Tawney, pp. v^-xxxi and the 
Genealogical Table of the Pahchatantra facing p. 242 of Volume V London, 1926, 

29 



450 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Rudpki’s fame also rests on his versification of the Kalila va Dimna 1 
which he undertook under the munificent patronage of the Samanid King 
Nafcr II bin Ahmad (A.H. 301-31/A.D. 913-42) and of his Minister Abu’l’ 
Fazl Bal'ami. He versified a Persian adaptation of an Arabic version from 
the Pahlavl translation of the Sanskrit original. In his Shahndma , Firdausi 
has referred to Rudakl’s versification of the Kalila in the following words : — 

^ ij 1 & j! 

ju aP ali (J^T j ^ & \) $y 

j\ jy&f sy J# >*>’! & jl J - 3 ®*) \y 

^ ) X Sjl£> J ^ j 






cri 


j \fr j * *y \Sj&\* t>V J \j^JT 

* JlJjl y*’ j>' Am L" AaF «Xi L *Lj ^ tSi j 

Ij I Cr) <£■« * ««{ Ij IjT C^y~J 


Kalila was translated from Pahlavl into Arabic, as you may hear it 
read today, 

It remained in Arabic till Nasr became the lord of the age on earth, 

His noble minister Abu’l-Fazl, who was his treasurer in respect of lore, 
ordered it to be rendered into Persian and Dari, and it was readily 
executed, 

Thereafter when he (Na§r) heard (it) an idea presented itself to him, 
He expressed his wish in public and in private that some memorial ot 
himself should survive in the world, 

Readers were appointed, they read out the whole book to Rfidaki 2 
He so linked together the scattered (words) as you’d say that he had 
threaded pregnant pearls. 

RudakI was amply rewarded for this work. From the following verse, it 
is understood that he received a sum of 40,000 Dirhams : — 

(A y~ -V 3 S 3 jj (*j j j'j* Jt*? 

* jytS ji f Uac 

Rtidakl received Forty thousand dirhams from his patron for the 
versification of the Kalila. 


1 Firdausi, Shdhn&ma, viii, 2506*7 (ed. Sa‘Id-i NaflsI), published by Beroukhim, Tehran, 
1935, also The Shdhn&ma of Firdausi by Warner and Warner, vii, 430-31, Triibner’s Oriental 
Series, London, 1915. 

* Here if another reference to Rudakl’s blindness. 

• s The autliorahip of this verse is attributed to ‘Unfurl, the poet laureate of the court of 
Mahmud of Obama* 

2QB m 


RUDAKI, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 


* 451 


Unfortunately this valuable work, excepting some fragments 1 tjiat have 
chanced to be preserved in various Persian lexicons and other works, has 
been lost. It was a Masnavl poem written in the Ramal-i Maqmr hexameter. 2 
Its opening verse is said to have run as follows : — 

J&.T j yi 

Besides this the poet is said to have written other Masnavis, namely, the 
‘ Dauran-i Aftab ’, 8 the ‘ Ara’isu’n-Nafd’is ’, 4 and the ‘ 8indaMdiidma\ 5 

According to Hajji Khalifa (d. A.D. 1658) the poet also wrote a Persian 
lexicon called ‘ Tdju’l-Maqadir’* now no longer extant. 

That Rudaki had a poetic genius of a high order is admitted at all hands. 
He rightly deserves the encomiums which were lavished upon him during 
his lifetime and were continued after his death. Shahid of Balkh in a verse 
cited by ‘Awfi says that ‘Bravo! and Well Done! are a compliment in the 
case of other poets, but in the case of Rudaki these words would be an imperti- 
nence’. 7 Kisa’i 8 and Nizami ‘Aruzi 9 of Samarqand have called him the 
‘Master of Poets’ while Ma‘rufi 10 of Balkh has acknowledged him as the 
‘Sultan of Poets’. Daqiqi, 11 the precursor of Firdausi, says that for him to 
praise one who had received panegyrics from Rudaki would be to bring dates 
to Ha jar. 12 In the verses quoted below, even TJnsuri, the poet laureate of 


1 According to tho calculation of Sa‘id-i Naflsi only 88 verses of this work has come down 
to us. (See his Ahwal-u-AsKdr-i Abu ‘ Abdu'Udh Ja'far RudaJci Samarqandi, ii f 588.) 

2 oOUli 

8 Farhang-i Jahangiri. 

4 Hajji Khalifa, Kashfu'z-fiunun, ii, 111, Constantinople, A.H. 1311. 

6 See Paul Horn’s Introduction to Asadi's Neuperaiches W6rterbuch {Lughat-i Furs), p. 21, 
Berlin, 1897, 

® Hajji Khalifa, Kashfu'z-fiunun, i, 212, Constantinople, A.H. 1311. 

‘Awfi, Lubdbu'l-Albdb (ed. E. G. Browne), ii, 6, London-Leyden, 1903. 

• c — jjT uXI x# OLf** ill*! 

Lughai-i Fun (ed. Paul Horn), p. 10. 

2 J* ^ J>!) xb yJm & OlT 

‘Awfi, Lubdb ., p. 7. 

i® ol j\LL |»jl j! 

* 

‘Awfi, Lifidb,, p. 6. 

n jf j/t x»l 4 2 j£ S*JJ & 

A *3- •*/. >J. Vr * ■»* *>’ 

‘Awfi, Lubdb., p. 6. 

ii According to the author of the Athdru'l-Bildd, Ha jar was the capital of Bahrein. 



452 ' 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


Sultan ^labmtid, admits that the ghazals of Rildaki were superior to his own 
and that with all his efforts he failed to produce a ghazal like that of RudakI : 

>y. f* j'j 
->\j S*jj u* 

The Samanid prince Nasr II was charmed by the poetic genius of RudakI 
and attached him to his court. Fortune smiled upon him and honour and 
riches were abundantly showered upon him. On one occasion, when he had 
completed the versification of the Kalila va Dimna , the prince rewarded him 
with forty thousand dirhams . 1 He lived in a princely, style in the Samanid 
court. It is said that he owned two hundred slaves clad in rich liveries and 
that he would require four hundred camels to carry his luggage . 2 A reference 
to his vast riches is met with in the poem written in his old age when he had 
fallen on evil days. All the memoir- writers are unanimous in their opinion 
regarding his wealth. Poets like ‘Unsurl 8 and AzraqI 4 have envied his lot. 

His name has been indissolubly connected with that of his royal patron 
Nasr II by a charming anecdote related by all Tazkira-writers. Once Na§r, 
accompanied by the nobles of his court, went to Badghls near Herat and he 
was so charmed by the beauty of that place that he remained there for four 
years and showed no sign of returning to his capital Bukhara, the stink and 
filthiness of which the poets never ceased to attack. The nobles were yearning 
for their home and prayed to RudakI to sing to the king some poem which 
would awaken in him a desire to go back to Bukhara. One morning RudakI 
improvised the following verses and sang them apparently to the harp before 
the king : 


s 

aT 




jJ tjU ja 

' iSyr <6y t 



Jj 


> 

l cJTj 


a>T V» 1^ 

) U 


j cJT 

s 

A>T O 


Jj 

:>U j J\> 

t jlj£ ^1 

s 

juT jlc-T 


.u 

jlr-T \& j 

ju 


1 See before. 

* Of. Jfixnl: * 

jtiUh. 

c rJ* A j\j* 

s ‘Unfurl says: 

oi i/ l — JLp 

4 Am^K writes: 

A*' j* M iSJJ 3' S*Jj 


S*jj 

> 

(A-) 5 A A 

cA>* Jr ) S>jj (j> A* Jrv * 

* 4* 

m 



RUDAKf, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 


. 453 


I jW. J CU**I J J* JjU 

t 

I j jJ ^ jm J Cs 

The fragrance of the rivulet Mvliyan 1 is ever wafted (to us) 

The memory of kind friends is ever present in mind; 

The sandy desert of Amu with all its hardships would glide like silk 
under the feet; 

The water of the Oxus with all its expanse, would only be knee-deep 
for our steeds. 

Bejoice and long live 0 Bukhara 1 the King is coming to visit thee; 

The prince is the moon and Bukhara the sky, the moon would rise in 
the sky; 

The prince is the cypress and Bukhara the garden, 

The cypress would proceed to the garden ; 

Eulogy and encomium would be an asset to thee 
Though the treasury might incur a liability. 

The king was so moved that he, as the story goes, 2 without putting on his 
socks, got upon the horse that stood saddled at the gate and did not halt till 
he had travelled for eight miles. The courtiers presented to the poet a purse 
of ten thousand dinars. 


jij i y 


Dawlatshah has found no beauty in the song and has expressed surprise 
that words so simple could produce such a wonderful effect. 8 We, however, 
must not forget that in Dawlatshah’s time artificial and stilted types of poems 
were in vogue and simplicity did not count for much. Apart from the simpli- 
city of the verses cited above, their wonderful effect upon the king undoubtedly 
owed much to the melodious voice and musical skill of the poet. 

Budaki’s poems on wine display his masterly touch in the lyric vein. 
Of the poems of this genre we quote below * the following which is best known, 
with its English rendering by Professor Edward Byles Cowell, the teacher of 
Fitzgerald as well as of Professor E. G. Browne: 


liiT jjjl j oyr [ j 

JUwl d-Vo jjjl J/ 

* jhJ y* $ j* 


jjwl o jJl jj & (S oT jLj 
xjU jjjl ^ ^ $L 
Ijei j j / £ji 

O') 


m • • 

1 A river in Bukh&rA 

8 Nijfftml ‘Arufl, Ohahdr Maqala (ed. Muhammad Qazvln!), pp. 37-39, Berlin, 1927. 

8 Dawlateh&h, Tadhkiratu'8h-Shu t ar& (ed. E. G. Browne), Persian Historical Text, p. 82, 
London-Leyden, 1901. ^ 

a RI?& Qul( Khftn Hid&yat, Magma* ii'l-Futafyd, i, 238, Tehran, A.H. 1295. 



454 , 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


‘Bring me yon wine which thou might ’st call a melted ruby in its oup, 
Or like a scimitar unsheathed, in the sun’s noon-tide light held up. 

Tis the rose-water, thou might ’st say, yea, thence distilled for purity; 
Its sweetness falls as sleep’s own balm steals o’er the vigil-wearied eye. 
Thou mightest call the cup the cloud, the wine the raindrop from it 
cast, 

Or say the joy that fills the heart whose prayer long looked-for 
comes at last. 

Were there no wine all hearts would be a desert waste, forlorn and 
black; 

But were our last life breath extinct, the sight of wine would bring 
it back. 

0 if an eagle would but swoop, and bear the wine up to sky, 

Far out of reach of all the base, who would not shout 
“Well done” as I?’ 1 

Rudaki had something of the Epicurean philosophy which inspired the 
poems of ‘Omar Khayyam in a later age. The poet sings 2 : 


->b j y? 


^1** 4 

l — - l iSj iLi 

^b 4 

t 

JJ 

L 

!> »J_.T j 

JjT <SjJ 

*l» 

oT , 

0* 

\$y 9 (S j* jT j a* 

2 ^ J 



A 

JJ* 


£ J tX 

3 :>b tab 

J 


6^b 


J ^b 


Live merrily with gay black-eyed ones, for evanescent and unreal is 
the world ; 

One should not be glad for gains obtained, nor should he be sad for the 
loss sustained; 

I have got for myself one who has tresses curly and fragrant and is 
bom of houri with face like the moon ; 

Lucky is the man who gave and ate, wretched is he who neither ate 
nor gave, 

Alas! this world is vain and ephemeral, bring me wine and let happen 
what may. 

Indeed, Epicurean philosophy was the guiding principle of the life of 
the poet who wasted his health and fortune by treading the primrose-path of 

* Browne, Literary Bistory of Persia , i, 457-58, Cambridge, 1029. 

* Cf. Sa'di's Hue from the Gidist&m * 

isJts j » j* J# j tfjf j «a£' 

** * 

Fortuaat/ was the man who ate and sowed and unfortunate was he who died and left 
behind. 



RtfDAXl, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 455 


dallianoe. However, with the approach of old age, the light-heartedness of 
youth was gone especially after the death of his friend and admirer Shahid 
of Balkh on whose death Rudaki wrote an elegy. 1 He also lost his position 
in the Samanid court probably after his patron Nasr II bin Ahmad (A.H. 
301-331/A.D. 913-942) had- to abdicate the throne in favour of his son Ntili 
in consequence of a conspiracy against him for his conversion to the Isma c ill 
faith 2 for which the poet also appears to have had sympathy. 8 

Rudaki was not without a vein of humour. It is said that once Abu 
Tahir Khusravani, a contemporary poet, had indirectly taunted Rudaki for 
his vanity in dyeing his hair. He wondered why men dyed their hair as 
by doing that they could not esoape death and gave themselves trouble in 
vain. 4 RfidakI took the compliment for himself and replied thus : 

y j fj* jl l" jSL jT j\ Aj \j \Sy <> 

I dye not my hair black to become young again and try sins anew, 

As in time of grief people don their garments black I dye my hair 
black to mourn the misfortune of old age. 


In the following verses, while mourning the death of a grandee, Rudaki 
says that a man should not lose his heart in times of distress and adversity. 
According to him it is through passive courage, resolute endurance and firm- 
ness of mind that a man can show his real greatness 6 : 

iSj\ j* jlf-* jX I j j ^ 

^ A^ j£iT -uT £iT j cA j &T eA j 

y* I «- • C >5 jAjr j'y* 


1 The elegy referred to is: 

jbJjl ij j cij l» jT j jjJLj oij JL^i- IT 
cAr* j j f Cr «-C f** j* ^ 

* Vide Svydsat-nfima by Nij$§mu’l-Mulk, ed. Charles Sohefer, 188-93, Paris, 1891. 

3 Cf. Ma* ruffs verse of whioh the second hemistich by Rudaki has been adopted by way of 
Tajmln: 

y j j\UL yl 

* Italo Pizzi, Chrestomaihie per sane, p. 64, Turin, 1889; also Charles J. Pickering's article 
'The Last Singers of Bukhara*, pp. 821-22 in the National Review, Vol. XV, London, 1890. 

* Cf. the following lines of Kisa'I on the same Bubject: 

j p £j J Jjr Ji \Sjjt £j J* f 0 * V $ J &* 3' 

xAj j x> mJ rr <3 V *> O* 3 & ci V J 3 

If thou art pained to see my hair tincture and dyeing my hair blaok; take it not amiss; 
To look young is not my motive rather I apprehend that someone ifcay seek in me the 
wisdom of age and find it not. 




456 . 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


tfjf j\ b cT <jT C$jb ^ J-> 

‘ ‘ > ^ > 
jj\j j\ $ ^jb (£*** 

1 (- £jVL* j (J3 jS * jy j J-Ja* Jj *X*X^ j-^l 

0 thou, who moumest and moumest rightly 
And in secret sheddest tears, 

What is gone is gone and hath happened what had to happen, 

The past is past, why moumest thou in vain; 

Wishest thou to make the world eternal ? 

How could the world everlasting be ? 

Thou may’st wail on till the Day of Resurrection, 

How couldst thou by wailings bring back the departed one ; 
Lament not, for the world pays no heed to lamentation, 

Bewail not as for wailings it careth not; 

Tis in times of tribulation that ones 

Excellence, manliness and leadership become manifest. 

The following quatrain shows that the poet had nothing but a scathing 
condemnation for cant and hypocrisy 1 : 

jl Je j l jls£ A> ^ Jjlf* O >1 <SjJ 

2 y ^ U *y\ 


Turning the face towards the altar would be of no avail 

If the mind is fixed on Bukhara and the damsels of Taraz; 
Our Lord might grant thee carnal desire 
But would hear thy prayers not. 


Rudaki echoed through the following lines the eternal religious sentiment 
of the East and advocated the noble principle of Ahimsa, arguing that all 
that God has given to man is not to be used either for his moral degradation 
or as a weapon for killing his fellow-men. One may wish that the wisdom of 
his lines stayed the cruel hand of the assassin and stopped for ever the terrible 
action of the nations or States employing the brutal engines of war for the 
destruction of human lives, abusing Science for perfidy and atrocious crimes. 
Here the poet speaks of the inevitable course of operation of the law of retribu- 
tion which man fails to see due to the haughtiness of his spirit and lack of 
wisdom and foresight. Here he comes out in his prophetio strain to convey a 
truth for all times to come *: 

> 

<£■»“*** <X lS ? 3y vsu!5 <jl yJ ^ J* 4 Of* 


‘S—I Ar* jr. j' jf j ) ' £ JjtT O’) 


1 Dr. fa Shafeq, Ta'rtkh-i Adabindt-i Irdn, p. 47, Tehran, A.H. 1821 (•olar). 

* ‘ Awft, Lubdb., ii, 8. 




RUDAKt, THE FATHER OF NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 


• 457 


J» jU'Jb ci fi.j 
| j J^»T •AttjC' I j jj & jl> \j* 
* c u LI j l £ j<X 4*rj jlC' lr 


III 4**15"* *Aj 3 ^^4* j^’***»^ 

jlj ^£«ju« c«5* l> & \*j£ 

0^, ^ J<A> J ^ 



Thou may’st possess a knife but men thou mustn’t slay, 

God never forgetteth a crime perpetrated, 

The knife wasn’t meant for the tyrant, 

Nor the grape for making wine, 

Onoe Jesus found a slain man lying on the road 
And was struck with astonishment and grief, 

He said, ‘Whom hadst thou slain that thou 

Hast been slain and who hath slain thee himself to be slain ? ’ 
Hurt thou none with thy finger, lest none may hurt thee with the fist. 1 


Rudaki’s verses embodying his lament in his old age have special interest 
as they throw much light upon his life and habits. There are some lines 
which may offend modern taste, yet on account of the importance of the poem, 
we quote as many verses as could be available. From the perusal of these 
verses it is understood that he had fallen on evil days in his old age. The 
cause of his poverty and misfortune must be either due to his love for animal 
gratification 2 or his removal from the Samanid court for his possible leanings 
towards the Isma‘IlI faith. Whatever the cause may be, the story described 
in these verses excites our pity, sorrow and grief. The verses are : 

j j; jl-Ao j* jj j I j» 


*y jit ^ V jl-Ao 

}y oW j* J J ^ J 

Sy <jl jl 6 Jiei j 2y • jt* 


1 Nafru’ll&h b. Muhammad b. ‘Abdu’l-Hamld MunshJ, Kitdb-i KalUa va Dimna , ed. MTrzA 
‘Abdu’l- ‘Ajjlm Kh&n Garakanl, Introduction, p. *J\ Tehran, 1351 A.H. 

2 We find references in his poems and in the poems written by later poets as to his love for a 
Turkish slave named ‘Ayyar. RudakI had to spend a huge sum of money to purchase him and 
became involved in debt which was liquidated by his great friend and admirer Abu’l-Fa?l 
BaTaml. 

Cf. Rudaki’s line: 

1 { il £ 

Adlb-i p&bir of Tirmig writes: 

XSmH j\x S*JJ \ 

guzanfot Samarqand says: 

c &X* ^ j\e o J* 

j\p ^ jX\ ox 


t J* jmt 

j jV. >\ $ V df. 




458 ■ 


B. 0. LAW VOLUME 


; ** J ^ J* St 

*y. o*^ ^ ^>b* ■> j; ^ 

jLp j^JJJ *> j *y O^yf * 

ly jbjr; ^baS cuU a 4% 

cu**! jb S ^ S cA*>* 4**^ oV^ 

#■* #* 

^ jb/* a J* JLlTT :> jj t -Uiw^ 

S y*> c^W. J^L jbj.5 £ jb* 

^JJ jbj.5 § jb^ jl J 

$y^ y L jb* L^bj^ «A^5^ <j/* 

jULb- & j b* jbj> XT ji j 

^ ^3»» ^ jlL 4. "«»£!*> l— «J 

*y jlL> jT \z~ t S j» j>- j 

lijj *Jb *b ^1 jb *7 </ 

^ jj jbb* Aj^ j jji-J j^jl dJL^J Jb- & 

2y £ j>- j $y j\ & 4 >bj jT j£ 


>x 

jbaij ^+» j 


j JjA . J ^1 J^LmJ 






y £ </ 

u-j^ 

jSj>- 

>y 

j£jz ijij 

* l 

j ^1 4^T ^«LJj 






b^ jbj & 

<U'bj jT JL«» 

>y. 

jljb ^b| 

<JiJ* 

& 4>*bj lT * 1* 






jAi CU*b S? 

^ jC 

kS y& brf 

*x 

oVi * j t 

uV, 

j\ O jlj 
^ » 






jl jJbJL jl£ c**» jL^> 

jjy. 

J J! 

jl«*»’j ^ -> 


_,! Isrly- 

«* 




'~**A [Jjj J ^f” J 0*JJ -A-J 

*y ubJ 6* <£) * b£ 



kodak!, thb father of 


NEO-PERSIAN POETRY 


•^459 




£ & 


x aUt 



£ -1 ji 1 j 

vj* j -klu |1 j 






J m j >m oba 

y Vi 

L mi 

3 y 








*y yry- o&Jj <jj 

4JLf 

>y 








d?-> <Sj 

^ AiUj 

jljO 

'y 


iJjf 






A> 4j J 

03 a; 

JL*p 

>y 

uLT J t 

O^Ji J/jl 






pp »ib j 


✓ 

>y 

o\w jl' (JjT & J, 







A A 

& AjUj i 

jT jui 

>y 

jL»l j>- jc. 

j\ & 4>Uj jT X# 






(JJj' jT J jr-l 

j «u«i _j Jj> iy 

>y 

uUL jT j , 

***** J jjj' 'jj 






ck 

j>- jrU 

iU 

*y 

ulTb jju 

i Jjj jj> 






0* j cu-2 £ 

A)bj 

ojS" 



ij» oUl 

j L-op cij ^ 


L*C 


Wore out and fell all the teeth I had, 





They were teeth, nay they were bright lamps; 

They were as white as pure silver and resembled a row of pearls, 

They were as bright as the Morning Star and as clear as the drops 
of rain; 

Not one is left now, all have decayed and fallen, 

. .What a mishap ! ’twas indeed the effeot of Saturn; ' 

No ’twas not due to Saturn nor due to lapse of time 
Why then ? the truth is that ’twas the Will of God; 

Ever so hath turned the Wheel of Fortune, and till theSrarM exists its 
law would reign supreme; 



460, • B. 0. LAW VOLUME 

A thing that cures, a souroe of pain would be, and again a thing that 
pains a cure could be ; 

Anon it makes old the things fresh and new 

And forthwith makes them new when old they grew ; 

Many a beauteous garden is reduced to desert drear 

And where once stood a desert lovely gardens appear ; 

0 thou, whose face is bright as the Moon and whose tresses fragrant 
as musk, knowest not what a high station thy slave held before ; 

Past are the days when he was merry and gay 
And had more to enjoy and less to pay; 

Thou art displaying thy curling tresses to thy slave in glee 
And didst know him not when wavy curls had he ; 

Gone is the time when his face was like velvet 

Gone is the time when his hair was ebon black ; 

Many a maiden fair in love with him 
In secret visited him by night ; 

As in the day she could visit him not for fear of her lord and loss of 
liberty; 

Sparkling wine, ravishing eyes and comely face, 

Costly though they were cheap for me ; 

Always happy I was and knew not what sorrow was, 

My heart was a play-ground for sport and gaiety 

Many a heart was softened to silk by my song 

Though ’twas as hard as a stone or an anvil could be ; 

Ever ready were his hands for the tresses smelling sweet 
And to lend the ear to men of lore always keen was he ; 

Thou didst see him not, when he would enter gardens warbling like a 
nightingale ; 

No hearth, no wife, no child, no care had he 
Free from these and unencumbered was he ; 

Always bought he at enormous prices damsels having breasts like the 
pomegranates wher’ver in the town one could be ; 

Gone are the days when the world ran crazy for his poems 
Gone are the days when the bard of Khurasan was he ; 

Who was laurelled and who was favoured by all ? 

Who was showered by the House of Sam&n with honour and 
favours; 

Forty thousand dirhams the prince of Khur&sto rewarded him 
To which a fifth was added by Mir M&k&n; 

Now the time hath changed and changed am I, 

Get a beggar’s stick, for ’tis the time to have a stick and a wallet. 

Thus in sorrow and misfortune ended the days of the poet. He was indeed 
the spoilt child of fortune. He died in his own village in A.H. 829/A.D. 940. 
According^ to^Sam'&ni his tomb was situated in a garden near his village 
Banuj, and was obliterated in course of time 



INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 

* 

cu^U iJjU ^ ^ Ji 

Look not on earth for our graves after we die, 

In the hearts of men of lore our sepulchres lie. 


INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 
By 

Dr. B. M. Barua 

The Indus seals and script have been critically studied from different 
points of view by such eminent scholars as Sir John Marshall , 1 Mr. Earnest 
Mackay , 2 Professor Langdon , 3 Dr. G. R. Hunter , 4 Dr. Giuseppe Piccoli , 5 
and Messrs. C. J. Gadd 6 and Sidney Smith . 7 It is necessary to keep in view 
the nature of the guidance to the study of this fascinating but difficult subject 
which each of them has given us. 

In the opinion of Sir John Marshall the Indus script is a pictographic 
writing which does not appear to have reached the syllabic stage, while in 
Dr. Hunter’s opinion it may have been originally both pictographic and ideo- 
graphic, but in its preserved state it is mainly phonetic. Mr. Gadd in his 
study of the Sign-list of Early Indus Script opines, ‘that it is not an alphabet 
must be obvious from the number of its signs; such a notion cannot seriously 
be taken into account. On the other extreme, it can hardly be a pure picture- 
writing in which every sign represents a word, since a very short search will 
reveal groups of signs which frequently appear in the inscriptions in different 
contexts and often with the insertion of one or more varying signs. While 
no great certainty can be felt about this matter, it remains true that the 
general impression derived from the study of these inscriptions is that the signs 
are probably syllabic, with the admixture of ‘ideograms’, and perhaps deter- 
minatives; in short, that the system is perhaps not very much different from 
that of the cuneiform writing.’ 

Mr. Sidney Smith observes, ‘Of those writings which are not purely 
alphabetic it may be said that signs fall into one of three classes, syllables, 
ideograms, determinatives. In any one inscription a sign can only belong 
to one of these classes, but it may in different inscriptions belong to all three. 
If a sign is used with a syllabic value, it may in different inscriptions have 


>461 


1 Article on Religion in Mohenfo-daro and Indus Civilization, Arthur Probsthain, Vol. I. 

* 4Artiol^on Seals and Seal Impressions in ibid., Vol. II. 

* Article on The Indus Script in ibid., Vol. II. 

4 Work on The Script of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. 

4 Article on A comparison between Signs of the Indus Script and Si^h^m tjie Corpus In * 

rifipUonum Etruscarum , Indian Antiquary , Vol. LXII, Pt. 782. 

6, 7 Arti cles on the Sign-list of Early Indus Script, Mohenfo-daro , Vol. II. 



46 % 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


different syllabic values. If a sign belongs to the last class, it may determine 
meaning, in which case it generally marks the first or last sound in a syllable, 
or the first or last syllable in a polysyllable. A determinative of sound is 
usually called a complement, and is particularly useful when ideograms permit 
of variant readings .... The complications of the ‘material’ nature of the 
signs arise from two main features of the script, modifications, whether internal 
or external, and combinations.’ 

While definitely stating that the Brahml script is derived from the ancient 
Indus pictographio writing and assigning the phonetic values to the derived 
alphabetic characters, Professor Langdon does not wish ‘to convey the 
inference that these are the correct values of the original ideograms, any more 
than the phonetic values of the Phoenician alphabet represent the values of 
the Egyptian pictographs from which they are derived.’ ‘It is highly impro- 
bable’, says he, ‘that the signs of the Indus script have reached the syllabic 
stage, that is, a consonant and vowel, as in the Brahml alphabet. Many of 
them may possibly be so used, and used as phonetic elements in the writing 
of the words, as many Sumerian pictographs are in the oldest known Sumerian 
texts.’ He goes further and adds that there is not even a remote connection 
of the signs of the Indus script with the Sumerian or Proto-Elamite ones, 
the Indus inscriptions resembling the Egyptian hieroglyphs far more than they 
do the Sumerian linear and cuneiform system. There exists no difference of 
opinion as to the great antiquity of the Indus pictographs and the System of 
the Indus writing from right to left. As regards the contents of the Indus 
inscriptions, they are so far taken to be personal names or titles. 

In spite of all attempts hitherto made there prevails a ‘counsel of despair* 
regarding the decipherment of the Indus inscriptions. Swami Sankarananda, 
in his Ifgvedic Culture of the P re-historic Indus , calls our attention to the 
Tantric code, Varnabljakosa} strongly maintaining that a sure key to un- 
locking the secrets of the Indus script, if rightly used, might be obtained from 
it. The object of this paper is to briefly indicate the way in which the guidance 
from the Tantric code might be followed and that with what probable results, 
without being sanguine at all of being able to lessening the difficulties that 
beset the path or having a final say in the matter. 

A few preliminary observations are indispensable. The Tantra texts, 
as they are now extant, are admittedly compilations of a comparatively 
modem age. They are far removed as such even from the Vedio and Epio 
times, not to speak of the early Indus civilization. Evidently their subjeot- 
matters bear the stamp of things that evolved through many subsequent 
periods. The separation of things that are later from things that are earlier 
is necessary before the Tantric code is availed of for the present purpose. 
One thing, however, is oertain, namely, that it is chiefly based upoq the yicto- 
graphs which stand for a syllabic form of writing. In other words, it attaches 
oertain phonetio ^alues, in many instances more than one, to different signs 

7 i See TaiMdbhidh&na, edited by Panchanana Bhattacharya in Arthur Avalon Tantril 
Texts Series, Vol. I. 


INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 


> 63 

as well as abstraot ideas. So far as the signs go, their variety and variations 
are at first sight commensurate with those of the Indus script. The Sanskrit 
names which it supplies seem to be very appropriate to the Indus signs if we 
can ascertain the deities and men in different attitudes, animals and objects 
from which they are derived. And yet the question is bound to remain open 
in the present state of our knowledge if the phonetic values as suggested in 
the Tantric code are at all applicable to the pictographs of the Indus Valley. 
The utmost that I can say is that there is no harm in giving it a fair trial, 
in which case there must be a concerted action among a number of experts 
who can correctly identify the Indus signs and those who can lay their finger 
on their Sanskrit name -equivalents in the Tantric code. If thereby a large 
number of intelligible words can be made out of the Indus inscriptions, then, 
and then only, the problem of decipherment can be taken to be solved, at least 
partially, in the absence of any better guide in the shape of bilingual, trilingual 
or quadrilingual records or in that of Tantric manuscripts with the pictographs 
distinctly shown in them. 

That there was the tradition of a pictogram in India is evident from the 
Lalita- Vistara list of sixty-four kinds of writing (lipis), including the numerical 
and notational ones and mentioning the Brahmi, Kharosthi and Puskarasari 
as three parent scripts, the last one being obviously the name of a pictogram. 

Though there is a wide gulph which separates the Indus history from the 
age of the Buddha and which can be bridged over only after other ancient 
sites showing the chain of continuity are discovered, it is a fact that the ancient 
pictographic tradition is maintained in the symbolical inscriptions on the 
Indian punch-marked coins, while the terra-cottas of the same age maintain 
the technique and tradition of the popular Indus arts and crafts. 

As compared with the pictographs and signs of the Indus script, the 
Egyptian hieroglyphics follow a simplified and much more definite system. The 
same observation applies almost with equal force to the linear and cuneiform 

* system of Sumeria, Susa, Babylon, Assyria and Iran. The uniqueness and 
high antiquity of the Indus script are proved by the much wider vanety of 
its signs as well as its fluid character, both of these distinctive features being 

• envisaged by the Tantric code. 

\ One great drawback of the Tantric code, so far as it is known, lies in its 
fojVre to suggest the pictures or signs that are expressive of numerals, whereas 
in^ll probability and as argued by Mr. Sidney Smith there are a few numeral 
4igns in the Indus inscriptions. If this be a fact, one may further observe 
that the Indus devices were precursors of those of the cuneiform system 

(see PI. V, C). „ , ... 

The Indus tradition of the yogic method of mental concentration was 

continued though the Upanifads, Buddhism, Samkhya-Yoga and different 
forms of later Tantricism, while, as I make out, the evidenoe of one of the 
early Mohenjo-daro seals is conclusive as to the continuity of tl^ Indus religious 
'"wight through the Ijlqveda, Vpanifads, Buddhism, Jainism a^Hinduism, 
i short, through the whole of Indo-Aryanism. In this particular-seal an 



464 


B, 0. LAW VOLUME 


ASvattha tree ( Ficus Beligiosa) prominently figures, even with its aerial 
roots. Two bird-beaked and dragon-bodied but conventionalized creatures 
remain poised in the air from two sides of the tree, facing each other. Their 
tails are entwined on the tree-trunk round a circular spot in which the four 
pippalas (A&vattha fruits) are shown, hanging down from their stalks (PI. II, 1). 
It is not difficult to make but that the creatures represented thereon are the 
two Suparnas, the mythical birds who appear in the Pali Jdtaka Niddnakatha 
to be in the r61e of demi-gods along with the Nagas, both ranking below the 
Devas and Brahmas. 1 The Buddha accords a chance or supernatural 
( opapdtiJca ) origin to both of them. 2 * In the Indus stage the Naga-bodied 
Suparnas are a single mythical being, while their later separation into two 
classes of mythical beings closely resembling each other in their general shapes 
and forms is evident from their representation as such in the decorative device 
of the stone libation vases from Babylonia and Assyria (see PI. II, la). So 
far as the Indus seal is concerned, the representation of the Ahattha fruits 
would have been unmeaning if it were not for the fact that Indus artist's 
intention was to indicate the eating or not eating of them by the two creatures. 
If so, the seal concerned contains unmistakably a very ancient and interesting 
pictorial representation of the allegorical verse in the Rgveda 3 and later texts 4 * 
which embodies the whole trend of the Indo-Aryan religious thought : 

Dva suparna sayuja sakhayd samanam vrksam pari§a§vajdte / 
tayor any ah pippalam svdduttyanaAnan anyo abhicdka&iti // 

‘Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree. One of them eats 
the sweet fruit, the other looks on without eating.' 

As to the contents of the Indus inscriptions, Mr. Gadd hits the mark in his 
conjecture that ‘they include names, very probably of the owners'. ‘Many, 
perhaps', he adds, ‘especially of the shorter inscriptions, may be regarded as 
names alone, but others seem to add qualifications, which may be titles'. 6 
Mr. Sidney Smith gives us a better guidance when he takes for granted ‘thah, 
the inscriptions do not all contain only personal names; there must be other 
elements as well'. 6 We can have a more definite guidance from the Pali 
scholiast Buddhaghosa when he leads us to expect to find on the punch- 
marked coins (kahdpamis) either the name of the place — a village, town or 
city, a hill-side or river-bank — from which they were issued or that of thpfr 
maker, 7 \ 

In the inscriptions on the Indus seals, too, as they stand till now, we arc . 
generally to expect the names, simple or descriptive, or persons or places, 


i Fausbdll’s Jdtaka , i, pp. 70, 76. 

• SaifiyitUa, HI, pp. 2463. 

• $gveda, I, 164-20; Nirukta , XIV, 30. 

• Ka$ha Vpa., III; Mutyfaka, III, 1.1; STvetdavatara, IV. 6. 

• Mohery&daro, Vol. II, p. 412. 

• Ibid., Vol. IL#p. 421. 

7 Sdratthappakdsini, II, p. 204: mahd-herafifiiko . . . asukagdme asukanigame asuka-nagty 
' cutdea-paijjai^cohdydya asuka-naditlre koto ’ ti pi asukdcariyena koto Hi pi jdndti. 



INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 


. 465 

> 

persons being owners or manufacturers and the places, villages, towns, 
cities or the like. It is only in the few cases of the seals with religious or 
mythological devices, which were probably used as amulets or the like, that 
we are to expect the names of the deities represented on them or any formulas 
of mystic potency. Following the guidance of the Tantric code, one may 
feel justified in thinking that the ordinary inscriptions ending in the letter 
(= 6a) record the personal names in genitive singular, meaning ‘of So and 
So\ One of them (PI. V, B. 2) may be taken to read L+u+l+u+6a = 
Lulu 6a, ‘of Lulu*. Another of them (PI. V, B. 9-10), in which in the upper 
line a ghariyal (Sk. graha) holds a fish in its jaws, may be taken to record a 
place-name ending in the word patha. There is a different place-name ending 
in the same word patha in the inscription on a second seal (PI. V, B. 9). 1 
In the religious seal (PI. I, 1), the inscription may be supposed to record the 
name of the deity represented on it. It will be extremely hazardous at present 
to suggest anything beyond this. 

Mr. Sohrab Jamshedjee Bulsara, who passes as a well-informed Iranian 
scholar, is out to prove the Iranian (i.e. Zoroastrian) origin of such ancient 
Indian alphabets as ‘the Devanagari, the Indus Script, the Brahmi, the Pali 
and the Kharoshti \ 2 The typical list given of the ancient Indian alphabets 
is more than sufficient to prove his supernormality. It is for the first time 
that we hear of the ‘Avestan letters' modelled evidently on the Egyptian 
hieroglyphics which follow a simple system of picture-writing as compared 
with the Indus script. 8 

One thing may bo definitely stated in favour of the Indus scribes that they 
have most skilfully and intelligently executed their work and are not careless 
like the scribes of A6oka. In a few of the seals they have clearly indicated 
the animal and other figures from which the letters or signs were derived. 
Attention may be drawn first of all to the seal (PI. I, 1) in which the scribe 
indicates that the first Tetter on the right gives the outline of the lion-faced 
man in attending posture, the second stands for the horned head of the buffalo, 
the third for the head of the rhinoceros, the fourth for the two forelegs of the 
tiger, the fifth for the outline of the fish, and the sixth for the two forelegs of 
the elephant. By showing the first letter below the inscription and above the 
N^iger, the scribe wants to indicate that the inscription is to be read from right 

L— ___ 


1 Note that in historical times the Punjab proper abounded with the pieces named after 
roads, e.g. Ajapatha (Goat-road), Men^apatha (Ram-road), Musikapatha (Rat-road), Vamsa- 
patha (Bamboo-road). Mahdniddesa, pp. 155, 415 ; Panini, V. 1. 77 ; B. C. Law, India as described 
in Early Texts of Buddhism and Jainism, p. 71, In each of the two seals (PI. V, B. 9, 9o), the 
place-name Beems to consist of five signs or syllables, the three in the lower row to be read from 
left to right and the two in the upper row from right to left. The three animals in the lower 
row ofHhe jB»t seal appear to be an elephant, a rhinoceros and a ram, the ram in front being 
shown also with its head turned towards the signs in the upper row. The place-name to be 
tttade out, according to the Tantric code, is 6alahapatha=Sk. 6arabhapatha. 

* Proceedings and Transactions of the Tenth All India Oriental Confererke^pp. 10 2ft. 

7 * MM * P- 108. 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


46 V 

to left'. The names suggested in the Tantric code along with their phonetiS 
values ate as follows (PL I, la). 

1. Simhasya (Lion-faced) = a; Narasimha (Man-lion) = a or u. 

2. Mahisaghna (Buffalo-killer) —ja. 

3. Khadgi (Rhinoceros) = gha , la , va. 

4. Vyaghrapada (Tiger-legs) = u or da. 

5. Matsya (Fish) = pa. 

6. Hast! (Elephant) = ia. 

The sensible word which can be made out of the inscription is ajala - 
upasa , Sk. acala-upasya , meaning ‘The mountain -worshipped one*. 

In another seal (PL II, 6) we see a six-faced animal and behind it a six- 
faced letter. The Tantric code name for this is Sanmukha (Six-faced) having 
u, it, tha , or pa for its phonetic value. 

In a third seal (PL II, 5) the scribe indicates the correspondence between 
a three-faced quadruped and a letter derived from it. The appropriate name 
to be supplied for this letter from the Tantric code is Trivaktra (Three-faced), 
phonetic value u . 

In a fourth seal (Pl. II, 4, 4a) the first letter \f of the inscription stands 

for the forelegs of the leopard. The suitable Tantric code name for this will 
be Svapada (Dog -legs), phonetic value d. 

In a fifth seal (Pl. II, 3, 3a) the third letter ^ stands for the long- 

bearded head of a mighty goat. If the Tantric code name Aja (Goat) or 
Ajesa (Goat-chief) be applicable to it, its phonetic value is either ai, sa or ja, 
jha. 

Similarly the letter or sign composed of six vertical strokes, Tantric code 
name Sadata (Six travellers), phonetic value 8a, may be shown to have been 
derived from the six standing human figures (Pl. II, 2, 2a); the letter or sigp 
composed of seven vertical strokes, Tantric code name Sapta-turaga (Seven 
fast-walkers), phonetic value cha, from the seven human figures in a fast 
walking attitude (Pl. I, 2, 2a) ; the letter or sign ft from the figure of a 
tree-spirit appearing in the attitude of catching or killing a tiger (Pl. I, 3, 3a) : 

and the letter or sign from the standing figure of a deity under//; 

prahha- like object (Pl. I, 4, 4a). ^ 

It is not an easy task to identify all the letters or signs ; a few of them can 
certainly be. Take, for instance, Kabandha (Headless man), phonetic value 
va (Pl. IV, 149); VrScika (Scorpion), phonetic value cha (Pl. IV, 94); Vihaga 
(Flying bird), phonetic value pha (Pl. IV, 99) ; Sikhi (Peacock), phonetic value 
ta, pha , ra, la (PL IV, 104); KukkutI (Hen), phonetic value H (PL IV; 103); 
Hasta (Hand), phonetic value jha (PL III, 32); Dhanu (Bow), phonetic value 
fa (Pl. IV l# 15y ^Dhanurdhara (Bow-holder), phonetic value pa (Pl. IV, 152V: 
Mtikha (Mouth), phonetic value ah, lea , \a, dha, ya , va, k§a (Pl. III, 81); QajS 

30B 



INDUS SCRIPT AND TANTRIC CODE 


,467 

Elephant tusker), phonetic value a (PI. Ill, 87); Catustara (Fouj/ stars), 
phonetic value ft (PL III, 3); Tribindu (Three points), phonetic ^alue cha 
(PL Hi, 2); Bindu (single point), phonetic value am , i , tha , ma (PL III, 1); 
Paftoapafic&tmika (Five individuals), phonetic value gha (Pl. III 18, 18a). 

The difficulty which seems at first sight insuperable lies in finding out 
the underlying system of the Indus writing, in separating the vowel and 
consonantal signs, as well as in distinguish ng the numeral devices. 

In offering this suggestion I do not intend being dogmatic on any point. 
I claim certainty just in one point, namely, in the interpretation of the seal 
representing the two Suparnas on an Aivattha tree. But it may be hoped that 
this paper as a whole will be found useful in clearing up the general position 
of the Indus script which is indigenous, ancient in time and unique in its 
character. The development of a syllabic system in the Indus script retaining 
in it vestiges of pictographs and ideograms is undeniable, and there is ap- 
parently no solid ground for thinking that there is anything peculiarly Dravi- 
dian or proto-Dravidian in the Indus seals and their inscriptions. None need 
be astonished if their language is a form of Prakrit from which the language of 
the Rgveda itself evolved with no real dual in it save and except in the com- 
pounds denoting natural pairs. 












mus script-typical signs 


I'LATS.ill 


3c. / ' 4- s 

/ > 

S. i lo. i u. 

I 

ii ii m. i 
II 1 1 


3. * * "bet. it •il, l i 

t ’ ’ 11 

*■ f ^ 8. >\ 


II 12 II U*. »» »*. »i u 

" " 


1 7 ■ HI I ’7*. MM '8- Hill I la- MMI 

nun ?#. itiim n.m **• ■» »*. n// 

III *1* /<U 

»»•)) <7o»)) *».( «.*) 

3). | 35. C^3 3S. (-, 3*,. * 3?.^» 

3*. M 37. § 38. | *9 | <fo.| m. | 

/l/l/ 9i./vv *</• Add **«• gs 
W- ^ <Ua. A ‘n- p ft ‘it- jfc S». a 
V. 4 **• 4 53. $ ft. A 5r .^jg f‘-Y 

J4 V 53.^ tt.ctfil.D 

(1 - 0 *»■ ffi «•§ g «■ |g <*g 

/' H 43 • 7 7 »: r*] 7'- »». 0 7J.® 

7 *' 6 7f - $ 7 *- ® 77 - (J£ 7 «- > 

^ >• ^ 98- ^ *3- *9. "U 

ffcy *7 ^ 3}.^| 



TO* 


INBUS SCEIPT— TYPICAL SIGNS 


Plate IV 


99.y* 

/**f, v 

lo5. I - /K> 

«r.^ - * -CT 

»».«* «... v v 


5i. 

U/ll-U tlMM/1 

»»•*, 

9 b-. 

$ 

’< § 

5 1 % **■ ^ 

lav . 



los.. '°3- <j> 

\o$. 

& 

ie£. ^ 

IT '»«■ £ 


«*■ r 

1*7. 

/iP 

/sr- ^ 

/** . u* 

//»$■* oj* 

**' 0 

m. 


no . 
\Zli. 

11$. 

I 31. 


U 

11 /. ujy 

/>*.. 

*) 

"*■ l/) 

1/7- 

y 

>204. ^ ' 

/*» . 

y 

ns. xi^y 

12 b. 

JT 

1 29 . ^ /29 *' 

* 


131. 

► 


I3€ 


* 


1 2 in 


r 

1 




«r/ ^ " ,l 

m. ojfo '* 7 <=fL 

'*»■ j. it*. ^ 




/£#* *•" 


*«• h 

tsl. | 

is - 

nil 
if 



/yf # 

1 7 ». A 

# JJ’ 

/ 7 r, p 


/ '*♦•< 

««.(i y 

/ 4 r<r. <5^ 

» - f 

/V*' C=j) /<r7 ' ►* 

/jri. ^ 

/f*. j>{J 

16b 

1U. 0 

/?/. $ ^ 
nt.zp 



INDUS SCEIPT 
A. Typical Combinations 


= !><£ .< • t>C + V a ^ 

■ X-t-n = <(. S’-Pg+'T*^ 

A + A - £ *7- ^ + A = ^ g, 0+l" e $) 

A + y , a i..« + 0 «" 6 ," 6 " 

■ ; + GO - '$* u ' • • + $~ l3 "*" + ^‘^ 

1 + T Utt ir. ^ 

W+>- ^ X ‘t- B|tV« $5 l5 - # 

* * , uu. - ijj* 1 

l/t« - ^ it. * r 


B. Typical Inscriptions 


V^tFCX PC *-V(tm C 

T-lfl 

^i® *' U<‘" u 6 *-9jTiw 6 jo 



C. Numeral Signs 



r <• ! C.^ 3 . n,c,n 


" l , c - ” r ' 




INDEX 


AbhidharmakoSa, 308, 312 
A^dhakasi, 73 
Adil Shah, Sikandar, 104 
Ain-i-Akbari, 179 
Aiyangar, S. K., 413 
AjataSatru, 19 
Akbar, 103, 104, 109 
Albers, A. C., 424 
Ambapfill, 73, 74 
Ambai^ha, 127 
Ambat thal^, 136 

^Uwtetffa-Sarupnagar Plains, 389 
Anathapindika, 74 
Andersen, Dines, 24 
Ahgulimala, 73, 172 
Apadana, 183 
Arabia, 112 
Arnold, Edwin, 117 
Arnold, Matthew, 320, 323 
ArthaSastra, 14, 16, 198 
ASoka, 19, 96, 465 
Aung, S. Z., 167 
Avadana Pataka, 21 
AvalokiteSvara, 16, 16, 17 
Ayodhya, 283 

Ayyangar, S. Krishnaswamy, 195 
Ayyar, Venkata Rama, 420 
Acarya, Varada, 165 
Acharya, P. K., 275 
Acharyya, Govardhana, 259 
Amba^ha, 127, 135 
Anandaraja’s palace, 220 
Arya Vajra, 56 

Babur, 104, 105 
Baghaura, 216 
Bailey, H. W., 11 
Balamukunda, 146 
Balkan States, 89 
Ball&la II, 331 
Banabhatta, 179 
Banerji, S. K., 103 
Bapat, P. V., 260 
BaranasI, 283 

Barasat-Basirhat Plains, 392 
Barrackpur, 384 
Barua, B. M., 461 
Barua, D. L., 183 

JBapuipur-Jaynagar Plains, 346, 365 
4toruipur Jifatla Road, 370 
Beames, 197 
Bhadrab&hu, 51, 52 
3i 


Bhadrabahu II, 55 
Bhaduri, Sadananda, 38 
Bhagwat, N. K., 61 
Bhandarkar, R. G., 139 
Bhattacharya, Padmanath, 250 
Bhattacharya, Vidhusekhara, 48 
Bhavadeva, 257 
Bhoja, 191, 192 
Bhojanagara, 136 
Bhojaraja’s palace, 224 
Bhramar Geeta, 286 
Bhunahu, 63, 67 
Bijapur, 104 
Bimbisara, 19, 74 
Bloch, Jules, 22 
Bloomfield, 126 

Brahmachari, Upendranath, 111 
Brown, P., 104 
Bj-hannandikeSvara, 415 
Buddha, 175, 424 
Buddha-Gaya, 429 
Buddhacharit, 117 
Buddliaghosa, 63, 464 
Buddhakhetta, 183 
Buddhapadana, 184, 186 
Buddha vaipsa, 183 
Budge-Budge, 364 
Budge-Budge-Bishnupur Plains, 349 
Biihler, 19, 20 
Burdwan Fever, 115 
Burns, 330 

Canda, 72 

Caryapadas, 201, 215 
Ceylon, 15 

Chaitanya Mangal, 235 
Chakrabarty, Tapo Nath, 243 
Chakra varti, Chintaharan, 176 
Chakra varti, Manomohan, 197 
Cha94imura!T530 
Chandras of Rohitagiri, 217 
Charpentier, 18 
Chatterjee, S. P., 342 
Chatterji, S. K., 203 
Chaudhuri, Jatindra Bimal, 145 
Chinese Turkestan, 319, 320 
CInas, 131 
Cintamani, 147 
Coimbatore, 273 
Cola-Sailendra, 420 
Conjeevaram, 

Curzon, Lord, f 8 




INDEX 


471 


Kanheri, 110 
Kanaka, 234, 307, 308 
Kanta, Surya, 127 
Katre. S. J 22 
^au^illya, 13 

Kavikankan Can^I, 202, 205 
Kavyamlmaipsa, 192, 193 
Keats, 321, 323 
Keith, 281 
Kerr, John, 115 
Khan, Fazal Ahmad, 334 
Khare, G. H., 140 
Khardah, 384 
KhaSas, 131, 209 
Khusrau, 104 t 
Ki^aram. ±cu * 


Erushas, 222 
Kinnaras, 222 
Kiratas, 131 
Kisii GotamI, 72 
Konow, Sten, 307 
KosambI, 283 


Kosambi, Dharmanand, 117 
Kramrisch, Stella, 141 
Krishna, M. H., 330 
Ksomendra, 193 
Kulapandita, 148 

Kulpi -Diamond Harbour-Falta Plains, 346 

Kundakundacarya, 57 

KuntaleSvara dautya, 191 

Kuntl, 251 

Kuriyan, G., 266 

Ku§ana kings, 305 

KuSinara, 431 


Lakshmanasena, 259 
Lalitavistara, 263, 463 
Lalmai Ranges, 213, 217, 218 
p«Uuid utilization in the District of 24- 
' Parganas, Bengal, 342 
Langdon, 401, 462 
Laud, Archbishop, 1 
Law, B. C., 23, 206 
L6vi, Sylvain, 24, 307 
Lllatilaka, 337 
Lokanatha, 243, 245 
Liiders, 22, 25, 33, 306, 311 
Lumbini, 424 


Macdonell, 281 
■ MadanadevI, 249 
Madanapala, 255 
MadJaav Rao, 435 
*MpAava, 34 
/ll&dljavaaferya, 199 
I Madhura^ 283 
| Madras, 209 


1 Magandiya, 63 
Magrahat, 352 
Mahabharata, 282 
Mahavaipsa, 21, 130 
Mahavastu, 263, 308 
Mahavira, 51, 242 
Mahenjodaro, 232 
Mahlpala I, 251, 254 
Mahmud, Sultan, 452 
Mainamatl, 213, 215, 217, 218 
Majumdar, B. C., 198 
' Majumdar, Surendra Nath, 139 
Mallika, 67 

Manasara, 275, 280, 283 
Manikchandra, 214 
Manu, 132 

Manusmyti, 207, 208, 209 
Marshall, John, 312, 461 
Matsumoto, Tokumyo, 22 
Mediterranean, 112 
Mesopotamia, 112 
Milinda, 166 
Mishra, Umesha, 237 
Mi6ra, Kedara, 247 
Mithila, 283 

Mithradates II and III, 305 
Mitra, Rajendra Lala, 197 
Mookerjee, Asutosh, 198 
Mookerjee, Syama Prasad, 231 
Moscow, 112 
Mfichchhakatika, 282 
Muller, F. W. K., 11 

Nadia, 236 
Nagadasaka, 19 
Nagasena, 160 
Naihati-Jagaddal, 384 
Nair, V. P. Kannan, 266 
Narada, Thera, 158 
Narasimha, 331 
Narasingha Deva II, 204 
Narayanapala, 255 
Narendrasinha, 9 
Nasik, 236 
NekkhammS ?260 

Newman, 320 
Nibbana, 69, 168 
Nilgiri hills, 270 
Nirgranthas, 219 
Nirvana, 19, 54, 55 
Nitisara, 179 
Nityananda, 181 
Noapara, 384 
Nur Jahan, 107, 108 
Ny&yakandall, 40 

N yayakusumampJta 
Nyayalilavatl,#2 



472 


B. C. LAW VOLUME 


Ny&ya-Vai6eeika, 38 

Omar Khayyam, 454 
Oriya literature, 197 

Padmapani, 221 
Paharpur, 226 
Pahlavas, 131 
Panini, 135 
Panipat, 437 
Paradas, 131, 209 
Parakramabahu, 16 
Parana vitana, S., 15 
Para^ara, 254 
Paradarasmyti, 207 
Pasenadi, 67 
Patacara, 72 
Patanjali, 137 
Pathak, R. V., 117 
Packers, 215, 216 
Paundras, 131 
Pegu, 9 

Pelliot, 11, 315 
Pope Gregory VII, 84 
Porana, 20 
Portugal, 112 

Pragjyotishapurabhukti, 251 
Prajnaparamita, 22 
Ptolemy, 139 
Parana — 

Bhagavat, 286 
Matsya, 13 

Nandike6vara, 415, 416, 419 

Raghavan, V., 191 
Rahula Sthavlra, SrT, 16 

Rajadharmakapda , 15 

Rajagaha, 136 
Rajasinha, 6rl Vijaya, 9, 10 
R&jatarahgi^I, 178 
Rama, 290 
Ramacandra, 16 
Ramachandran, T. N., 213 
Ramayana, 1 
R&vana, 1 

Reu, Bisheshwar Nath, 207 

Rhys Davids, 18, 283, 309 

Riga, 112 

Rogers, 115 

Rohitagiri, 217, 218 

Roy Choudhury, M. L., 292 

RudakI, 444, 450, 455, 457 

Rupban-Kany&’s palace, 223, 224 

Rupban*mur&, 225 

Rupnarayan, 346 

Russia, 89 


Sabdaratnavall, 181 
Sagala, 283 
Saha, M. N., 84 
Sahajayana, 215 
Sahityadarpan, 200 
Sakas, 131, 209 
Saketa, 283 

Salbanraja’s palace, 229 
Samantabhadra, 52, 53, 60 
Sangha, 7 

Saranankara, 9, 10, 11 
Sarasvati, Rangaswamy, 196 
Sarvasvara, 413, 414 
Sarup, Lakshman, 34 
6aSanka, 227 \l 

&astri, Haraprasad, 200, 216, 

Satara, 2 

Sayanacarya, 34, 199 
Schopenhauer, 159 
Son, Dinesh Ch., 197, 199 
Sen, Keshav Ch., 116 
Sen, Priyaranjan, 197 
Sen, Sukumar, 259 
$esa Concept of, 1 23 
Shillong, 114 
Siddhartha, 226 
Sikandara, 103, 109 
&i6unagaa, 21 
6ivabhuti, 51 
Skandasvamin, 34 
Smith, Helmer, 24 
Smith, Vincent, 104, 217 
Sona, 72 
Spain, 112 
Spooner, 307 
6ravasti, 283 
f$rl Bhadra, 51 
6rl Krishna, 286 
6rlchandra, 218, 249 
Srlpati Bhatta, 153 
Stede, W., 23 
Sterling, 197 
Subhadra, 251 

Subhasita-sara-samuccaya, 145, 153 
Sufis, 292 
Suj&ta, 117 

Sukul, Lalita Prasad, 285 
Sulaiman Shikoh, 106 
6ulapftni, 417 

Sundarbans, 347, 350, 352, 361, 399, 403 
Suryya-siddh&nta, 94 
Susun&ga, 19 

Suvanjaprabhasottama-sutra, 309 

Tagore, Devendra Nath, 116 
T&j Mahal, 434 
Takakusu, 11 



INDEX 


Tak^a- Sutra, 237 

Vidyasundar, 205 

Tennyson, 320, 322 

Vienna, 112 

Therig&tha, *83 
ThonwwfjIB^J., 18 

Vigrahapala, 252 

Vikramaditya, 193 

Thomas, F. W., 18, 305 

Vimala, 73 

Tilak, B. G., 94 

Vinnana, 68, 69 

Travancore, 273 

Vipaka, 163 

Tulsid&sa, 289 

Virarajendra, 423 

Turkestan, 112 

Vishveshvara Smriti, 207 
Vi?nudharmottara, 141, 221 

Ubbirl, 72 

Vizagapatam, 268 

UjjayinI, 51, 54, 283, 441 

Vogel, 310 

Upaka, 64 
Up&li, 73 ✓ 

V^ttaratnakara-paftcikS, 18 

Upper Hoogyytlain, 345, 352, 359, 301. 376, 

Watson, Sir William, 320, 321, 324. 329 
Wind and Storm, 357 
Winstedt, Richard, 1 

Vai6ravana Kuvera, 309 
V&k&$akas, 196 

Wintemitz, M., 132 

Varadachari, K. C., 123 

Yajnavalkya, 15 

VasitthI, 72 

Yavanas, 131, 209 

Vedan&, 68 

Yudhisthira, 251 

Vejuvana, 74 

Yueh-chih, 317 

Vepldatta, 156, 157 
Vehkata Madhava, 35 

Yugoslavia, 84 

Vehkat&rya, 6rl, 34 

Zafar Khan, 234 

Ves&ll, 136, 283 

Zimmer, 281 


ERRATA 

Page I Read ‘ Laud ' in place of ‘ Land*. 

„ 339 „ * that * in place of * the 

„ 416 „ * Navapatrikd ' in place of 4< Navaputrika \ 

„ 463 ft 'gulf' in place of ‘ gulph 



MESSAGES 


Sir Atul Chatterjee 

It gratifying to learn that many friends and admirers of Dr. B. C. Law 
are contributing to a Presentation Volume in his honour. Dr. Lav^s services 
to the study of ancient Indian culture have been most valuable, UMT on % 
acoount of his own patient and erudite research into many recondite problems 
and his munificent endowments to further similar research by other scholars. 
He has set an excellent example and it is to be hoped that he will be spared 
for many long years to carry on and develop his activities in this sphere. 

The Late Dr. A. Berriedale Keith 

I congratulate you on your attainment of 55th year. It is pleasant to 
think that you have accomplished so much while you are still so Young. With 
all good wishes. 

Dr. F. W. Thomas 

Your valuable and thoroughgoing contributions to our studies are so 
numerous and extensive that it is difficult to realise that in 1940 you will 
attain an age of no more than 55 years. Having reached 76 early this year 
(1943) I must be regarded as being on the descending path; but my interest in 
our perennial studies is undiminished and I look forward hopefully to being a 
living participant in the tribute of appreciative congratulation which will 
reach you on the day. 

Sir Edward Maclagan 

You know how most I appreciate what I have read of your well-known 
indological studies. 

Dr. Dasharatha Sharma 

Please find herewith one Sanskrit verse, an humble offering of mine, for 
the Commemoration Volume. I do not know whether it will be found good 
enough; but it expresses fairly well, I believe, the high regard in which I have 
always held you. 

i i 

ftmnuww graft frr 

fa«m«H nre i 

roromf i 

The Hon’ble Mr. Sachchidananda Sinha, Vice-Chancellor, Patna 
University 

I am a very great admirer of your profound learning and rare scholarship, 
and I pray that live long to serve the cause of ancient Indian literature 

mid culture. 

•-'* ) / 






