




y 


MADRAS UNIVERSITY HISTORICAL SERIES — No. 9 


THE COLAS 

SECOND EDITION 


A 


It. A M 








THE COLAS 


BY 


K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, M.A., 

Emeritus Professor of Indian History and Archaeology 
University of Madras. 

Professor of Indology. University of Mysore. 


With over 100 illustrations and one in colour. 





First Edition : Vol. I, 1935; Vol. II, 1937. 
Second Edition : (Revised) 1955. 


Printed and Bound in India 
at G. S. Press, Madras 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


This book has been out of print for many years now and 
I am grateful to the Vice-Chancellor and Syndicate of the 
University of Madras for the invitation they extended to me 
to revise it for a second edition. The first edition appeared 
in two volumes in 1935 and 1937. each volume accompanied 
by an appendix of select inscriptions containing abstracts of 
unpublished inscriptions. This appendix has been omitted in 
the present edition partly to save space, and partly because 
the evidence is now fairly familiar to the reader. There is 
also another valid reason. The Central Advisory Board of 
Archaeology has adopted a resolution advising the Union 
Department of Archaeology to bring out at an early date an 
up-to-date Topographical List of South Indian Inscriptions 
similar to the well-known list of The Inscriptions of the Madras 
Presidency by Prof. V. Rangachari. and I understand work 
on these lists is being undertaken, besides steps for speeding 
up the publication of the texts of these inscriptions. 

The promise of a separate study of Cola Art held forth 
in the Preface to the first edition has not materialised; diffi- 
culties in the way of a comprehensive treatment are unfor- 
tunately still too many. These will disappear only if the 
Archaeological Department or a South Indian University un- 
dertakes a systematic survey and description of the monu- 
ments with photographs, plans, and elevations on the model 
of what has been done for Kambuja, Annam and Java by the 
French and Dutch archaeologists working m those countries. 
This work is beyond the resources at the command of the 
present writer who has therefore, with the permission of the 
authorities of the University of Madras, added a fresh chapter 
to the book giving a summary account of the main features 
in the history of Cola Art with adequate illustrations. In the 
preparation of this chapter he has received considerable aid 
from Mr. K. R. Srinivasan, Superintendent for Archaeology, 
Southern Circle, and Dr. S. Paramasivan, Archaeological 



PREFACE 


vi 

Chemist in the South — both from their writings and from 
personal discussions with them. 

The whole text has been carefully revised, and in part 
rewritten in the light of recent discoveries and interpretations. 
Some ancillary matter on feudatory dynasties which seemed 
unduly to hamper the nai’rative has been omitted, and the 
foot-notes collected at the end of each chapter instead of 
being distributed at the foot of the pages. 

My obligations to previous writers will be evident from 
the notes. For the new chapter on Art I have availed myself 
of the writings of the late Jouveau-Dubreuil and of Mr. Percy 
Brown in particular. The sources of the illustrations are in- 
dicated in the description of plates and it will be noticed that 
I owe most of the illustrations to the courtesy of the Director- 
General of Archaeology. Mr. K. R. Srinivasan has allowed 
me to reproduce some photographs in his private collection. 
Mr. N. Lakshminarayana Rao, Government Epigraphist for 
India, not only extended ample facilities for consulting texts 
of inscriptions, but furnished some valuable references, placed 
his transcript of the Kai’andai Plates at my disposal, and also 
permitted me to reproduce the excellent seal of these plates, 
the better preserved of the two seals on them; this now takes 
the place of the seal of the Tiruvalangadu plates included in 
the first volume of the first edition. 

Dr. A. Aiyappan. Superintendent of the Madras Museum, 
and Mr. P. R. Srinivasan, his archaeological assistant, as well 
as the numismatic assistant of the Madras Museum, very 
readily enabled me to consult the Coins of the Dhavalesvaram 
hoard, though it entailed a considerable inroad on their pre- 
cious working hours on more than one occasion; Mr. P. R. 
Srinivasan also kindly undertook the detailed description of 
the illustrations which is appearing under his name. Lastly 
Mr. H. S. Ramanna. Lecturer in Indology in the Mysore Uni- 
versity. kindly undertook the task of indexing the book. 

To all these friends I tender my most grateful thanks. 
The Vice-Chancellor of the University. Dr. A. Lakshmana- 
swami Mudaliyar. has been evincing a personal interest in 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. SOURCES 1 

II. EARLY NOTICES .. 18 

III. COLAS IN EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 30 ' 

IV. GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SANGAM 

AGE . . 63 

V. FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA .. 100 

VI. THE RISE OF VIJAYALAYA. ADITYA I (c. a.d. 850-907) 110 

VII. PARANTAKA I (a.d. 907-955) . . 120 

VIII. FROM THE DEATH OF PARANTAKA I (a.d. 955) TO 

THE ACCESSION OF RAJARAJA I (a.d. 985) . . 140 

IX. RAJARAJA THE GREAT (a.d. 985-1014) .. 168 - 

X. RAJENDRA (a.d. 1012-1044) .. 194 

XI. THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA (a.d. 1044-70) . . 245 

XII. THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I (aj>. 1070) .. 285 
Xin. KULOTTUNGA I (aj>. 1070-1120) . . 301 

XIV. THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I (a.d. 1120-63) . . 342 

XV. RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III (a.d. 1163- 

1216) . . 365 

XVI. RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA HI, THE END (1216- 

1279) . . 417 

XVII. THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE - . . 445 ' 

XVIII. LOCAL GOVERNMENT .. 486- 

XIX. TAXATION: FINANCE .. 520' 

XX. POPULATION: SOCIAL DIVISIONS: STANDARD OF 

life . . 546 

XXI. AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES . . 567 

XXII. INDUSTRY AND TRADE .. 592 

XXIII. COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES .. 613 

XXIV. EDUCATION AND LEARNING . 628 

XXV. RELIGION .. 635 

XXVI. LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS .. 662 

XXVn. COLA ART .. 693 

DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES .. 749 
INDEX . . 771 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FRONTISPIECE 

PLATE I. 

Fig. 1. General view of the Siva temple, Vijayalayacolesvara on 
Melamalai, from north-west, Narttamalai (Pudukkottah State), 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

Fig. 2. The main temple, Vijayalayacolesvara on Melamalai. from 
north-west. 

PLATE II. 

Fig. 3. Agastyesvara temple (Siva, early Cola) from north-west, 
Panangudi, (Pudukkottah State) Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

Fig. 4. Siva temple, early Cola style, Enadi (Pudukkottah State), 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

PLATE III. 

Fig. 5. Siva temple — Vimana (early Cola) from north-east Korkai, 
Tirunelveli Dist. 

Fig. 6. Nagesvara temple, Kumbakonam. 

PLATE IV. 

Fig. 7. Muvarkovil, No. 1, south view, in Kodumbalur, (Puduk- 
kottah State), Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

Fig. 8. View of the Agastyesvara shrine at Melappaluvur, 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

PLATE V. 

Fig. 9. Agastyesvara temple — Lion Pillars, at Melappaluvur, 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

Fig. 10. Koranganatha temple, from south-west, Sriniva. nallur, 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

PLATE VI. 

Fig. 11. Brhadisvara temple, general view, from south-east, Tanjore, 
Tanjore Dist. 

I 12. Brhadisvara temple — Vimana from North-west, Gangai- 
konda-colapuram, Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

PLATE VII. 

Fig. 13. Brhadisvara temple, north doorway with Dvarapalakas on 
the main shrine, Gangaikonda-colapuram, Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

Fig. 14. Laddigam, entrance gopura. 

PLATE VIII. 

Fig. 15. Airavatesvara temple, general view, from south-east. 
Darasuram, Tanjore Dist. 

PLATE IX. 

Fig. 16. North-east view of Airavatesvara temple, Darasuram, 
Tanjore Dist. 

Fig. 17. South-west view of Alankara mandapa in Airavatesvara 
temple, Darasuram, Tanjore Dist. 



xiv 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATE XXV. 

Fig. 63. Brhadisvara temple, metallic image of Nataraja at Tanjore. 

Fig. 64. Nataraja, Velanganni (Tanjore). 

Fig. 65. Nataraja, Tiruvalangadu (Chittoor). 

PLATE XXVI. 

Fig. 66. Image of Nataraja with eight hands, front and back view, 
Nallur, Tanjore Dist. 

Fig. 67. Siva temple- — Metallic image of Nataraja (Sandhya- 
Tandavamurti) , Tiruvarangulam, Pudukkottah State. 

PLATE XXVII. 

Fig. 68. Bronze — Image of Siva as Vrsabhantika with Uma, front 

view, (Treasure trove) Tiruvenkadu, (Shiyali Taluq), Tanjore Dist. 

Fig. 69. Gangaikonda-colapuram, Gangaikonda-colesvara temple — 
Metallic image of Siva (Vrsabhantika). 

PLATE XXVin. 

Fig. 70. Sukhasanamurti (late), Pudukkottah museum. 

Fig. 71. Bronze statue of Kiratamurti — Tiruvetkalam near Chidam- 
baram. 

Fig. 72. Metallic image of Kiratarjunamurti, Radhanarasimhapuram. 
Tanjore Dist. 

Fig. 73. Metallic image of Alinganamurti at Tiruvaduturai, Tanjore 
Dist. 

PLATE XXIX 

Fig. 74. Metallic image ot Bhiksatanamurti (Pichcandar) in the Siva 
temple at Tirunamanallur. 

Fig. 75. Kailasanathasvamin temple — Metallic image of Bhiksatana- 
murti, (late), Tiruchengod, Salem Dist. 

Fig. 76. Subrahmanya temple — Metallic image of Skanda with four 
arms, Tiruvidaikali, Tanjore Dist. 

PLATE XXX. 

Fig. 77. Vi?nu. 

Fig. 78. Visnu. 

Fig. 79. Laksmi (?) 

Fig. 80. Laksmi 

PLATE XXXI. 

Fig. 81. Visnu temple, metallic images of Rama Laksmana and 
Slta. Tirukkadaiyur, Tanjore, Dist. 

Fig. 82. Bronze image of Siva as Kalyanasundara — Parvatl being 
presented to Siva in wedlock by Laksmi and Visnu, (Treasure 
trove) Tiruvenkadu, (Shiyali Taluq), Tanjore Dist. 

PLATE XXXII. 

Fig 83. Seal on Karandai plates 

PLATE XXXin. 

Fig. 84. Dvarapalaka. Vijayalayacolesvara, Narttamalai. 

Fig. 86. Narttamalai — platform before Samanakudagu. 

Fig. 87. Detail of sculptured elephant and lion fighting in the open 
court, Airavatesvara temple, Darasuram, Tanjore Dist 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Fig. 85. Female door-keeper, Kampaharesvara temple, Tribhu- 
vanam, Tan j ore Dist. 

PLATE XXXIV. 

Fig. 88. Balustrade, Tribhuvanam. 

Fig. 92. Nagesvara, Agni presenting pdyasa to Dasaratha. 

Fig. 93. Nagesvara, Dasaratha distributing pdyasa among queens. 
Fig. 94. Nagesvara, Birth of Rama. 

PLATE XXXV. 

Fig. 89. Tribhuvanam — Ornamental niche, north basement of 
Vimana. 

Fig. 90. Tribhuvanam — Ornamental niche, south wall mahamandapa 
basement. 

Fig. 91. Tribhuvanam— Another ornamental niche. 

Fig. 99. Punjai, Krsna and Putana. 

PLATE XXXVI. 

Fig. 95. Nagesvara, Rama’s fight with Tataka. 

Fig. 96. Nagesvara, Hanuman before Havana. 

Fig. 97. Tribhuvanam, Ravana, Slta. Jatayu. 

Fig. 98. Punjai, Varaha panel. 

PLATE XXXVII. — COINS 


LIST OF MAPS AND PLANS 

EXTENT OF KARIKALA'S KINGDOM 34 

COLA KINGDOM UNDER PARANTAKA I . . 133 

THE KADARAM CAMPAIGN OF RAJENDRA . . 212 

COLA EMPIRE UNDER KULOTTUNGA I . . 324 

COLA EMPIRE UNDER KULOTTUNGA III . . 392 

Plan I. VIJAYALAYA-COLESVARA TEMPLE . . 699 

Plan II. GROUND PLAN OF SUNDARESVARA TEMPLE AT 

TIRUKKATTALAI . . 702 

Plan III. MuVARKOIL : KODUMBALUR . . 708 

DRAWINGS ACCORDING TO JOUVEAU-DUBREUIL. 

ARCHEOLOCIE DU SUD DE L’INDE . . 747-48 


(1) Parts of the plinth (upapitha). (2) Parts of the pillar. (3) Evolu- 
tion of palagai. (4) Parts of the capital. (5) Evolution of the Corbel. 
(6) Two forms of the panjara. 



ABBREVIATIONS 


ARA. Annual Reports on Archaeology, Madras. 

ARB. Archaeological Reports, Burma. 

ARE. Annual Reports on Epigraphy, Madras. 

ASC. Archaeological Survey Reports, Ceylon. 

ASI. Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports of the 

Director-General. 

ASSI. Archaeological Survey of Southern India. 

BEFEO. Bulletin de l’Ecole Frangaise d’Extreme Orient. 

BG. Bombay Gazetteer. 

CSI. Coins of Southern India by Sir Walter Elliot (1886). 

CV. Culavamsa, edited and translated by Geiger, (Pali Text 

Society) . 

DKD. Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts, by Fleet (in the BG). 

EC. Epigraphia Camatica. 

EHI. Early History of India. V. A. Smith 

El. Epigraphia Indica. 

Ep. Bir. Epigraphia Birmanica. 

EZ. Epigraphia Zeylanica. 

HAS. Hyderabad Archaeological Series. 

HISI. Historical Inscriptions of Southern India, Sewell (1932). 
IA. Indian Antiquary. 

IAL. Journal of Indian Art and Letters (India Society, London). 

EHQ. Indian Historical Quarterly. 

IMC. Indian Museum Catalogue (of Coins), Vol. I. V. A. Smith. 
JA. Journal Asiatique. 

JAHRS. Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society. 

JBBRAS. Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

JIH. Journal of Indian History. 

JISOA. Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art (Calcutta). 

JMU. Journal of the Madras University. 

JOR. Journal of Oriental Research, Madras. 

JRAS. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (London). 

List. Kielhom : List of Inscriptions, Southern. (El. vii and viii) . 

MAR. Mysore Archaeological Reports. 

MV. Mahavamsa, edited and translated by Geiger (Pah Text 

Society), continued in CV. 

NI. Nellore Inscriptions edited by Butterworth and Venugopal 

Chetty. 

OZ. Ostasiatische Zeitschrift. 

PK. The Pandyan Kingdom by K. A. Nilakanta Sastri (1929). 

PSI. Inscriptions of the Pudukkottai State. 

QJMS Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society. Bangalore. 

SII. South Indian Inscriptions. 

Studies. Studies in Cola History and Administration by K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri (1932) . 

TAR. Travancore Archaeological Reports 

TAS. Travancore Archaeological Series. 



Chapter I 


SOURCES 

On the history of the Colas, as on many other subjects of 
early Indian history, we had, till about 
Inti oduction. 1900, little information of an authentic 
character. When, in the early years of the last century, 
Col. Mackenzie made his great effort to survey all and collect 
as many as possible of the antiquarian remains of the Madras 
Presidency, his agents in the Tanjore district failed to discover 
anything more remarkable on the ancient Colas than the 
Colavamsacaritram. This is a late Sthalapurana which is 
legendary and full of miracles. Tradition knew nothing of 
the real history of the older rulers of the land and could not 
tell if the Cola dynasty numbered eighty-four kings or sixteen. 
Epigraphy has made remarkable progress in South India dur- 
ing the last fifty years. Hultzsch, Venkayya and Krishna 
Sastri have brought out scholarly editions of many of the 
inscriptions. Of the Sangam literature, which is doubtless the 
earliest group of Tamil writings extant, considerable portions 
have been recovered and published. Now it is both possible 
and necessary to attempt a comprehensive study which shall 
bring together the results so far attained, and so to approach 
a definitive history of the Colas. 

To attempt a task of this nature in a subject which, thanks 
to fresh discoveries or new interpretations of old material, is 
apt to have its foundations disturbed from time to time, is. 
we are warned, to run the risk of our structure collapsing no 
sooner than it is reared. But this is, in regard to Cola history, 
greatly to under-estimate the permanence of the results reach- 
ed so far; for a careful review of the steps by which the recon- 
struction of this history has proceeded since the days when 
the clues obtained from Eastern Calukya copper-plates were 
correlated to the evidence from the Cola inscriptions of Tan- 
jore and other places in the Tamil country, must convince the 
most sceptical among scholars that a considerable tract of 
ascertained knowledge has been added permanently to the 
history of South India. Even the discovery, in recent years. 



SOURCES 


of the important Karandai (Tanjore) plates of Rajendra I 
and the Charala plates of Vlrarajendra 1 has not made any 
great difference to the general outline of the political history 
of the Colas. A settled and continuous narration of the poli- 
tical history of the Colas appears therefore not merely quite 
possible to undertake, but likely to be of more than transient 
interest. The case for such an undertaking becomes stronger 
if it is observed that, in its administrative system and in its 
literary and artistic achievement, Tamil civilisation may be 
said to have attained its high water mark under the Cola em- 
pire of the tenth to the thirteenth centuries. Under this em- 
pire also flourished in their greatest strength the sea-faring 
instincts of the people of Southern India which enabled them 
to add for a time an overseas empire to the more abiding pros- 
pects of a profitable trade with the states of the Far-East. The 
telling of a story which fills so large a place in the past life 
of the land and is so full of colour and incident should not be 
unduly postponed. At the same time we should recognise 
that, in regard to certain points of the story, the preliminary 
researches, of which one should have desired to avail oneself, 
have yet to be made; and even the attempt to paint the pic- 
ture as a whole may be the means, by drawing attention to 
their need, of bringing such researches into being. 

The history of the Colas falls naturally into four divisions: 
the age of the literature of the Sangam, the 
Divisions of tbe interval between the close of the Sangam 
age and the rise of the Vijayalaya line, the 
Vijayalaya line which came to prominence in the ninth cen- 
tury a.d. and lastly, the Calukya-Cola line of Kulottunga I 
and his successors from the third quarter of the eleventh 
century to about the middle of the thirteenth. Nearly two 
centuries before the rise of Vijayalaya in the neighbourhood 
of Tanjore. there flourished a Cola kingdom in the Telugu 
districts comprising portions of Cuddapah, Kurnool and Anan- 
tapur , 2 whose kings traced their descent from Karikala. 
Nothing definite is known, however, of their connection with 
the early Colas. Again, from about the twelfth century, there 
were a number of local dynasties which claimed also to be 
among the descendants of Karikala and to belong to the Kas- 
yapa gotra. Besides their legendary pedigree there seems to 
be no evidence connecting them in any manner with the 



SANGAM WORKS 


Colas of the Tamil country. Of these late Telugu-Codas, who 
have left behind a large number of stone and copper-plate 
inscriptions, we need make only passing mention in this 
history. 

The main source of our information on the early Colas is 
the early Tamil literature of the so-called 
Period^ 65 ' Early third Sangam. The brief notices of the Cola 
country and its towns, ports and commerce 
furnished by the Periplus and by Ptolemy are best interpreted 
in the light of this literature. The striking coincidences in 
these matters between the classical writers and the literature 
of the Sangam are enough to show that this literature belongs 
to the early centuries of the Christian era. And the somewhat 
obscure account in the Mahdvamsa of many conflicts between 
the inhabitants of Ceylon and Tamil immigrants into the 
island receives some elucidation from a comparison of the 
proper names in the Mahdvamsa account with those occurring 
in the Sangam poems. The synchronism between Gajabahu I 
and the Cera king Senguttuvan was viewed with suspicion 
by Hultzseh; but it rests not simply on the identity of the name 
of the Ceylonese king in the Mahdvamsa and in the Silappadi- 
karam , but on the existence of an active intercourse, political 
and cultural, between South India and its island-neighbour. 

The period covered by the extant literature of the Sangam 
is unfortunately not easy to determine with any measure of 
exactness; though it seems most likely that it extended over 
five or six generations at the most. Excepting the longer epics, 
the Silappaclikdram and the Manimekalai 3 which, by common 
consent, are taken to belong to a time later than the Sangam 
age, the poems have reached us in the form of systematic antho- 
logies, some of which, like the Ahananurii , follow a highly in- 
tricate scheme in their arrangement. Each individual poem 
has generally attached to it a colophon on the authorship and 
subject-matter of the poem; in the poems of the division called 
Puram which deal with concrete objective situations, the 
name of the king or chieftain to whom the poem relates, and 
the occasion which called forth the eulogy or description, are 
also found. It is from these colophons, and rarely from the 
texts of the poems themselves, that we can gather the names 
of many kings and chieftains and of the poets and poetesses 
patronised by them. The task of reducing these names to an 



SOURCES 


ordered scheme in which the different generations of contem- 
poraries can be marked off from one another has not been 
easy. Some writers have been apt to draw on their imagina- 
tion and invent genealogical connections not supported by the 
sources; others have confessed themselves beaten in the game 
and have denounced the colophons as late and untrustworthy 
guesses, not worth much consideration at the hands of the 
modern historian . 4 Before adopting this counsel of despair, 
one would do well to recollect that some anthologies, like the 
Kalittoyai, are said to have been put together by a poet re- 
presented in the collection itself, and that no reasoned case 
has been made out against accepting' the literary tradition re- 
lating to these anthologies and the individual poems in them . 5 
In any attempt to deal systematically with the data drawn 
from these poems, the casual nature of the poems and the 
wide difference between the purpose of the anthologist who 
brought them together and that of the modern historian must 
not be lost sight of; or one might fall easily into the error of 
weaving a continuous story out of discontinuous material. 

On the history of the Colas of the Vijayalaya line, there 
The Vijayalaya ^ an abundance of authentic material from 
hue. diverse sources. This makes the narration 

of their history a relatively easy task. But of the fortunes of 
the Colas in the interval between the end of the Siangan* age 
and the rise of Vijayalaya, that is, in the age of Pandya-Pallava 
dominance, we have practically no record. The scanty re- 
ferences to them in the Pallava and Calukya inscriptions are 
but feebly supplemented by the hagiology of Saivism and 
Vaisnavism relating to the period. 

The dynasty of Vijayalaya has left behind a large number 
of stone inscriptions and a few copper-plate 
Inscriptions. grants of great value to the historian. The 
illustrious Rajaraja I, under whom South Indian mon- 
archy attained a sweep and splendour till then unknown, 
conceived the idea of prefixing to his inscriptions a set his- 
torical introduction recounting, in an ornate and poetic style 
of Tamil, the main achievements of his reign and kept up-to- 
date by additions made to it from time to time. The narration 
of the descent of a king and. incidentally, of some salient facts 
relating to himself and his ancestors was for centuries before 
Rajaraja’s accession the more or less universal practice of 



INSCRIPTIONS 


kings and chiefs who followed the norm set before them by 
the Smrti and Dharmasastra of the country for the drawing 
up of charters (S&sanam) setting forth gifts ( dana ) of various 
kinds. But such narration formed part, generally speaking, 
only of copper-plate grants ( tamrasdsana ) and was composed 
de novo on each separate occasion; and this practice, while it 
gave full scope for the fancy of the poet-composer of the 
prasasti, sometimes resulted in contradictory and confusing 
statements made about the same king in different grants. In 
ordering, therefore, the writing, on stone, in set form and in 
the language of the people, of an official and authorised ac- 
count of the leading events of his reign, Rajaraja initiated a 
practice which, as it was kept up by his successors, not only 
satisfied the boundless vanity of this race of kings, but fur- 
nishes to the historian a formal record of exceptional value 
of the transactions of each reign . 6 Most of these historical 
introductions have been the subjects of scholarly discussion 
and elucidation by Hultzsch and Venkayya in the earlier 
volumes of the South Indian Inscriptions, and though these 
mey-kklrttikal occasionally merit the waggish description of 
them as ijoy-kklrttikal. still, as a rule, they furnish invaluable 
guidance to the internal chronology and general history of 
the reign, besides providing picturesque and trustworthy ac- 
counts of particular events. 

Few of these inscriptions are purely historical in aim and 
character. The one at Tiruvendipuram 7 recording m detail 
the tribulations of Rajaraja III and the relief he obtained from 
the intercession of his Hoysala contemporary, is the most con- 
siderable among the handful of purely historical inscriptions. 
Generally speaking, inscriptions record gifts and endowments 
of a public or private nature, usually to temples, mathas and 
Brahmans; sometimes the construction of a temple or its 
renovation, or the setting up of a new image forms the subject 
of an inscription. To provide for the maintenance of a lamp 
in a temple was a common method of earning religious merit 
for oneself or of expiating an offence. This was done by gifts 
of money or cattle calculated at so much or so many per 
lamp, and it was possible for two or more persons to endow 
a lamp jointly and apportion the merit among themselves in 
accordance with the share contributed by each. Often the 
lamps were to burn throughout the day and night, to be per- 



SOURCES 


petual, ( nanda vilakku); 8 but day-lamps, night-lamps for the 
occasions when puja was performed ( sandi ) were also known . 9 
When the lamps were provided for by gifts of cattle, the ex- 
pression ‘sdvd-muvd-pperadii : invariably occurs, and it means 
literally ‘the big sheep that neither die nor age.’ That this 
was only a formal way of expressing the permanence of the 
endowment becomes clear from the use of the same expres- 
sion even where cows, and not sheep, are given. Moreover, 
if for any reason the original herd went down in numbers, 
and in one instance a herd of fifty cows was reduced to twenty- 
six in less than three years , 10 the fact was taken into account 
in assessing the obligations of the herdsmen for the future. 
Among the donors we find not only kings and their officials, 
but several corporations including occupational and commer- 
cial guilds, caste organisations, military groups, and village 
assemblies, and many private individuals, men and women. 
The class of courtesans, the devaradiyar, ‘servants of the Gods’, 
often made considerable benefactions to temples which were 
suitably recognised by privileges of a hereditary nature being 
conferred on them in relation to the services and festivals in 
the temples concerned. 

Several inscriptions were obviously intended to publish 
and preserve in a more or less permanent form decisions and 
agreements on matters of public importance. In this class, 
which though not extensive is doubtless of greater interest 
to the student than the more numerous donative records, we 
find royal orders on taxation and land-revenue, the resolu- 
tions of village assemblies on their own constitutional arrange- 
ments. their awards in disputes between communities or other 
corporate organisations, judgments delivered against persons 
guilty of theft, adultery, murder and other crimes, and poli- 
tical compacts between powerful feudatory chieftains of par* 
ticular localities. Quite often, inscriptions on temple walls 
served the purpose of a public x-egistration office by conserv- 
ing a trustworthy record of sales, mortgages and other forms 
of transfers of property-rights in village-lands . 11 Sometimes a 
record is expressly described as the copy of a copperplate 
grant . 12 A unique inscription from Tiruvidaivayil (Tanjore) 
preserves an otherwise unknown Devaram of ftanasamband ax- 
on the local shi'ine. 



LANGUAGE AND SCRIPT 


The language and script of the Cola inscriptions varied 
with the time and place of the records. The 
and^scrilft 1811386 language most commonly employed was 
Tamil; some Sanskrit records are known, 
besides several bilingual inscriptions employing both. Kan- 
nada and Telugu were also employed in the Karnataka and 
Telugu areas. The assumption has sometimes been made 1 " 
that Tamil was the prevailing language in Cola times in all 
places where the Tamil inscriptions of Cola rulers are found, 
and that Tamil receded from these areas at a time subsequent 
to the period of Cola rule in these parts. Such inscriptions are. 
however, only proof at best of the presence of some Tamil 
immigrants in non-Tamil regions that were brought for a 
time under Cola rule. The recovery of some Telugu and Kan- 
nada records of the Vijayanagar rulers and their Nayak vice- 
roys, and of the Hoysalas from distinctly Tamil areas cannot 
prove that the Tamil country exchanged its language for 
Telugu or Kannada during the period of these records. The 
long Marathi inscription of Tanjore of a.d. 1803 is another 
instance. Vatteluttu was the prevalent script in which Tamil 
was written in the early centuries of the Christian era in the 
Pandya and Cera countries; in the former it gave place to 
Tamil about the time of the Cola conquest 14 though ‘in the 
insulated malainadu (Malabar) it continued as late as the 
middle of the eighteenth century a.d.’ The Sanskrit lan- 
guage employed the Grantha script, closely allied to the Tamil 
in its evolution. Numerous as are the published inscriptions 
from which the evolution of the script can be traced with 
tolerable accuracy, chronological arguments drawn from 
palaeography are generally not so conclusive as might be 
wished, and must be received with caution. There are fewer 
chances of stone inscriptions being found to be forgeries than 
copperplate grants and, as a matter of fact, very few Cola 
inscriptions are of doubtful authenticity. One of the most 
conspicuous examples is that of a record 15 purporting to be 
dated in the twenty-ninth regnal year of a Rajendracola Raja- 
kesari. By mixing up in its historical introduction the events 
of different reigns, the record rouses suspicion; its palaeo- 
graphy belongs to the fourteenth century, and it is found in 
a temple of which the walls bear no other inscription of an 
earlier date than the reign of Rajaraja III. 



SOURCES 


From the tenth century a.d., the period of Cola rule 
was a great epoch in the building of struc- 
Temples. tural stone temples. The walls of the new 

temples, their pillars and their plinths were usually covered 
with inscriptions in course of time. The great temple of Raja- 
rajesvara in Tanjore furnishes, in this respect, only a leading 
example of a practice very common at the time. We are 
expressly told 16 that before older structures were pulled down 
for rebuilding a shrine, the inscriptions on the walls were, in 
many cases, copied out in books and re-engraved later on the 
walls of the new structure. Even brick temples had some- 
times inscriptions engraved on their walls . 17 We shall never 
know the extent of the damage inflicted in recent years by 
the ignorant piety of renovators of ancient shrines. Govern- 
ment have been unduly slack in stopping such damage; they 
have even refused to lay down a procedure to be followed by 
renovators which would have minimised the extent of the 
damage . 18 Sometimes inscriptions are found engraved on 
rocks and boulders not forming parts of temples, but they are 
the exception. 

The copper-plate grants known by the names of Anbil, 
Leyden (larger). Tiruvalangadu and Karan- 
Legendaiy kings. ( j a j as we jj as Kanyakumari stone ins- 
cription and the Charala plates of VIrarajendra, give long 
legendary genealogies intended to bring out the solar origin 
of the Cola dynasty. The Udayendiram plates of Prithivlpati II 
Hastimalla 19 give a much shorter list of the legendary ances- 
tors of Vijayalaya. Of the several names in these legendary 
lists, which are by no means identical with one another , 20 only 
two or three names appear to be historical. Karikala, Koc- 
cenganan and probably also Killi may be identified with the 
kings of the same names of whom we hear in the Tamil litera- 
ture of the Sangam age. Barring the names of these kings, 
however, and some common legends, — e.g., that of Manu sen- 
tencing his son to death as he had by an accident crushed a 
calf to death under his chariot-wheel, and the story of Sibi 
rescuing a dove from the pursuit of a vulture by offering it 
his own flesh — there is nothing else to indicate the relation in 
which the Colas of the Vijayalaya line stood to those of an 
earlier time mentioned in early Tamil literature. We shall see 
that even in regard to Karikala and Koccenganan the account 



MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT 


given in the copper-plates is more legendary than historical 
and has little in common with the earlier literary accounts. 

The stone inscriptions often contain astronomical data 
Astronomical which, being less enigmatic than those from 

data. the Pandyan inscriptions of a later age, have 

yielded, in the hands of Kielhorn and others, results of great 
value to Cola chronology. It is, however, easy to exaggerate 
the significance of such data. ‘The fact that a date has been 
recorded accurately does not prove the authenticity of a 
record, any more than an incorrect date proves that the record 
in which it is put forward is spurious .’ 21 Relatively few ins- 
criptions quote any definite era like the §aka or Kaliyuga , 22 
but in several instances the details furnished are so full and 
accurate that, together with the historical introductions cha- 
racteristic of particular monarchs and the regnal years cited, 
they have led to the attainment of chronological results of 
precision and value. These results show that whenever pos- 
sible the Cola monarchs followed the practice of choosing 
their successors and associating them in the administration of 
the country in their own life-time. This must have been done 
with the double object of avoiding disputed successions and 
providing opportunities for proper training, sufficiently early 
in life, for the future sovereigns of the country. 

Sometimes years elapsed between the date when a royal 
order was issued or some transaction took 
Administt ation. p] aC6) an( j ^e time when it was engraved on 
stone. In a record 23 of a money-endowment which was made 
in the thirtieth year of Parantaka I, for instance, we are told 
that part of this money was invested in the thirty-fifth year 
with the assembly of a neighbouring village. Some important 
inscriptions give a full account of the different stages that 
intervened between the issue of a royal order, especially in 
revenue matters, and its actual execution. A careful study of 
them throws much welcome light on the administrative 
machinery and practice of the time. They also tell us a great 
deal about the numerous taxes, tolls and dues of various kinds 
in terms not always readily understood, and about the 
numberless changes in place-names that formed such a mark- 
ed feature of the Cola period. We also learn much of society, 
religion, arts and crafts from the inscriptions. 

C 2 



10 


SOURCES 


Side-lights on Cola history are often obtained from the ins- 
criptions of neighbouring dynasties. The Ras- 
Inscriptions of trakuta inscriptions of the time of Krsna III, 
other dynasties. thoge ' of the Eastern Calukyas and some 

even of the Eastern Gangas, and the inscriptions of the West- 
ern Calukyas, often go to confirm or modify impressions ob- 
tained by a study of Cola records. The records of prominent 
feudatory dynasties, or of individuals like Kopperunjinga, 
become important as we approach the period of the decline 
of Cola power. Hoysala records also explain in part the poli- 
tics of the period of decline. 

Next to the inscriptions, monuments are the most inte- 
resting and instructive source of history. 
Monuments. And for the Cola period these take the form 
mostly of temples and sculptured halls and towers in them. 
It was also the age when the art of casting bronze images 
attained its high-water mark. Though several temples dating 
from Cola times are in a good state of preservation, very little 
has been done for the systematic study of their architecture 
and sculpture. M. Jouveau-Dubreuil has given a shrewd 
account of their general characteristics in his Archaeologie du 
sud de Vlnde, and for the rest, we have only the haphazard 
observations scattered in the reports of the Archaeological 
department. When monuments standing on the surface have 
received such scant attention, it is no wonder that more 
ancient monuments buried in the soil remain undisturbed. 
Yet the importance of this branch of archaeology for the early 
history oi Southern Indict can hardly be overestimated . 24 

Numismatics, which forms an interesting and important 
^ branch of archaeology in relation to the 

history of the rest of India, has so far not 
yielded, except in a few instances, any striking results for the 
general history of South India. South Indian coinages, how- 
ever, have ’as yet not received a scientific treatment in any 
way to be compared with that which has obtained such valua- 
ble historical results from the coins of the North .’ 25 The finds 
of Roman coins and the coinage of the Madura Sultanate have 
been rather closely studied and with good results. During 
the period of their paramountcy in Southern India, the Colas 
issued coins of gold, silver and copper. Specimens of the gold 
issues are extremely rare; silver coins are not so rare, and 



LITERARY EVIDENCE 


11 


copper pieces of different sizes are met with every day, These 
coins, generally speaking, are of two types — one carrying on 
both sides the Cola symbol of the tiger in the centre, flanked 
by the symbols of the subject powers, the Cera bow and the 
Pandyan fish, with a legend giving the name of the king; the 
other, called by Prinsep and Elliot the ‘Ceylon type’, in which 
the symbols give place to ‘a rude human figure, standing on 
the obverse and seated on the reverse .' 26 As the ‘Ceylon type' 
makes its appearance in the reign of Rajaraja I and the type 
with the symbols is known to persist for a long time after, 
even up to the reign of Kulottunga I, the view, common at 
one time, that coins of the ‘Ceylon type’ are later than those 
of the other type must be modified. In fact, it may be doubted 
if we have any coin specimens clearly of an age anterior to 
Rajaraja I, so that the ‘Ceylon type’ would appear to be really 
coeval with the other . 27 None of the known specimens of Cola 
coins have yet been identified with any of the coins mentioned 
in contemporary inscriptions 

Literature is in other countries the bed-rock of history; 

in India it is often a snare. The utter im- 
Literatui e possibility of basing any part of the ancient 

history of India solely, or even primarily, upon literary evi- 
dence has been deplored by sevei’al modern students. Not 
only is there a paucity of professedly historical works, but of 
very few really ancient compositions do we know with cer- 
tainty the time and place of origin. Great books which, like 
the Ramayanci and the Mahabhhdrata, have for ages served as 
popular cyclopaedias of national culture, were frequently 
revised; the time, the authorship and the extent of such revi- 
sions are so obscure that it is hopeless to make an intelligent 
use of data drawn from these works . 28 Lastly, in the few works 
of which we have definite knowledge in regard to authorship 
and provenance, a great amount of space is taken up by con- 
ventional descriptions, and it is seldom that we come across 
the plain downright statement of a fact. 

In Tamil literature, the poems of the Sangam age are very 
realistic and primci facie trustworthy and do not share the 
demerits of the literature of a more fulsome age; but by a 
cruel irony of fate these poems are involved in some chrono- 
logical obscurity; and the compositions, especially those of the 
Cola period, of which we know the authors and dates, exhibit 



12 


SOURCES 


in abundant measure all the defects of court poetry. Still, 
after all allowance is made, the evidence from indigenous lite- 
rature for the history of the Cola kingdom will be seen to be 
not inconsiderable in volume and will, if used with care, go 
far to eke out the testimony of archaeology. 

The Cola empire under Vijayalaya and his successors wit- 
nessed one of the greatest periods of literary and religious 
revival in South India. Sometime in the tenth or eleventh 
century a.d., the canonical works of South Indian Saivism 
were arranged more or less in their modern form by Nambi 
Andar Nambi, who was also its first hagiographer and whose 
work formed the basis of the far more elaborate Tiruttondar 
Purdnam, known generally as Periya Purdnam, of Sekkilar, a 
contemporary of Kulottunga II in the twelfth century. Great 
as is the value of the tradition preserved by these writers, 
they are to be accepted more as witnesses to beliefs current 
in their own times than as correctly recording what we should 
now call the early history of Saivism. This distinction has 
not been sufficiently considered by those writers who have 
drawn rather freely from Sekkilar in their accounts of tran- 
sactions that took place centuries before his time. Moreover, 
a careful study of the Periya Purdnam reveals that many 
details for which there is no warrant in Nambi Andar Nambi’s 
short notes on the saints make their appearance for the first 
time in Sekkilar’s account; and for aught we know, Sekkilar 
was guided only by his imagination and by popular belief. 
Such details, however valuable as reflecting a definite, and as 
it happened the final, stage in the growth of Saiva hagiology. 
should not be accepted, without sufficient corroboration from 
other sources, as part of the early history of Saivism in South 
India; much less would they be entitled to credence if they 
are opposed to the testimony of contemporary inscriptions or 
other evidence equally trustworthy. It seems only proper, 
therefore, that we accept the beautiful pen-pictures which 
abound m Sekkilar’s great work as idealised accounts of life 
and society as he saw them in his own day rather than as 
studies and portraits of a bygone age. Thus the description 
of the Brahman village of Adanur and of the hamlet of pariahs 
attached to it in the story of Nanda. the pariah saint, may 
well be used in any re-construction of rural life in Cola times, 
allowance being made, of course, for the play of the well- 



HISTORICAL LITERATURE 


13 


understood conventions of literature that dominate such 
accounts. 

Equally remarkable is the settlement of the Vaisnava 
canon of the ‘Four Thousand Sacred Hymns’ which took 
place about the same time as the Saiva canon was fixed by 
Nambi AncLar Nambi. The Divya suri-carita and the Gurn- 
paramparai form the Vaisnava counterpart of the Periya Purd- 
nam from which they differ in providing an elaborate, though 
impossible, chronology for the lives of the Vaisnava saints, the 
Alvars. In addition to being a record of traditions and beliefs 
prevalent at the time of their composition, these works furnish 
the background necessary for a proper estimate of Ramanuja 
and his place in the history of Vaisnavism. And the great 
commentaries on the hymns of the Alvars, written in a pecu- 
liar jargon more Sanskrit than Tamil, though perhaps of a 
slightly later age than the Cola period, still have great value 
for us, as they record in a casual manner several incidents 
of Cola times. This feature, as well as the idiosyncrasies of 
language that mark these commentaries, sometimes assist us 
in elucidating the Cola inscriptions. 

Among works of secular literature which can be dated 
with accuracy, the most interesting from our point of view 
are the Vlrasoliyam of Buddhamitra, the Kalingattupparani of 
Jayangondar and the three ulds and the Kuldttungan Pillait- 
tamil of Ottakkuttan. The first is a work on Tamil grammar 
composed by a Buddhist writer in the reign of Virarajendra. 
The Ydpparungalam and the Ydpparungalak-kdrikai are other 
works on one branch of grammar, prosody, by a Jaina writer, 
Amitasagara, of somewhat earlier date. These three works 
possess glosses slightly later than the original texts: and the 
examples cited by the authors of these commentaries to illus- 
trate particular rules of grammar are often of uncommon 
interest; they provide fresh information, and confirm, and 
sometimes elucidate, data drawn from the inscriptions. The 
Kalingattupamni of Jayangondar is a war-poem of the con- 
ventional parani type, which has for its subject-matter the 
conquest of the Kalinga country by Karunakarat-tondaiman, 
the celebrated generalissimo of Kulottunga I. The poem is 
justly celebrated for the excellence of its diction and its superb 
display of metrical effects; it fetched the title of Kavic-cak- 
ravarti (Emperor of Poetry) to its author, a title which seems 



14 


SOURCES 


to have been kept on as a sort of poet-laureateship, or at any 
rate was conferred also on Ottakkuttan who. though himself 
a poet of no mean order, paid his predecessor the high com- 
pliment of imitating him closely in his Takkaydgapparani on a 
well-known theme of mythology. For all its fabulous and 
supernatural elements, and the absurd hyperboles characteris- 
tic of it, the Kalingattupparani is still valuable to the historian 
as it furnishes much welcome information on the Cola genea- 
logy and on the details of the Kalinga campaign of Kulottunga. 
including the route taken by his army. Parts of the poem 
were translated into English by V. Kanakasabhai some years 
ago, and the translation was published in the Indian Antiquary. 
Ottakkuttan chose the uld as the vehicle of his encomiums on 
three successive monarchs who followed Kulottunga I. The 
ula is, like the parani. a conventional literary form. If 
the parani is par excellencp a war-poem, the uld is 
just its opposite; free from the cares and anxieties of his 
high station, with no troubles domestic or foreign to cloud his 
happiness, the king with his retinue is conceived as going for 
a stroll round the capital city; the beginning of the uld gene- 
rally gives a more or less studied account of the achievements 
of the king and his ancestors, and provides a somewhat de- 
tailed description of the chief men among his courtiers who 
accompany him and the place they occupy in the administra- 
tion of the country; this part of the poem is of considerable 
historical value. What follows in the uld is not of much im- 
mediate interest to us; it is, to a modem student, a mono- 
tonous account of the amorous looks and the tell-tale acts of 
the women of the city who, at the sight of the king, become 
agitated and love-sick. Besides the three tilfls, on Vikrama. 
KulSttunga II and Rajaraja II, Ottakkuttan also wrote the 
Kidottnngn-solan-pillait-tamil. a child-poem on Kulottunga II: 
notable for its fine sentiment and high eloquence, this no err, 
is not nearly so useful to us as the uMs. 

The number of late chronicles and Sthalapuranas is legion 
The Navacolacarita, a Vira-saiva compilation available in a 
Kannada and a Telugu version, the Brhadisvara-mdhdtmya 
or the Colavamsacaritra in Sanskrit, of which there is a Tamil 
translation among the Mackenzie Mss., and the Kongudesa- 
Rdjakkal. also in the same collection of manuscripts, are the 
leading examples of this class. But as Fleet has observed . 29 



FOREIGN WRITINGS 


15 


the fanciful nature of such works and their utter want of re- 
liability for any purposes of early history ‘are disclosed at 
once by the very slightest thoughtful examination.’ 

Though not copious, the evidence from Chinese writings 
is extremely valuable on account of its set- 
Foieign evidence, chronology and the matter-of-fact nature 

of the data furnished by it. Arab travellers, Muslim histo- 
rians and the early European travellers like Marco Polo give 
important hints on the impression made by South India on 
foreign observers in those days. This line of external evi- 
dence is of particular value for an understanding of the nature 
and extent of the foreign commerce of the period. 


1. Karandai plates (unpublished): I am obliged to Mr. N. L. Kao, 
Government Epigraphist for India, for a transcript of the text. For 
the Charala plates see EL xxv pp. 241-66. 

2. EC. xii (7) and EL xi, Malepadu plates. 

3. A relatively late date for this poem, later than a.d. 400, seems 
to be forced on us by the trend of the discussion of the relation between 
Canto XXIX of this poem and the Nydyapravesa, unless indeed this 
Canto is treated as having suffered a later revision. See Nydyapravesa 
(Baroda), pp. xiii-xvi for a succinct review of the discussion by 
A. B. Dhruva. 

4. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, History of the Tamils pp. 416-7 

5. For a full discussion of this subject see Studies, I. 

6. These introductions were, in some inscriptions, omitted in part 
owing to exigencies of space, e.g. 96 of 1923 of the eleventh year of 
Rajendra II, See also ARE. 1935-6, II 39 

7. 142 of 1902, EI. vii p. 161. 

8. It is interesting to observe that Parimelalagar explains the phrase 
‘poyya vilakkam ’ in Kural 753 by ‘nandd vilakku.’ 

9. This. I believe, is the correct interpretation ot the expression 
‘sandivilakku’ which figures so often in the inscriptions and is usually 
translated into ‘twilight-lamp.’ See Tamil Lexicon s. v. ^ — canti. 

10. 120 of 1926 (year 6 of Rajendra I). 

11. In 134 of 1926 (Rajak. 16) we have an instance ot a temple 
raising money by mortgaging some of its land to a woman in the queen’s 
service. 

12. 180 of 1894 (Kulotunga I, 23) 

13. ARE. 1895, I 7 and 1908, II 49 See also Venkayya IA xxxvu 
pp. 199-200. 

14. TAS. i p. 286. 



16 


SOURCES 


15. 190 ot 1926. ARE. 1927 II 32 

16. ASI 1909-10 pp. 128-9: also 92 of 1895 and ARE. 1920 II 17. 

17. 123 ot 1900; El. vii pp. 145-6. 

18. ARE. 1902, I 8 and G.O. (Madras) 763 Public, 6th August 1902. 
After drawing attention to the destruction of the Kalinari isvara by the 
inhabitants of Tirunamanallur, the government epigraphist says in his 
report: The Nattukkottai Chetties are spending year by year a por- 
tion of their large earnings in repairing the ancient Siva temples of 
Southern India. In the course of these “repairs” they have totally dest- 
royed the following shrines with every one of their inscriptions: The 
Ekamranatha temple at Conjeevaram, the Jambukesvara temple on the 
island of Srirangam, the central shrine of the temple at Tiruvannamalai, 
the same at Tiruvennainallur in South Arcot and the same at Tirup- 
pugalur in the Tanjore District. Of some of the inscriptions in the 
first two temples, I have inked estampages in my office. The remainder 
ara lost for ever, as the inscribed stones have been dressed again before 
rebuilding the temples. Many other temples are now going to be 
treated in the same manner.’ Government declined to restrict the acti- 
vities of renovators by the issue of prohibitory orders as suggested by 
the epigraphical department which thereupon made ‘a more vigorous 
attempt to secure impressions of the inscriptions thus threatened with 
destruction.’ This has led to the accumulation of thousands of impres- 
sions in the epigraphist ’s office which have little chance, as things stand, 
of being published in any reasonable period even in the bald form 
adopted in SII. (Texts). There is also a real danger that in the race 
between publication and collection, collection might suffer without pub- 
lication gaining adequately. 

19. SI I. ii. no. 76. 

20. For a comparison and critique ot these lists see TAS. iii: also 
El. xv. 

21. Fleet, quoted by Rice, El. xiv. p. 340. 

22. Writing of the Gramam inscription of Parantaka I which is dated 
in a Kali year and in which the day is expressed by giving the number 
of days that had elapsed since the beginning of the era, this is what 
Kielhorn says: ‘I may add that this is the earliest known Cola date 
which can be verified and that, of the 136 dates hitherto examined, it 
is the only one in which the era of Kaliyuga is quoted. Among the 
same dates 18 quote the Saka era- and of these 12 are in Kanarese, 
4 in Telugu and only 2 in Tamil inscriptions. The Saka year 991 is 
quoted In the date of a Tamil inscription of VIrarajendra which does 
not admit of verification.’ EI. viii p. 261. 

23. 164 of 1912. 

24. ARA. 1912-13, I 10; 1915-6, I. 8. 

25. Rapson-Sources of Indian History: Coins, p. 123. 

26. Elliot, p. 108. 

27. Very little was known of the real history of the Colas when 
Elliot wrote his great work on the ‘Coins of Southern India ’ He indeed 



NOTES 


dates the origin of the Ceylon type’ in the eleventh century (p. 108 ) 
and calls it ‘a remarkable change’ from the earlier type; the Cola coins 
actually figured and described by him (some of which were considered 
again by Hultzsch I A. xxi p. 323) support this view. 

Rapson (op. cit. sec. 126) stereotypes the theory of Elliot and gives, 
doubtless by oversight, c. a.d. 1022 as the date not only of the intro- 
duction of the Ceylon type but of 'the beginning of the reign of B ija- 
raja Cola.’ He also describes the figures in the Ceylon types thus. oiv. 
king standing: rev. king seated. It may be doubtful if the 'rude human 
figure' (Elliot) which Tufnell (Hints, p. 11; took to be that of a ‘rak- 
sasa’ was intended to represent the king. A unique silver coin with 
legend Sri Rajarajadeva’ (Hultzsch IA. xxv, p. 317) combines the squat- 
ting figure on the obv. with the symbols and legend on the rev. 

28. Foulkes’s articles in the Indian Antiquary on ‘Civilisation of the 
Dekkan down to the 6th Century b.c.’ (viii pp. 1 ff) are a measure 
of what is possible with only such sources at our disposal. 

29. IA xxx pp. 6-7. 


C 3 



Chapter II 


EARLY NOTICES 


According to tradition, the Cola country comprised the 
land between two streams having the same 
The Country. name , Vellaru , 1 in the north and the south, 
the sea on the east and Kottaikarai m the west. This area 
includes the modern districts of Trichinopoly and Tanjore 
and part of the former Pudukkottah state. The Kaveri and 
its branches including the Coleroon (Kollidam) dominate the 
landscape of this generally flat country which slopes gently 
towards the sea. The low tableland of Vallam broken by small 
ridges of grit and sandstone to the south and south-west of 
Tanjore, and a number of protruding masses of crystalline 
rock, of which the Trichinopoly rock in the centre of the fort 
is the best known, are the only relief to the monotony of the 
level surface. To find any hills of importance, we must turn 
to the northern taluks of the Trichinopoly district lying on 
the border, if not altogether outside, of the Cola country pro- 
per. The delta of the Kaveri is a large alluvial plain ‘devoid 
of all natural eminences, save the ridges and hillocks of blown 
sand, which fringe the narrow strip of beach along the sea- 
coast. “The sea rolls upon a shelving sandy shore unbroken 
by rocks of any kind"; hence the coast is remarkably mono- 
tonous in aspect. The whole surface of the delta is one even 
level of paddy fields interspersed only with tops or clumps of 
cocoanut, mango and other fruit trees. There are no forests 
or tall tree jungles .' 2 The soil is very favourable also to the 
bamboo and the plantain. 


The glory of the Kaveri forms an inexhaustible theme of 
early Tamil poetry. This noble stream was 
released from his water-pot by the sage 
Agastya in response to the prayer of the king Kanta and for 
the exaltation of the ‘children of the sun .’ 3 She was the 
special banner of the just race of the Colas, and she never 
failed them in the most protracted drought. The yearly 
freshes in the Kaveri formed the occasion of a carnival in 
which the whole nation from the king down to the meanest 
peasant took part. 



NAME COLA 


19 


Kaverippattinam on the coast, about eight miles to the 
T north of Tranquebar, serves to identify the 

Kaveri proper from amidst its more con- 
siderable offshoots that find their way to the sea, and the little 
village apparently marks the site of the Cola emporium of 
ancient renown . 4 Negapatam, about ten miles south of Karaik- 
kal, also on the sea board, was perhaps known to Ptolemy as 
an important town: at any rate it became a seat of trade and 
the centre of many religious faiths including Buddhism, long 
before it attracted the attention of European merchants and 
missionaries. Tanjore, Trichinopoly. the modem represen- 
tative of the more ancient Uraiyur which is now a suburb of 
Trichinopoly. and Kumbakonam are the other notable cities 
of the Cola country. Gangaikonda-colapuram. at the meeting 
point of the modern districts of Trichinopoly, S. Arcot and 
Tanjore, rose into prominence as the Cola capital in the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries, and is now a small place with 
a magnificent temple in ruins. 

Of the origin of the name Cola we have no knowledge 
whatever. The learned Parimelalagar is in- 
clined to make it the name, like Pandya and 
Cera, of a ruling family or clan of immemorial antiquity 5 and 
renown. The story of the eponymous brothers Ceran. Solan 
and Pandiyan is doubtless an instance of euhemerism . 6 What- 
ever its origin , 7 the name Cola was from the earliest times 
used to describe the people and the country subject to the 
sway of the Cola dynasty of rulers. Col. Gerini’s attempt to 
connect the word with the Sanskrit Kdla (black), and with 
Kola which ‘in the early days designated the dark-coloured 
pre-Aryan population of southern India in general,’ is hardly 
more convincing than the efforts to derive it from Tamil 
‘Colam’ (millet) or Sanskrit ‘Cora’ (thief ). 8 

Other names in common use for the Colas are Killi. 

Valavan and Sembiyan. Killi perhaps comes 
Other names f rom ‘kil’. meaning ‘dig’ or ‘cleave’ and 
conveys the idea of a ‘digger ’; 9 this word often forms 
an integral part of early Cola names like Nedungilli, 
Nalangilli and so on, but almost drops out of use 
in later times. ‘Valavan’ is most probably connected with 
‘ valam . \ ‘fertility’, and means owner or ruler of a fertile 
country, such as the land of the Kaveri was. Sembiyan is 


The r 


; Cola. 



20 


EARLY NOTICES' 


generally taken to mean a descendant of Sibi, 10 a legendary 
hero whose self-sacrifice in saving a dove from the pursuit of 
a falcon figures among the early Cola legends and forms the 
subject-matter of the Sibijataka among the Jataka stories of 
Buddhism. 11 

The Colas adopted the tiger as their crest; the same ani- 
mal was figured on their banner. Not one 
of the numberless references to this Cola 
emblem which occur in Tamil literature tells us anything of 
its origin. Some late local chieftains of the Telugu country 
who claimed descent from Karikala adopted the lion-crest. 12 
And the Sindas of the Naga family, who used the Vyaghra- 
lanchana, had the story that Sinda, their eponymous ancestor, 
born of the serpent king Dharanendra at Ahicchatra in the 
region of the Sindhu, was reared by a tiger. A slightly differ- 
ent form of the story makes him the offspring of a union be- 
tween God Siva and the Sindhu, brought up on tiger’s milk 
by the king of serpents. 13 These late inventions only confirm 
the fact that the origin of the tiger-crest was forgotten quite 
early by those who had adopted it. 

The grammarian Katyayana knew of the Codas. 14 The 
earliest records which mention the Colas 
Earlj Reterences. an( j w j 1 j c } 1 can dated with certainty are 
the Asokan inscriptions, 15 where they are mentioned among 
kingdoms which, though not subject to Asoka. were on friend - 
ly terms with him. The Colas, like the Pandyas. are spoken 
of in the plural in all the versions of the Asokan edicts, and 
this has been held to imply that ‘in Asoka’s time there were 
more than one Coda and one Pandya king.’ 16 

Two or three poets of the Sangam make rather enigmatic 
references to an invasion of the South by the Moriyar (Maur- 
yas) and one of them, Mamuianar, also speaks of the wealth 
of the Nandas hidden under the Ganges at Patalipuua. All 
the three poets agree that, in the course of the invasion, the 
Mauryas cut for their chariots a new path across some rocky 
mountain. Mamuianar alone furnishes some more details. 
He says that the Vadugar formed the vanguard of the invading 
Mauryas ( Aham 281); elsewhere he adds that the Kosar 
undertook the subjugation of the South and that, as the Mohur 
chieftain continued defiant, the Mauryas came down with 



MARITIME TRADE 


21 


their great forces on a warlike expedition to the South ( Ah am 
251). Now, as Aioka distinctly states that the Tamil king- 
doms were not politically subject to him, and as there is little 
possibility of any Mauryan invasion of the extreme South 
having taken place after his time, we have necessarily to 
ascribe the events mentioned by Mamulanar to a period an- 
terior to Asoka’s accession. In other words, this poet must 
be taken to provide a much earlier and doubtless more de- 
pendable, if somewhat meagre, confirmation of the stories of 
Bindusara’s conquests in the Deccan and Southern India re- 
corded by the Tibetan historian Taranath. 17 The Kosar, who 
occupied the Tulu country, perhaps agreed to serve as wardens 
of the marches for the Mauryan Empire in the South; when 
they found the chieftain of Mohur troublesome and themselves 
unequal to subjugating him, they were assisted in their task 
by the advent of Mauryan troops with a Vaduga vanguard. 
Mohur is probably represented to-day by its modem name- 
sake in the South Arcot district, not far from the famous 
Attur pass through which, in recent times, Haidar Ali came 
down so often on the southern plains. 18 

If this view of the relation of the Mauryas to the South 
Indian states is accepted as correct, it would 

Relation to follow that there was a slight set-back to 
Mauryan Empire , 

the Mauryan power in the south sometime 
late in Bindusara’s reign or early in Asoka’s, as these states, 
especially Satiyaputa, seem to have improved their political 
status in regard to the Mauryan Empire before the date of the 
Rock Edicts II and XIII. 

The part taken from the sixth century b.c. by southern 
India in the growing commerce between 
Periplus. the Western countries and those in the East 

as far as China is sufficiently known. 19 Of the direction and 
nature of this trade and of its economic importance, something 
will be said further on. Here we may note that to this com- 
merce we owe, in the main, two valuable notices of Southern 
India and the Cola country separated by about half a century. 
The Periplus Maris Erythraei is the interesting handbook of 
an Alexandrian merchant, ‘which was written in the time of 
Domitian a.d. 81-96, and by the evidence furnished by Pliny 
the Elder.’ 20 The anonymous author of this short treatise 
tells us a little about the Cola country in particular which. 



22 


EARLY NOTICES 


considering the paucity of early notices of the Coromandel 
coast, is of uncommon interest to the student of Cola history. 
He says: ‘Beyond Colchi there follows another district called 
the coast country, which lies on a bay, and has a region inland 
called Argaru.’ This statement is best understood as point- 
ing to the division of the Cola country into two parts, a coastal 
district and an inland district. There is, as we shall see, evi- 
dence of Cola rule from two centres at this period — Puhar or 
Kaverippaltinam on the coast and Uraiyur inland. Pattinam, 
meaning a port-town, was the name of the Cola capital on the 
coast, and the phrase in the Periplus. ‘the coast country, which 
lies on a bay’, unmistakably recalls the Pattinam of the 
PattinappHaiP specially as it is placed in contrast with ‘a 
region inland called Argaru,’ which doubtless is the same as 
Uni'vjur. The author has named each of the districts after its 
chief town. It is remarkable that, while he knows the name 
‘Cerobothra’ and ‘Pandian.’ he does not mention ‘Cola.’ His 
information on the east coast of India is meagre and appa- 
rently based on hearsay . 22 He mentions also three market 
towns and harbours ‘where the ships put in from Damirica 
and from the north', which ‘in order as they lie’ are ‘first 
Camara, then Produca. then Sopatma’ — names now not easily 
identified , 22 though Sopatma may be the same as So-pattinam 
of Tamil literature, now called Markanam. 

Writing about half a century later, the geographer 
Ptolemy has rather more to tell us about the 
Cola country and its ports and inland 
cities . 24 Leaving aside all doubtful names which cannot be 
properly identified, we find that he gives particulars suffi- 
ciently precise of the positions of Kaverippattinam (Khaberis) 
at the mouth of the Kaveri and of Negapatam (Nikama) ; and 
as Cunningham has said: ‘Co]a is noticed by Ptolemy, whose 
Orthura regia Sornati must be Uraiyur, the capital of Sora- 
natha. or the king of the Soringae, that is the Soras, Choras 
or Cholas .' 25 Ptolemy also makes mention of the ‘Sorai 
nomads’ with 'Sora the capital of Arkatos.’ ‘One is strongly 
tempted to suppose that here,’ as Caldwell remarks, ‘the 
names given by the natives of the country to his informants 
had got transposed,’ and that, consequently, we have to con- 
sider Arkatos as the capital of the Sorai nomads. Arcot is not 
so modern a name as it is often imagined to be . 26 A Cola 



PALI EVIDENCE 


23 


princeling by name Alisi is said to have had for his residence 
‘Arkkadu surrounded by paddy fields ~ 27 and very likely 
Arkkad means ‘forest of Ar' ( Bauhinea Racemosa ) dr or 
dtti being a Cola emblem. This Arkkadu may or may not be 
identical with the Arcot celebrated in later days as the seat 
of the Nawabs of the Carnatic: but it is probably the same as 
Ptolemy's Arkatos . 28 From the statement of Ptolemy on the 
‘Sorai nomads’ and ‘Arkatos.' the inference has been made 29 
that there were two different Cola countries or kingdoms at 
the same time; it is quite possible, however, that the 'Sorai 
nomads' were some nomadic tribe or tribes in the Cola coun- 
try itself. That such tribes were in existence, and that some 
of the early Cola kings, especially Karikala. made an effort 
to civilise them and train them to more settled ways of life, 
is borne out by Tamil literature. 

The early chapters of the Mahavamsct contain testimony. 

sufficiently authentic and precise, to the early 
Pali books. intercourse between the Co]a country and 
the island of Ceylon; and generally, the early literature of Pali 
Buddhism makes very valuable, though scanty, allusions to 
the land of the Colas and Kaverippattinam, its most celebrated 
emporium. Some of these references must be as old as the 
Periplus. if not earlier. The Questions oj King Milinda. a 
Buddhist work of the beginning of the Christian era. men- 
tions Kolapattana among the best-known sea-port towns of 
the time, and Kolapattana must be. says Rhys Davids, some 
place on the Coromandel coast . 20 Most probably this is a refe- 
rence to Kaverippattinam. the Pattana par excellence on the 
Coromandel coast, which figures elsewhere in Pali Buddhist 
literature as well. M. Sylvain Levi has pointed out that 
Puhar. the great centre of traffic between Southern India and 
the islands of the Archipelago, was the original abode of the 
somewhat obscure sea-goddess Manimekhala — ‘girdle of 
gems’ — after whom Madhavi’s celebrated daughter and the 
poem of Sattan narrating the story of her spiritual life came 
to be called 21 In the Jataka story. Akitti. in order to escape 
the attentions of his admirers, left the neighbourhood of 
Benares for the Tamil country where he spent some time in 
a garden near Kaveripattana. 

According to the Mahdvamsa. the island of Ceylon began 
to fall under powerful Cola influences very early in its his- 



24 


EARLY NOTICES 


tory. The relations between the Damilas and the natives oi 
the island form one of the main strands in the narrative of 
this valuable chronicle, and the synchronisms furnished by it 
are among the more important sources of our knowledge of 
Tamil history and chronology. Though on several occasions 
the chronicle speaks only of Damilas in general, still the dis- 
tinction between the Pandya and Cola divisions of the Tamil 
country is well known and clearly observed in the Maha- 
vamsa. Towards the middle of the second century b.c., a 
Damila of noble descent, Elara by name, came to Ceylon from 
the Cola country (Colaratlha) , overpowered Asela who was 
then ruling in the island, and himself reigned as king for 
forty-four years, ‘with even justice towards friend and foe on 
occasions of disputes at law .’ 32 Many stories are told in illust- 
ration of the justice of his rule, and among them is that of 
the king sentencing his only son to death for having unwit- 
tingly caused the death of a young calf by driving the wheel 
of his chariot over its neck. Though not a follower of the 
Buddha’s creed, this king lived on friendly terms with the 
Buddhist bhikkus 33 of his realm, and his rule, so long as it 
lasted, was in every way acceptable to his subjects. His rule 
was confined to the northernmost section of the island and the 
Mnhaganga. now Mahawaeliganga, was its southern limit . 31 
Then began a war between Elara and Dutthagamani, so call- 
ed because he was wroth with his father who stood in the 
way of his fighting the Damilas; the object of Dutthagamani 
:n undertaking this war was twofold; to restore the political 
unity of Ceylon and to bring glory to the doctrine of the 
Buddha by driving out the Damilas addicted to false beliefs. 
The details of the campaign that followed are very clearly 
recorded in the Mahavamsa P 5 success attended the arms of 
Dutthagamani, and his conquered foe was pursued up to the 
vicinity of Anuradhapura, and Elara met his death, in a heroic 
combat with Dutthagamani beneath the walls of that city 
Then Dutthagamani marched into the city, ‘and when he had 
summoned the people from a yojana around, he celebrated 
the funeral rites of king Elara On the spot where his body 
had fallen, he burned it with the catafalque, and there did 
he build a monument and ordain worship.’ And even in the 
days of Mahanaman. the author of this part of the Maha- 
vamsa. in the sixth century a.d.. the princes of Lanka, when 
they drew near to that place, were wont to silence their music. 



CEYLON 


25 


because of this worship Of these transactions that loom so 
large in the early history of Ceylon, there is no trace in Tamil 
literature 36 apart from the legend of the prince and the calf 
which is placed in the reign of Manu. We therefore lack all 
means of judging the extent to which the fortunes of the Cola 
monarchs of the mainland were involved in the establishment 
and the overthrow of Elara’s power in Ceylon. 


1. kadal kilakkut-terkuk-karai pural Vellaru 
kuda-tisaiyil kottiakkaraiyum — vada tisaiyil 
enattu Vellarirupattu narkadam 
Sonattuk-kellaiyenac-col. 

Though ascribed by some to Kamban (see e.g. p. 56 of the Solamandala 
satakam ) the venba seems to be more ancient in origin: others ascribe 
it to Auvaiyar (Taylor III 42). Kottaik-karai ‘means ‘‘fortbank” and 
tradition says that it refers to the great embankment of which traces 
still stand in the Kuliltalai taluk of Trichinopoly ’ — Gazetteer of the Tan- 
) ore Dt. I p. 15. 

2. Tanjore Manual, pp.4-5; Trichinopoly Manual, pp. 2-5 

3. Manimekalai I, 9-12: 23-4. 

4. ‘According to some it is the Chabaris Emporium mentioned by 
Ptolemy in the 1st cent. a.d. The inscriptions secured from the modern 
Kaverippattanam and its vicinity leave no doubt as to its identity with 
Kavirippumpattinam alias Puhar, though the monuments of Pallavanic- 
caram and Sayavanesvara are not of such early date as could be ex- 
pected’ — ARE. 1919 II 2. 

5. See Rural No. 955 and his gloss on it. 

6. Caldwell. Tinnevelly. p. 12 

7. L. V. Ramaswami Aiyar. to whom I referred the question, wrote 
to me as follows: ‘Tam. Cola does not appear to be directly connected 
with any extant Tamil or Dravidian base. This fact of course need not 
necessarily lead us to postulate a foreign origin for the word. ***** 
If the postulate that— ft— may have in some circumstances (for which 
we have parallels in Dravidian) changed to— 6— is justified, then one 
might conceivably connect Cola with Citl — with the meanings "to whirl.’ - 
“to hover’’, and explain “Cola” as “hoverer.” ’ 

8. See Gerhii-Researclies. pp. 85 ff and 101-3. There appears to be 
some other evidence, however, in support of Gerini's view that a stream 
of dark emigrants of the negrito race, the descendants of the so-called 
Raksasas of old, came to Malaya from Southern India and were follow- 
ed by their early successors, the Dravidians, who constituted the pre- 
Aryan population of India, cf. Elliot Smith, Human History pp. 69-71. 
But Gerini exaggerates the cultural importance of these prehistoric 
movements of population. He confounds them with later ones that 
took place in historical times after Southern India was more or less 

C. 4 



26 


EARLY NOTICES 


dyanLrcd in it* Culture, and he goes on to suggest that the Indian 
culture of Siam, Kambhoja and other places had its origin in the ear- 
liest pre-historic movements (p. 101! For Cola' < cora. thief, see Bhan- 
darksr, Carmichael Lectures, 1918, pp. 8-9. 

9. Dr. Pope suggested the fanciful equation Killi = PaHaoan (1,-1. 
x>:ix p. 250). Even if Pallava is accepted as the correct form of the 
word, rather than Pel lava (.Skt. sprout), it would mean more pio- 
perly 'people dwelling in low lands' (patlant), and not diggeis.’ It may 
be doubted if the Pallavas were indigenous to Southern India; and 
unless they were, it would be vain to look for a Dra\ idiaa origin for 
their name. In any case, they were by no means the same as the Colas. 

10. See e.g. the Virasoliyam, comment on Tattita, v. 3. 

11. Yazdani — Ajanta I pp. 4-7. Krom — Boro Budur vol. i. pp. 275-7. 

12. El. xi, p. 338. 

13. El. iii 231-2. 

14. Mahabhasya , ed. Kielhoin, II p. 270. 

15. Vide Hultzsch — Asoka Inset iptions — Index s. v. Cola. 

16. D. R. Bhandarkar — Asoka p. 38. 

17. Smith, EHH p. 147. See ML S Ramaswami Aiyangar, Studies 
in South Indian Jainism, pp. 127 ff, for a succinct summary of the evi- 
dence on the subject; also Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Beginnings, pp. 88 tf. 
Following Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangai, M. S. R. lays (p. 134 ff. op. c it.) 
undue stress on vamba in the phrase co.hiba moriyar (Ahain 251), quotes 
late and obscure Gutta legends of the tenth century a.d. in suppoit 
of his notion that the Impel ial Gupta, were conlounded by Mainulanai 
with the more ancient Muuiyas, and seeks to establish a fifth century 
date for Mamulanar and his contc-mpoi dries ot the Sangam. The fact that 
Pandit Raghava Aiyangar docs not now see much force in these argu- 
ments as he once did, and has suppressed them in the second edition of 
his Seran Songnttuvan, perhaps renders otiose any detailed discussion 
of these views. The phia-c 'mi.nba miiriyar’ is used by Mamulanai only 
once; he himself, elsewhere, talks only of the ‘muiiyar’ and so do the 
two other poets, Parankorranar t Alain 69; and Atiraiyanar (Puram 
175). The expression cannot theretore be made much ot. especially 
because vamba' is an adjective with seveial meanings of which unsteady' 
restless,’ is admittedly one. And supposing lor a moment that i'.Iamu- 
lanar was thinking of the Imperial Mauryas, he knows of the Nandas 
and their wealth, nothing could have struck him more than the ’rest- 
lessness - oi these Maurjas. eager to annex all the kingdoms of India to 
their empire. Even accepting the other meaning suggested ior the 
word 'vamba.' ‘new, - we are not aware of any insuperable difficulty m 
supposing that, at the time when Mamulanar was writing the Mauryan 
expansion to the South was a fact of recent history. One fails to see 
moreover how some contusion between the Mauryas and the Guptas 
that marks the legendary genealogy of an obscure clan of rulers in 
North India can furnish an analogue for a similar confusion in the mind 
of a South Indian Tamil poet of unknown age; much less, how such in- 
ferential confusion can be made the basis for suggesting a date for the 
poet and hi- compositions. M. S. R. was strongly influenced by Smith's 



NOTES 


27 


view of Samudragupta the Indian Napoleons campaign in me South 
based on his early identification of 'Palakka’ ol the Ailahabad pillar in- 
scription with Palghat, which is no longer considered sound. Mr. P. T. 
Srinivasa Aiyangar says of Aham 281: ‘The Kosar are called here Vadu- 
gar.’ It may be so; in which case Vadugar munnura of this verse 
should be a buef allusion to the failure of the Kosar to subdue Mohur, 
narrated at greater length in Aham 251. But Mr. Aiyangar's assertion 
that die Konkan Mauryas 'were the only possible Moriyar who, m 
conjunction with the Kosar, could have attempted a raid into the Tamil 
country’ is hardly convincing. See his Tamils pp. 522-3. 

18. Studies in South Indian Jainism p. 140. Many other places also 
bear the name Mohur and the identification of the place must be con- 
sideied tentative. 

19. See Kennedy JRAS. 1898 pp. 248-87 for a lull discussion oi this 
subject. Prof. Jules Bloch in his paper “ Nom du R>~." (Etudes Asiatiqws 
Vol. I. pp. 37-47) denies that the Greek term for lice is derived from 
Tam. Anii; and he holds that there is not much evidence, philological 
or other, in pi oof of the part of South India in this trade, \\ hicli might 
after ail have been confined, at any rate until a very late stage, to 
Northern India and to the land routes. L. V. Eamaswami Aiyar 1.1. 
Vol. lix pp. 178 ff., after a caiei'ul examination of Bloch's position on 
the etymology of the Gk. Owzon. comes to the conclusion. 'Vurigi oi 
Vanzi may be postulated for Dravidian from which, with characteristic 
modifications, the Greeks could have borrowed that word’. Kennedy's 
conclusion that maritime trade between South India and ihe West date", 
from the sixth or even the seventh century b.c. still seems good. 

20. Rostovtzeff— Social and Economic History of the Roman Em- 
pire p. 91. 

21. The quotations are from Schuff: PernAus. Schoff says Coa-i 
country is from the native name. Cola coast Colamandalam.' (p. 211) 
This is hardly satisfactory as Cola-mandalam only means Cola country 
not ‘coast.’ 

22. See Rawlinson — Intercourse between India and the Western 
World pp. 121-2. 

23. Schoff — p. 242. Kanakasabhai p. 29. Also IA. viii, p. 149 n. 
QJMS. xxi. pp. 413-4. 

24. See Ch. I. sections 12. 13. 68. and 91 in Me. Crindle’s edn. of 
Bk. VII in IA. xiii. Also Caldwell— Comp. Grammar, pp. 92 If. Kana- 
kasabhai (p. 29) makes many shrewd suggestions on the identification 
of Ptolemy’s names. 

25. Ancient Geography p. 631. See also Caldwell — Comp. Gram- 
i i at p. 93. 

26. Caldwell says: ‘Gen?ral Cunningham objects to this identifica- 
tion that Arcot is quite a modem name: but it must, as Col Yule has 
pointed out, be at least as old as a.d. 1340, for it is mentioned by Ibn 
Batuta. The name is properly dr -kad, Tam the six forests and the 
Hindus of the place regard it as an ancient city, though not mentioned 
by the name in the Puranas, and point out the ‘six forests’ in which six 



28 


EARLY NOTICES 


of the rijis of the ancient period had their hermitage.' (op. cit. pp. 93-4) 
Such local legends are not of much value in the face of the much 
stronger and earlier evidence cited. Ptolemy places Arkatos in the 
country between Mt. Bettigo and Adeisathros (VII, 1. 68) ; but on ac- 
count of the inextricable confusion into which he falls over the second 
of these names (I A. xiii. p. 337), this does not help us much in the 
location of Arkatos on a modem map. The references in the early 
Tamil literature are valuable in this respect. Cunningham was doubt- 
less influenced by Yuan-chwang’s data about Chu-lien when he pro- 
posed to identify Ptolemy's Sora, the capital of Arkatos, with Zora oi 
Jora (the Jorampun of the maps), an old town lying immediately under 
the walls of Karnul (A»c. Gsogr. p. 626). 

27. Poem No. 190 (anonymous) of the Narnnai has the following: — 
tengamal viritar — lyareralisi 

vandumusu neyda — nellidai malaru 
mariyalangalani — yarkkadanna. 

There is also a stray venba (Perundogai No. 988) which mentions Alisi- 
iciidu, the kadu (forest) of Alisi. This princeling had a son Sendan, 
who is sometimes conncied with the Cola capital Uraiyur ( Kurundogai 
No. 258). Arkkadu is said to be in the Cola country by the editor of 
the Narrinai. 

28. See Yule and Burnell-ffobsoii-Jobson s. v. Arcot, where it 
is pointed out that of several places of this name in the Southern dis- 
tricts besides the town of Arcot near Vellore, one in Tanjore would 
correspond best with Harkatu of Ibn Batuta. 

29. D. R. Bhandarkar-Asoku p. 39. 

30. Rhys Davids — The Questions of King Milmda ( SBE .) i, p. xliv 
and ii. p. 269. 

31. 1HQ. vi 597 fl. Without stopping to argue the matter fully, M. 
Sylvain Levi finds an easy explanation in ‘Tamil nationalism’ (p. 607) 
for the view which ascribes an early date to the poem. The relation 
between the Nyayapravesa of Dinnaga and the Manimekalai xxix is not 
simple, as readers of Professor Krishnaswami Aiyangar’s Manimekhalai 
in its Historical Setting must see. And a careful examination of the 
other systems of philosophy propounded in that canto shows that there 
are many truly ancient doctrines in it which would not be easy to ex- 
plain on the basis of a late date such as the sixth century a.d. See 
S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, JIH, viii and ix. 

I have my own doubts if Canto xxix does not bear dgns of a 
remodelling. 

32. See Geiger's Mahavamsa chh. xxi-xxv for the narrative. Geiger 
thinks that ‘Cola-country’ means ‘Southern India.’ (Trans, p. 143 n. 4). 
This is unnecessary and seems to go against the precise expressions in 
the original, like Cola-rattha (xxi 13) and dakhinam Madhuram puram 
Pandu-rajassa (vii, 50), besides the common form Damila employed of 
both countries. Further, the story of the justice done by the king to 
the cow that lost its calf narrated ot Elara in the MV. is localised at 



NOTES 


29 


Tiruvarur on the continent, and there is a stone monument in that 
place representing the central incident of the story. See Epigr. Zeylanica 
iii pp. 1-47 for the chronology of the MV. ‘The length of Elara’s reign 
may be accepted as correct.’ i bid p. 5 n. 1. 

33. MV. xxi, 21-6. 

34. MV. xxii 86 and xxiv 4. 

35. Geiger-transl. pp. 290-1 gives a lucid account of the details of 
the war. On one occasion seven Damila princes were defeated in one 
day (xxv 10), and altogether thirty-two princes are said to have been 
thus overpowered in the war (ibid. 75). They were probably all com- 
manders of Elara’s forces which garrisoned many fortresses on the 
frontier and elsewhere. 

36. See JRAS. 1913, pp. 529-31. Some vague popular legends con- 
nect the poet of the Kura l, Tiruvalluvar, with a merchant prince, Elela 
Singa, (V.R.R. Dikshitar-Studies in Tamil Literature and History- pp. 
129 ff.), but no one knows where these come from, and they lack all 
claim to credence and can furnish no basis for a date for Tiruvalluvar. 
For other instances of Tamil influence in Ceylon, not specially known 
to be Cola, see MV. xxi 10, Sena and Guttaka; xxxiii 56, Pulattha and 
others; xxxiv, 19 ff. for the infamous career or Anula-devi who made 
over the country to a succession of her Tamil paramours. 



Chapter III 


COLAS IN EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


The earliest Cola kings or whom we have tangible evi- 
dence are those mentioned in the Sangam 
Nature of the literature. Scholars are now generally agreed 
Early Literature. literature belongs to the first few 

centuries of the Christian era . 1 The internal chronology of 
this literature is still far from settled, and this remains at pre- 
sent an insuperable obstacle in the way of giving a connected 
account of the history of the period. We gather the names of 
kings and princes, and of the poets who extolled them; we 
also learn much of uncommon interest about the life and work 
of the people. Some of the- kings, we can see, were men of 
real distinction with a good title to fame; and the poets were 
often great artists who could add beauty to truth in the 
manner of their expression. In this body of early Tamil litera- 
ture, the individuals depicted stand out in bold relief mils 
their characteristic traits are most unmistakably revealed t" 
us; rt is thus all the greater pity, that we canno! work it into 
a connected history. We shall see that when the chronology 
becomes firm, with the Colas of the Vijayalaya line, literature 
loses its early qualities of realism and strength, and lapse- 
particularly in the delineation of persons, into the easv devices 
of court poetry. 


Two names stand out prominently from among those oi 
the Cola kings known to the Sangam liter? - 
Two great kings. ture . anc | their memory is cherished in song 
and legend by a loving posterity: they are those of Karikala 
and Koceenganan. There is no sure means of settling the 
order of their succession, of fixing their relations with one 
another and with many other princes and princelings of about 
the same period. If Puhar or Kavirippumpattinam rose in 
importance only in the time of Karikala 2 then the civil strife 
between the two branches of the Colas, one of them apparent- 
ly stationed at Uraiyur and the other at Puhar. may be laken 
to fall in the period subsequent to the rule of Karikala In 
any event, this strife between the lival branches of the royal 



KAR1KALA 


31 


family appears 1o have been a constant factor in the annals of 
the Colas of the Sangam age. Even Karikala. the most illust- 
rious among them, had his own troubles in the beginning. 3 

Before we proceed to discuss the kings of the Sangam 
Age, some attention may be given to the 
^ legends about the mythical Cola kings 

known to this literature. The Colas were even then looked 
upon as descended from the sun 4 — a fact that received elabo- 
rate emphasis in later times in the long mythical genealogies 
incorporated in copperplate charters of the tenth and eleventh 
centuries, in the Kanyakumari stone inscription of Virarajen- 
dra, and in literary works like the Kalingattupparqgii and the 
Vikramasolan Ulti. Coeval with Agastya and Parasurama was 
king Kantan, whose devotion to the former brought the river 
Kaveri into existence, 5 and who at the bidding of Parvati 
CKanni) entrusted his kingdom for a time to his illegitimate 
son Kakandan, in order to escape the fury of Parasurama, who 
waged relentless war against all Ksatriyas. 6 He ruled from 
Campa later called Kakandi, Puhar and Kavirippumpath - 
nam. Another legendary hero was Tungeyilerinda-todiUoi - 
cembiyan, who destroyed some mysterious flying fortress of 
the Asuras 7 and also instituted in Puhai-, at the instance of 
Agastya . an annual festival to Indra of the duration of 
twenty-eight days. 8 The story r.f the king who sentenced his 
son to death for having killed a calf by rash driving 9 and that 
of another who rescued the dove from the hawk, but not the 
names of Manu and Sibi, are known 10 to this early literature. 
The king of the bird-story is, however, once called Sembiyan 11 
Some of these legends, like the story of the calf and the 
prince, 12 the origin of Ihe Kaveri. and the institution of the 
festival to Indra, are not found in the anthologies of the 
Sangam, and make their appearance for the first tinw in tlvt 
twin epics of the Silapp'tdi'karam and the Maivnielcalai. 

Karikala. the greatest among the Colas of the Sangam 
age, was the son of Ilanjetcenni distinguished 
Karikala for the beauty of his numerous war-cha- 

riots. 18 Karikalan means ‘the man with the charred leg.’ and 
the name perpetuated the memory of a fire-accident in the 
early years of the prince's life, 14 in later times, under Sans- 
kritic influences, the name was explained as Death (Ktila) 



32 EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

to ‘Kali’ or ‘Death to (enemies’) elephants.’ Karikala was dep- 
rived of his birth-right and confined in a 
Accession. prison by his enemies for some years. The 

plucky manner in which he effected his escape and establish- 
ed himself in power is a favourite theme with the poets. 15 

‘Like the tiger cub with its sharp claws and its curved 
stripes growing (strong) within the cage, his strength 
came to maturity (like wood in grain) while he was in 
the bondage of his enemies. As the large-trunked ele- 
phant pulls down the banks of the pit (in which it has 
been caught) and effects its escape by filling in the pit, 
and joins its mate, even so after deep and careful consi- 
deration, he drew his sword, effected his escape by over- 
powering the strong guard (of his prison), and attained 
his glorious heritage in due course.’ 

Again. 

‘This lord, dreaded by his enemies like Murugan’s 
anger, inherited the throne from his mother’s womb; 16 
he forced his enemies to do his behests, and filled with 
uneasiness the lands of those that did not submit; like 
the young sun spreading the rays of dawn on the ocean 
before rising in the sky, so from the day he began to 
crawl as a baby, he bore on his shoulders his excellent 
country, and daily increased its prosperity. As the fierce 
whelp of the lion, proud of its strength greater than that 
of Death, while it has not yet given up sucking the breast 
of its dam, quickly kills the elephant in its first hunt for 
food,’ 

so ‘Karikala-Cola with the garland of dr pleasing to the eyes’ 
fought a great battle at Venni in which the Pandya and the 
Cera both suffered a crushing defeat. 17 Venni has been iden- 
tified with Kovil Venni, a village fifteen 
Battle of Venm. mi j es to east Q f Tanjore. Though we 
know very little of the circumstances that led to this battle, 
there can be no doubt that it marked the turning point in 
Karikala’s career; for in this battle he seems to have broken 
the back of a widespread confederacy formed against him. 
Besides the two crowned kings of the Pandya and Cera coun- 
tries, eleven minor chieftains took their side in the campaign 
and shared the defeat at the hands of Karikala. 18 Much sym- 



KARIK ALA'S CONQUESTS 33 

pathy was felt for the Cera king, who was wounded at his 
back, the last disgrace that could befall a soldier on the battle- 
field, and who expiated his cowardice by committing suicide; 19 
this is how one of Karikala’s own friends, the poet Vennik- 
kuyattiyar, possibly a resident of Venni and an eye-witness 
to the battle, addresses the monarch: 20 

‘Oh! descendant of that warrior who, sailing on the 
wide ocean, compelled the winds to fill the sails of his 
ships! 21 Oh, Karikal-valava, lord of mighty elephants! 
By this victory thou hast displayed the greatness of thy 
valour which faced the fight and carried it to success. Is 
not he even nobler than thee — he, who, after attaining 
great celebrity in the world, feels now the shame of a 
wound in his back, and starves himself to death on the 
plain of Venni watered by the freshes (of the Kaveri) ?’ 

If Venni was the first great battle of Karikala’s reign 
which established him firmly on his throne 
1 and secui'ed for him some sort of hegemony 

among the ‘three crowned monarchs’ of the Tamil land, there 
was no lack of other opportunities for the exercise of his arms. 
He defeated a confederacy of nine minor chieftains in a battle 
at Vakaipparandalai: Paranar, a contemporary both of Kari- 
kala and his father, mentions this fact, 22 but tells us nothing 
of the cause of the battle or of the enemies of Kari- 
kala. The poet of the Pattinappdlai describes fully the dest- 
ruction carried by the forces of Karikala into the territories 
of his enemies and the awe inspired by his deeds of valour, 23 
and adds that as a result of his campaigns, ‘the numerous 
Oliyar submitted to him, the ancient Aru- 
Conquests. valar carried out his commands, the North- 
erners lost splendour, and the Westerners were depressed; 
conscious of the might of his large army ready to shatter the 
fortresses of enemy kings (Karikala) turned his flushed look 
of anger against the Pandya whose strength gave way; the 
line of low herdsmen was brought to an end, and the family 
of Irungovel was uprooted.’ If we disregard the vague state- 
ments about Northerners and Westerners in these lines from 
the Pattinappdlai , we see that for all his heroism on the battle- 
field Karikala’s permanent conquests did not extend much 
beyond the land of the Kaveri. The Aruvalar were the 





KARIKALA : RELIGION AND DEATH 


inhabitants of the Aruvanad which comprised the lower valley 
of the Pennar, just north of the Kaveri delta country. The 
Oliyar were perhaps some nomadic tribe of naga extraction, 
whom Karikala converted to a settled life . 24 The description 
of Kavirip-pumpattinam and its foreshore, which takes up so 
much of the Pattinappalai , gives a vivid idea of the state of 
industry and commerce under Karikala who is said to have 
promoted the reclamation and settlement of forest land end 
added to the prosperity of the country by multiplying irriga- 
tion tanks . 25 

Of Karikala’s personal life we hear next to nothing. 

While U r uttir angannanar, the author of the 
Personal Life. Pattinappalai, tells us vaguely that he enjoy- 
ed the society of women and children , 26 the late annotator 
Naccinarkkiniyar, possibly reproducing a correct tradition, 
states that Karikala took to wife a Velir girl from Nangur , 27 
a place celebrated in the poems of Tirumangai Alvar for the 
heroism of its warriors. A daughter of Karikala, Adimandi by 
name, is the subject of many poems. She lost her husband, 
a Cera prince, by name Attan Atti, who was drowned in the 
Kaveri, but subsequently, by the power of her chastity, she 
is said to have brought him back to life . 28 

Karikala’s faith in the Vedic religion and the poignancy 
of the grief caused by his death find moving 
e lgion. Deat . ex p ress j on j n the following lines of Karun- 
gulal-Adanar : 29 

‘He who stormed his enemies’ forts dauntlessly; who 
feasted his minstrels and their families and treated them 
to endless draughts of toddy; who, in the assembly of 
Brahmans noted for knowledge of dharma and purity of 
life, guided by priests learned in their duties and attended 
by his noble and virtuous queen, performed the vedic 
sacrifice in which the tall sacrificial post stood on a bird- 
like platform ( garudacayana ) , within the sacrificial court 
surrounded by a high wall with round bastions; he, the 
great and wise king alas! is no more! Poor indeed is this 
world which has lost him. Like the branches of the 
vengai tree, which stand bare, when their bright foliage 
has been cut down by shepherds eager to feed their 
cattle in the fierce summer, are his fair queens, who have 
cast off their jewels.’ 



36 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


From very early times Karikala became the centre of 
many myths which, in modern times, have 
Legends. often been accepted as serious history. The 

Silappadikaram which, with studied fairness attributes to each 
of the three Tamil monarchies some conspicuous success 
against northern Aryan kings, gives a glorious account of the 
northern expedition of Karikala 30 which took him as far as 
the Himalayas and gained for him the alliance or subjection 
of the kings of the Vajra, Magadha and Avanti countries. The 
raising of the flood-banks of the Kaveri by Karikala seems to 
be first mentioned by the Malepadu plates of Punyakumara 31 
a Telugu-Coda king of the seventh or eighth century. 
Nothing can be more typical of the manner in which legends 
grow than the way in which this story mingles with another 
stream of legend centring round Trinetra Pallava, and cul- 
minates in the celebrated jingle of the late Telugu-Coda plates: 
carana-sardruha vihata-vilocana-pallava-trilocana-pra mukba- 
khila-prithivisvara-kdrita-kdven-tira , 32 which has been made 
the basis of conclusions of the highest importance to the chro- 
nology of Early South Indian History. The choice of Karikala 
to the Cola throne by a state elephant which was let loose for 
the purpose from Kalumalam and which discovered him at 
Karur, and his conquest of KancI and settlement of agrarian 
colonies in the Tondaimandalam are other elements in the 
Karikala legends that can find no support from the earliest 
authorities on his reign. It would seem that the Tondai-nad 
was ruled by Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan in the days of Karikala; 
and there is no satisfactory evidence in support of the sugges- 
tion that has been made that this chieftain was the grandson 
of Karikala, or, at least, a vieei'oy appointed by him after his 
conquest of KancI . 33 

We now pass on to Nalangilli and his rival Nedungilli 
who, judging from the civil war between 
Civil War. them which lasted till the death of Nedun- 

gilli 34 at the Kariyaru, must have belonged to rival branches 
of the Cola family which ruled with Puhar and Uraiyur for 
their respective centres. Nalangilli had a younger brother, 
Mavalattan; and his memory is preserved to us by the poet 
Tamappal-kannanar who, when Mavalattan lost his temper 
in a game of dice and hit him with a die, so rebuked him that 
later he felt the need for an apology and composed a short 



KILLIS 


37 


poem, 35 which is the only relic of this inflammable princeling 
and his boon-companion, the Brahman poet of Damal. 36 

The Manimekalai 37 mentions a great battle at the Kari- 
yaru in which the Pandya and the Cera were defeated by a 
junior prince (Ilangon) of the C5la family in the reign of 
Mavankilli, also called Nedumudikkilli and Killivalavan in 
this poem. This battle has been identified with the one in 
which Nedungilli met his fate and the civil strife came to an 
end; 38 from this the inference has been drawn that the Ilangon 
of the Manimekalai was no other than Nalangilli, and that 
Nalangilli was the younger brother of Nedumudik-killi; some 
writers go further and argue that because Nalangilli is called 
Setcenni-Nalangilli, 39 he may be a grandson of Dahjetcenni, 
the father of Karikala, with the result that Nedumudik-killi, 
Nalangilli, and Mavalattan turn out to be three sons of Kari- 
kala. But there is nothing except the name in favour of 
identifying the two references to the Kariyaru in the Purand- 
nuru and the Manimekalai; nothing is known of the circum- 
stances of Nedungilli’s death at the Kariyaru, a fact which 
finds only the most casual mention in the colophon to Puram 
47; we are to infer from this that as there was a civil war 
between Nalangilli and Nedungilli, a fight at the Kariyaru 
might, by proving fatal to the latter, have closed the strife. 
On the contrary, the battle of the Kariyaru described, though 
briefly! yet with considerable vividness, in the Manimekalai. 
appears as a first-class event in the foreign relations of the 
Cola kingdom, and not as a petty fight incidental to a quarrel 
among blood relations; and there is no suggestion in the con- 
text that the Cera and the Pandya were, on that occasion, 
engaged in aiding one Cola prince against another. The last 
argument adduced from the name Setcenni-Nalangilli is not 
without force, and it appears quite likely that he and Mavalat- 
tan were the sons of Karikala. 

Nalangilli forms the subject of no fewer than fourteen 
pieces in the Purananuru. and Kovur-Kilar. 

Nalangilli. w ho contributes half the number implies that 

the king enjoyed, like Karikala himself, a sort of vague hege- 
mony among the Tamil states, and sings with intelligible exag- 
geration: 40 



38 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


‘As true wealth and happiness are seen to follow in 
the wake of virtue, so the two umbrellas (of the rivals 
Pandya and Cera) follow thy peerless umbrella which is 
raised aloft, resplendent in the sky, like the full-moon. 
Ambitious of fair fame thou wouldst stay nowhere but in 
thy victorious camp. Thy elephants chafe, whose tusks 
are blunt with battering the walls of thy enemies’ forts. 
Eager for fight, thy soldiers who wear anklets, make 
nothing of marching through wide stretches of forests to 
reach the enemy country. Thy war steeds starting from 
the Eastern sea stay not till the waves of the Western 
ocean wash their hoofs; in fine, the kings of the North 
keep watch with sleepless eyes as they dread the possi- 
bility of thy marching against them.’ 

The poet who praised his lord with such strident notes was 
no base sycophant. In striking contrast with the foregoing, 
is the moving exhortation to peace addressed to the king when 
he was besieging Uraiyur in order to reduce Nedungilli to 
submission : 41 

‘He does not wear the white flower of the palm. He 
does not wear the garland of the dark-boughed margosa. 
Thy garland is a wreath of the dr, and so is that of him 
who wages war with thee. If either of you loses the 
battle, it is your house that loses; in the nature of things, 
it is impossible that both of you win. Your action, there- 
fore, forebodes no good to your race; this strife will 
rejoice other kings who, like you, ride on pennoned 
chariots.’ 

This noble advice of the poet would seem to have fallen on 
deaf ears; for, as we have seen, the epithet Kdriyarrut-tunjiya 
applied to Nedungilli seems to imply that the war came to 
an end only with his death. 

Nalangilli, like several other princes of the age, cultivated 
literature himself, and of the two poems preserved from among 
his compositions, one takes the form of an uncanny oath in 
the following terms : 42 

‘If gently approaching my feet, one prays for a 
favour. I shall grant him with pleasure my ancient king- 
dom, nay. I shall give my life for his sake. If, like a 



NEDUNG1LL1 


39 


blind man who stumbles on a tiger sleeping in the open, 
one is so foolish as to slight my strength and oppose my 
will, he shall hardly escape with his life. If I do not 
advance to the fight and cause (my foes) to suffer like 
the long-stemmed bamboo trampled under foot by a huge 
elephant, may my garland be crumpled in the wanton 
embraces of dark-haired harlots, who can never love with 
a pure heart.’ 

That Kavirip-pumpattinain with its extensive trade was in 
Nalangilli’s possession , 43 and that Vedic sacrifices were com- 
mon in his reign 44 are facts well attested by our sources. 
There is a poignant note of melancholy in some of the poems 
on Nalangilli 45 composed by Uraiyur Mudukannan Sattanar. 
x and it is not easy to decide if this is due to the poet’s own 
temperament or to the incidents of the civil strife. It would 
appear that Nalangilli died at a place called Ilavandigaip- 
palli . 46 

Nedungilli, the opponent of Nalangilli in the civil war, is 
addressed in two poems by Kovur-Kilar. the 
e ungi. i. author of the exhortation addressed to both 

of them to cease from their strife. These poems add a little 
to our knowledge of the occurrences in the war. One of them 
mentions that Nedungilli was once shut up in Avur which, 
like Uraiyur, was beset by the forces of Nalangilli. The poem 
gives a graphic description of the effects of the siege : 47 

‘The male elephants, not led out to bathe with the 
female herd in the large tanks (outside the fort) , nor fed 
with balls of rice mixed with ghee, chafe at the posts to 
which they are chained, heave long sighs, and with their 
trunks rolling on the ground, trumpet loudly like thunder. 
Children cry for want of milk, the women plait their hair 
without flowers, the mansions of the city i-esound with 
the cries of people wailing for want of water. It is not 
possible to hold out any more here, thou, master of fleet 
steeds! If thou wouldst be kind, open the gates (to the 
enemy) saying, “This is yours;” if thou wouldst be heroic, 
open the gates and lead thy soldiers out to victory; to be 
neither the one nor the other, to close the strong gates of 
the fort, and to shut yourself up in a cox-ner behind the 
high walls, this, when one thinks of it, is shameful indeed!’ 



40 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


Nedungilli, then, had ambition without courage, and brought 
much suffering on himself and his subjects by his pusil- 
lanimity. Like all cowards, he seems to have lived in con- 
stant dread of treachery and foul play. When he was be- 
sieged at Uraiyur, a minstrel, Ilandattan by name, who had 
entered Uraiyur from the camp of Nalangilli, was taken to be 
a spy, and was about to be killed when Kovur-Kilar put in a 
successful plea for his life being spared. The short poem is a 
fine picture of bardic life in the Sangam age . 48 

‘They fly like birds and traverse many a long and 
arid route in search of patrons, and with untutored tongue, 
sing their praise; pleased with what they get they feast 
their train, eat without saving, give without stinting, and 
pine only for honour. Such is their living which depends on 
the free gifts (of patrons). Does this ever hurt others? 
No, to be sure. Only, they exult in their triumphs over 
rival bards, and when their rivals’ faces are cast down, 
then do they walk proudly, and are well pleased; they 
have thus a primacy of their own, not less than persons 
who, like you, have attained to the rulership of the earth.' 

Close to Nalangilli and Nedungilli in time, because the 
. same poets are found composing poems in 

their praise, was Killivalavan who died at 
Kulamurram. Another Killivalavan, the subject of a single 
poem of Kovur-Kilar , 49 is said to have died at Kurap-palli. It 
has been suggested that these two kings are identical , 50 and 
if that be so, this poem of Kovur-Kilar composed after the king 
had captured Karuvur, depicts a later stage in his Cera war 
than another 51 poem by Alattur Kilar, which describes Karu- 
vur still in a state of siege. Killivalavan is celebrated in 
eighteen songs by ten different minstrels, and himself figures 
as the author of a poem in praise of his friend Patman , 52 the 
lord of Sirukudi. He ruled with Uraiyur as his capital . 53 ‘This 
king, who (we may infer) possessed considerable ability, was 
both brave and generous, but somewhat headstrong. Hence 
a great deal of good advice is, in a very tactful way, offered to 
him by the minstrels; and he seems to have been all the better 
for it.’ The following lines are by Vellaikkudi-nakanar , 54 
who was rewarded on the spot by a remission of the arrears 
due on his lands. 



KILL IV ALAV AN 41 

The pleasant Tamil lands possess 
For boundary the ocean wide. 

The heaven, where tempests loud sway not, 

Upon their brow rests as a crown. 

Fertile the soil they till, and wide. 

Three kings with mighty hosts this land 
Divide; but of the three; whose drums 
Sound for the battle’s angry strife, 

Thou art the chief, O mighty one! 

Though the resplendent sun in diverse quarters rise; 

And though the silvery planet to the south decline; 

Thy land shall flourish, where through channels deep, 
Kaveri flows with bright refreshing stream, 

Along whose banks the sweet cane’s white flowers wave 
Like pennon’d spears uprising from the plain. 

Let me speak out to this rich country’s king! 

Be easy of access at fitting time, as though 
The lord of justice sat to hear, and right decree. 

Such kings have ram on their dominions at their will! 
The clouds thick gather round the sun, and rest 
In vault of heaven: — So let thy canopy 
Of state challenge the sky, and spread around 
Not gloom, but peaceful shade. Let all thy victories 
Be the toiling ploughman’s gain. 

Kings get the blame, whether rains fail, or copious flow. 
And lack the praise: such is the usage of the world. 

If thou hast marked and known this well, 

Reject the wily counsels of malicious men. 

Lighten the load of those who till the soil. 

The dwellers in the land protect. If thou do this 
Thy stubborn foes shall lowly bend beneath thy feet. 

The siege and capture of Karur. the Cera capital, was. 
doubtless, the greatest military achievement of this king, and 
has called forth a number of poems. Thus Alattur Kilar made 
an effort to divert the king’s attention from his enterprise and 
save Karur from destruction, by gently reproaching him with 
pitting himself against a foe unworthy of his mettle 55 : — 
Whether thou wilt destroy or wilt release, 

’Tis thine to ponder which befits thy name! — 

The axe, bright-edged, long-handled, sharp by file 
Of smith black-handed, smites the fragrant boughs 



42 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


They era.-dting tall and scatter the white sands 
Of An-por with can's river cool, where sport 
The damsels with their golden bracelets gay: 

Thro’ town, and all the guarded hall are echoes heard. 
And yet their king in pleasure slumbers on! 

With bow-armed host, thy war-clrum sounding loud. 
'Twill shame thee to have fought such feeble foes. 

'The intercession was unsuccessful; the fair city fell": and a 
poetess, Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar. gave expression to her 
grief as follows: 36 

Thou scion of the Cola Lord who saved 

The dove from woe. — Chief of the wrathful hosts, 

Aimed with the gleaming darts that work havoc, 

As when a fiery dragon , angry, fierce, — 

Bearing five heads, with gleaming poisonous looth. 

Has enter’d the vast mountain-cavern, where 
The golden creepers twine; — and from the sky 
Fire issues forth and loudest thunderbolt; — 

Thou saw’st the loidly city old, whose king 
Wa.- circled round by girded elephants. 

There in dark deep moat alligators congregate 

In the wide waters nf the guarded lake 

Are crocodiles that fierce in fight 

Dart forth to catch Ihe shadows cast 

By gleam >>f watchman's torch at midnight hour. 

Its walls like burnish’d copper shone. 

This seemed not fair to thine eyes; for thou didst 
Work destruction mightily glorious king! 

‘The delicate lvric warning against arrogance’ addressed to the 
proud conqueror bv Mulam-kilar of Avur must have been 
composed soon after the capitulation of Karuvur: 37 

'Thou art the mighty one. who sparing not the guard- 
ed fort broke thro' and slew its king and made the yellow 
gold, erewhile his crown, anklets to grace. O! hero! tin- 
conquering foot. 

Thy land is ‘-o fertile that a tiny piece thereof where 
a -he-elephaiu might rest can nourish seven lordlv ele- 
phants. 



HALL OF JUSTICE 


43 


That we may ever see, as now, the necks of thy tra- 
ducers bend, and those who laud thee raise their heads, 
be thou, great king! pleasant of speech, and easy of access.' 

Kovur-Kilar also described this event at some length in 
a poem that has not been preserved in its entirety. 58 

The poems of the Purananuru are silent on the relations 
between Killivalavan and his southern neighbour the Pandya; 
but a poem of Nakkirar 5y m the Ahana.nv.ru makes pointed 
reference to a defeat sustained by the forces of a Killivalavan 
under the walls of Madura at the hands of the Pandye com- 
mander-in-chief, Palaiyan Maran. In the absence of any indi- 
cation to the contrary, we may assume that the king whose 
defeat is alluded 10 by Nakklrar was the one that died m 
Kulamunam. 1 ' 0 Killivalu\an evidently waged war in another 
direction against th? Malaiyaman chieftain of Maladu, a 
district on the banks of the Pennar which had Tirukkoyilur 
for its centre. Though vv cannot be quite certain of it. the 
Malaiyaman again-' whom this expedition was directed '-eem- 
to have been Malri m m Tirumudik-km-i who is celebrated 
in several poems of the Fur am by Kapilar and Marokkattu 
Nappaitdaiyjr lor the liberal patronage he extended to the 
minstrels, a trad which is emphasised also by Kovur-Kilar in 
the following poem by which he succeeded in releasing the 
children of the Malaiyaman from a cruel death to which the 
victorious Cola monarch had condemned them: 61 

"Thou art of the royal Lne of him who saved the 
dove from affliction and many another sufferer; 

These are children of the race that, in their concern 
for the learned, share their food with them and save them 
from want, and under whose fostering care men lead 
happy lives; 

See these little innocents, how first they stood fear- 
ing the sight of thine elephants: then, forgetting that, 
were daunted by the aspect of thy hall, and now stand 
trembling with troubles ever new! 

Hear me, and then follow the promptings of <hin>- 
own desire!’ 



44 EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

A panegyric by Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar applauds in equal 
measure and with much art the generosity, justice and hero- 
ism of this king. 62 

‘Descendant of him who to save a dove from grief 
entered the balance whose beam was tipped with the 
carved white tusk of the heavy-footed elephant! Giving 
in grace was bom with thee, and is not thy peculiar 
praise. 

And, when one ponders how thy sires of old destroyed 
the mighty fort suspended in the sky which foes dreaded 
to approach, — to slay thy foes is not thy peculiar praise! 

And since the council of Uraiyur, impregnable city 
of the valiant Solar, is the home of Equity, — Justice is 
not thy peculiar praise! 

O Valavan, swift horseman, whose stout arms are 
like fortress-bars, whose wreath attracts every eye, how 
then shall I sing thy praises? 

How shall I tell of thy glorious prowess that withered 
the fadeless Vahji, destroying the Ceran king with his 
mighty chariot cunningly wrought, who planted his 
guarded bow-banner on the immeasurably lofty gold- 
tipped peaks of Himalaya.' 

Two short odes on the death of the king, though they 
reveal nothing of the identity of Kulamurram where he died 
or of the circumstances attending his death, are noteworthy 
for the quaintness of their conceits. One of them is by the 
gifted poetess, Marokkattu Nappasalak 63 

If in his mind against thee he were wroth. 

Or if in outward act he showed his rage. 

Or if he touched thee with afflictive hand. 

Thou couldst not have escaped, O Death! 

Thou took’st great Valavan, entreating him. 

Like minstrels, bowing low. with suppliant hand. 
Praising, thou didst bear off his life. 

Leader of hosts that crowd the glorious field. 

Crowned with gold wreath, Lord of the mighty car! 



KOPPERUNJOLAN 


45 


The other, by Masattanar of Aduturai, though somewhat 
commonplace, as observed by Dr. Pope, still does not lack 
power : 64 

Death! Right silly art thou, ruthless one: 

Through lack of sense thou eat’st thine own seed-corn! 
Thou yet shalt see the truth of what I say. 

Warriors with gleaming swords, and elephant and horse 
Fell on the battle-plain that flowed with blood; 

Daily he was insatiate, slew his foes, 

And fed thine hunger! Like thyself a strength 
He had that knew no ruth nor vengeance feared. 

This Valavan who wore great golden ornaments. 

Whose flowery garland swarmed with humming bees. 
Since thou hast borne away, — who shall appease thine 
hunger now? 

Another renowned Cola king of the time was Kopperun- 
jolan who also ruled from Uraiyur. Him- 
Kopperunjolan, ge y a p 0 e t 65 he was an intimate friend of 
two poets — Andaiyar of (Irum) Pisir and Pottiyar. Andai 
(owl) sounds more like a nickname than a name proper 66 ; 
but the poet is not known by any other name. He was a native 
of the Pandya country and gave some good counsel 67 to the 
king of that country, Arivudai Nambi. Pottiyar was a native 
of the Cola country and resided at Uraiyur. The intimate 
friendship between these and Kopperunjolan became a classic 
example in later literature 68 like that between Damon and 
Pythias. Andai was a jolly good fellow and his poems ring 
with the true enjoyment of life. Asked once why, though old, 
his hair had not turned grey, he gave the answer : 69 

My years are many, yet my locks not grey: 

You ask the reason why, ’tis simply this 
I have a worthy wife, and children too: 

My servants move obedient to my will: 

My king does me no evil, aye protects: 

To crown the whole, around me dwell good men 
And true, of chastened souls with knowledge filled. 


Here is another poem evincing the attachment felt by him to 
Kopperunjolan. in preference to the king of his native land : 70 



early taM'L literature 


4t> 

If you ask us ‘who is your king? Ou-’ king »s he v.ho 
To the labourers gives strong palm wine strained and 

Lmellou j 

And with the lat oi iurile satni'..> their desire. 

And fills their mouths with lam . revs' rich roast flesh. 
They leave short toil lur feast; .he feast prolong! 

In that good fertile land the ;nms r rels with their kin 
Find our king the fo? of want and hunger’s pangs. 

FT •«- rhe lord Of Ksli. the mirbly CO] a kmc. 

He loves converse with Potti. whose friendship knows 

I no flaw. 71 

All the day long he laughs with he ail right glad! 

A beautiiul poem 72 by Pulls it ur lit irnyanar which depre- 
cme- civil Ante by a fine appeal to the simple pmvnnd e'-.i"- 
Imns oi .lie king is the sole relic left to us ot v. hat was pus-, oh 
a . cnous quairel between K6ppeiuhj6lr.il and his two -ons 
tdy a '•■longe irony of fate. ;his winsome monarch, w !io enga- 
ge:: the ^epe.st ad'ection of two poets for life and in dent ii 
v ; ui'cbio to compose his dirfeionces wuli his -w. u children 
H’ sciosp ■ u'terrnce on suicide is pe- h«.p*. suincient j,r .oi 
d'.-a lie found m W Ins last refuge from the tioubles of life: 7 " 

’!hey ■ bo hav< not ; -sored their minds 

T>y tVc doubl-hte ' pu Ilnd aye endure-. 

S*.j- r.,1 -shell we do good deed- or -hall we 
W'-> huo's an elephant may gain an elephant; 
thf-e liunts quail nun come back w ; lh empty hand 
Therefore if .pen have lof-y aspirations 
Thc\ must t-orry them out in successful det d-, and .-<> gnu. 
Enjoy]. .cnf ol the world beyond the reach of sense 
Should this not ho theirs, in some futu>e bir'h th<-. muv 
fwin i e]p;.-e. 

And if there be no tutuie birth. — ye‘ to found 
Tho-r fame on earth like Himalaya's lofty peak. 

And to puss away with body- unstained by evil. 

Is surely asceticism’s highest gain. 

Two other short poems 71 express the king's eagernes- io n-w t 
Anda* before the end came, a' also his quiet confidence that 
his friend would not fail him. When Anda ; turned up m cm >4 
time and joined the king in his resolve to quit the wicked 
world. Pottiyar evinced 75 great admiration for the nobility of 



POTTJ ON URAIYUF 


47 


• In; king and flu- nisdom of Andai, and die deepest concern 
tor the country which wa- losing a monarch whose groat 
qualities captivated the mind of Andai. though he owed him 
no allegiance. Two short pieces" 5 commemorate the suicide 
of Andai in the king's company. One of t hem records -that 
Andai starved himself to death under the shade of a tree in 
he rivcr-bc-d. When Pot-dyer wanted to follow, the king fui- 
b:*de him asking him to postpone his suicide till after his son 
had been born, 77 and Pottiyar had to go back. In the follow- 
ing hnes the poet gave vent to his feelings as he returned to 
Uraiyur: 78 

The keeper who hrs ln«t the huce <=lephant which he 
[daily supplied 

WTh i’s ample meal, and 'ended [or many a year. 

Is sad a s he surveys the vacant pillar whore it stood. 

And weeps riven so. d'd T no* gHpye when I beheld 

The court ye id in the ancient f ov n where Kill i hved and 

[died: 

Ki 1 ! 5 v.-i‘h wealth of a riots, o'er which waves the 
[conqueror’s wreath? 

When, a lit lie later, he visited the spot of the king's death, 
marked by a '-tone ( nadukal ), lie was greatly moved by the 
recollection of his noble trails. 7tl 

He had the praises manifold of minstrels whose wants he 

[relieved. : 

He \\ as mod loving to the dancers who resorted to his 

[court: 

He wvayed his sceptre in accordance with the teaching 
[of the sages: 

His friendship had the firmness honoured of the wise; 

He was gentle to women, brave in the face of the strong: 

He was the refuge n| the spotless learned ones. 

Such an one death did not spare, but carried off his 
[sweet soul. 

Therefore, my afflicted kinsfolk, let us 

Embracing one another join in reviling death. 

Come, all ye bards, whose words are true! 

He hath become a pillar planted in the wild. 

Crowned with imperishable praise! 

While the wide world in sorrow mourns. 

Such is the lot of him who was our protector! 



48 EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

Perunarkilli must have been a powerful monarch, as he 
is the only one among the Tamil sovereigns 
Pei-unarkilli. 0 £ ^ gangam age who performed the Raja- 
siiya: it is likely that the Cera Mari Venko and the Pandya 
U grapperuvaludi both attended this great inauguration of 
Perunarkilli's rule, and that the fine benediction of Auvaiyar 
in which she includes all the three was, as suggested by 
Kanakasabhai. pronounced on this occasion: 80 

This heavenlike country with its divisions, whether 
it is yours or is owned by others who do not go with you 
but are against you, belongs in truth to the saintly; may 
you, in your lifetime, pour out with water flowers and 
gold into the outstretched hands of the Brahmans; drink 
of the sweet liquor which your servant maids glittering 
with jewels hold before you in golden cups, and in your 
exultation, bestow costly gifts without limit on the needy; 
only the good deeds that you do now will stand by you 
at the time of your death. Ye monarchs! (lords) of the 
white umbrella and the pennoned chariot! Seated to- 
gether, you appear like the three sacred fires which the 
twice-born preserve day and night with ceaseless vigi- 
lance. Only this can I say: may your days be as many 
as the stars in the sky or the rain-drops in heavy 
showers.’ 

Nothing is known of the events of this king’s reign. That 
he had his share of fighting, we may, however, infer from a 
poem which gives a rather conventional description of the 
havoc wrought on enemy countries by his forces, 81 and from 
the colophon to another poem which mentions a fight between 
this king and a Cera Mandaraii-jeral-irumporai. in which the 
chieftain Tervanmalaiyan fought on the side of the C5la king. 
Neither the friend nor the foe 82 of the Cola on this occasion 
could now be ascertained. 


Before giving an account of Koccenganan who was 
doubtless among the latest, if not the last. 
Princes! of the C6 - as menti oned in Sangam literature, 

the minor celebrities of the Cola line may 
be briefly noticed. It is certain that many of them were petty 
princelings, members of the ruling family rather than kings 
themselves. There are two princes of the name Ilanjetcenni, 



MINOR PRINCES 


49 


distinguished by the epithets Neydalanganal and Seruppali- 
yerinda, both of them celebrated by Un-podipasungudaiyar, 
a poet otherwise unknown. The first is said to have distin- 
guished himself by the capture of Famulur, a Cera fortress ; 83 
how he earned the prefix to his name, Neydalanganal, is not 
known. Seruppali, overthrown by the second prince, is also 
only a name. The Cola Mudittalaik-kopperunarkilli (the great 
good Killi, the king with the crowned head) is remembered 
by a single poem of Mudamosiyar (Mosi, the Lame), who 
lived in the part of Uraiyur known as Enicceri. The poem 84 
is a fine piece giving expression to the poet’s grave concern 
for the safety of the Cola who was riding an elephant, which, 
having suddenly turned mad, was carrying him past Karuvur. 
The poet was then in the company of a Cera prince, and ex- 
plained to him what was happening before their eyes. The 
rushing elephant is picturesquely compared to a ship sailing 
on the high sea. 

Perum Tirumavalavan , 85 who died at Kurappalli, was the 
contemporary and ally of the Pandya Peruvaludi who died at 
Velli-yambalam. Karik-kannanar of Kavirip-pum-pattinam 
while applauding their alliance, warns them against evil coun- 
sellors ever intent on dividing them : 86 

‘Thou art the Lord of the Kaviri and its cool waters: 
this king is the lion of the warlike race of Pancavas, who. 
not disheartened by the death of his elders, valiantly pro- 
tects his good subjects, like the long shoots of the shady 
banyan tree, which strike root in the ground and keep 
the tree alive though the parent trunk is withered; and 
who, though young, has speedily scattered his enemies 
like the thunderbolt which smites whole broods of ser- 
pents. Thou art the warrior of Urandai, where virtue 
abides; this king, thinking that paddy and water are 
cheap, has made himself Lord of the mountain sandal 
and the sea pearl together with the thundering drums, 
and rules with mercy Kudal, the seat of Tamil (learning) . 
Majestic like the two gods standing together, one of whom 
is white (in complexion) and holds the palm-flag and the 
other of dark hue carries the wheel, you are now both 
terrible to your enemies. Is there anything pleasanter 
than this? Listen, yet. (to my words). May your fame 
last for ever! May you stand by each other, and if you 



50 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


do not break your friendship, you would not fail to con- 
quer the whole of this sea-girt earth. Therefore, without 
giving heed to the specious words of thoughtless people 
which, though they appear good and wise and in keeping 
wuh ancient tradition, are intended to break the love that 
binds your hearts, may your friendship continue exactly 
as it is to-day! May your lances rise victorious on the 
bloody field of battle! May the lands of your enemies 
bear on the peaks of their mountains the crests of the 
striped tiger and the water carp.’ 

Tiru-mavalavan had the misfortune of being pilloried in song 
by an irate poet who was kept waiting too long for a gift. In 
a song of great power and beauty, 87 the angry bard proudly 
declares that his race has a greater regard for the poverty of 
small discerning chieftains than for the vain pomp of heartless 
monarchs. 

Ver-pahradakkaip-peru-virar (nar)k-killi is the name 
of another Cola prince celebrated ny Paranar and Kalatta- 
laiyar, of the age of Karikala and his father. Three poems 88 
in the Purananuru describe the sad fate of this prince and his 
Cera opponent Kudakko Nedunjeral-Adan, both of whom fell 
on the field of battle. Another prince with a strongly marked 
individuality was Porvaik-k5pperunark-killi who figures in 
half a dozen compositions, three of which are short lyrics com- 
posed by Nakkannai, 89 a lady who appears to have loved this 
erratic prince with a real passion. Sattandaiyar, the poet of 
the remaining three pieces, 90 celebrates the prince’s power as 
a pugilist and his quickness in taking cities. He also suggests 
that no love was lost between him and Tittan, who is said to 
have been his father, and who figures in several poems 91 in 
the anthologies as a celebrated king of TJraiyur. Tittan once 
forced the chieftain Katti and his companion Panan to fall 
back in disorder after a hasty advance on Uraiyur. 92 As this 
incident is recorded by Paranar. Tittan and his eccentric son 
must have preceded Karikala. Tittan had also a daughter 
Aiyai. 92 Solan Nalluruttiran and Nambi Nedunjeliyan are re- 
presented each by a single poem. The former was a poet himself, 
and in fact we have no knowledge of him except as an author. 
A whole section on Mullai. comprising seventeen songs in the 
anthology called Kalittogai. is said to be his work, and in a 



SENGANAN 


51 


short poem in the Purandniirv! di he sings his ideal of a feli- 
citous life: to shun misers and seek the company of strong 
and noble friends. Nambi Nedunjeliyan forms the subject of 
a fine eulogium 93 from Pereyil Mumvalar (the Laughing Man 
of the Big Fortress), a poem, remarkable for its fine array of 
short sentences and its vivid portraits. 

The life of Koccenganan, like that of Karikala, came to 
gather a haze of legend round itself; and it 
Koccenganan. . g necessar y aV oid mixing up facts drawn 
from contemporary sources with the beliefs of later times. A 
song in the Purandniiru . 96 and the forty verses that constitute 
the poem Kalavali by Poygaiyar form the earliest evidence on 
this king’s life. The references to him in the hymns of Tiru- 
nanasambandar and Tirumangai Alvar as well as Sundara- 
murti take us to the next stage in which the emphasis falls 
on the religious side of the king’s life. He figures also in the 
legendary genealogy of the Cola copper-plates of the tenth 
and eleventh centuries though his place in the list is not the 
same in all. 97 It is worth noting that the story which, after the 
manner of the Jataka tales of Buddhism, makes a spider of 
this king in his previous birth is first noticed by Appar and 
repeated by the Tiruvalangadu plates 98 of the reign of Rajendra 
Co’a. The Knlinqattvnmrani and the Vikramasolan-uld more 
or less agree with the copper-plates, but the main stream of 
legend flows through the Andddi of Nambi- Andar-Nambi to 
the Periya Purdnam of Sekkilar, the ocean in which all the 
streams of Saivite legend mingle in the Tamil country. 

The Kalavali 99 is a poem of moderate length, giving a 
somewhat conventional, though occasionally gruesome, des- 
cription of the battle of Kalumalam. near Karuvur in the 
Kongu country, 100 in which 6enganan defeated and made 
captive the Cera king Kanaikksl Irumporai. The poet Poygai, 
a friend of the Cera, placated the Cola conqueror by singing 
of his valour in the battle-field and thereby secured the re- 
lease of the Cera from captivity. The verse in the Purandniiru 
to which reference has already been made purports to have 
been composed by the Cera, while still in captivity in the Cola 
prison at Kudavavirkottam (West Gate Prison) . and forms 
a sad confession of his cowardice in surviving the disgrace 
that had befallen him: 



52 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


Even a babe that dies, and a mole that is born though 
they are not men, are still put to the sword . 101 Can it 
be, that such a race gives birth to one who, subjected to 
misery like a dog held in leash, yet begs for water from 
his unkindly jailors, and drinks it, in his weakness, to 
allay the fire in his stomach? ’ 

The story is that he declined to drink the water he had so 
obtained, and slept away his thirst . 102 Poygai’s successful in- 
tercession must have taken place soon after. So far the evi- 
dence of contemporary literature. There seems to be nothing 
incredible in the situation thus depicted. No deep-seated 
grounds of public policy governed the actions of kings and 
chieftains in those days, and the relations among them were 
more or less personal. Nothing seems more natural in such 
a state of things than for a prince, who fell short of the heroic 
ideal cherished by his age and who pined in captivity, to ob- 
tain his release owing to the intercession of a clever bard who 
made a subtle appeal to the vanity of the victor by celebrating 
his success in very glowing terms . 103 

Though we have no contemporary evidence bearing on 
Kdccenganan’s religious persuasion, there seems to be little 
reason to doubt that Tirumangai and Sambandar represent a 
correct tradition about him in their allusions to his religious 
zeal. And the probable identity of Poygaiyar of the Kalavali 
with the Alvar of the same name strengthens this supposi- 
tion . 101 Tirumangai-Alvar in one of his hymns on Tirunarai- 
yur 105 makes the achievements of Koccenganan and his wor- 
ship at Tirunaraivur the refrain of his song. Here is no room 
for doubting that the Alvar was thinking of the great Cola 
king distinguished for heroism on the field of battle as the 
Saiva devotee who was reputed to have constructed seventy 
beautiful shrines to Siva, besides offering worship to Visnu in 
Tirunaraivur. His pointed mention of the elephant corps of 
Senganan’s enemy, the cavalry of genganan himself and the 
part it played in his wars 106 is an important link which esta- 
blishes a connection with the Kalavali. which in like manner 
states repeatedly that the success of the Cola king against the 
Cera elephants was primarily due to the infantry and cavalry 
in his army. Tirumangai also implies that Senganan’s sway 
extended far outside the Cola country , 107 that he fought at 
Alunda. and Venni. and that he killed in figlu a chieftain 



CHRONOLOGY 


53 


Vilandai Vel. In the hymns of Nanasambandar and Sundara- 
murti the great temples to Siva at Ambar, Vaigal, and Nanni- 
lam are definitely said to have been founded by Senganan. 
The Anbil plates 108 of Sundara Cola state generally 
that Kocceganan built temples to Gaurisa all over the 
country, while the Tiruvalangadu plates, as we have 
seen, hint at the spider story. The Anbil plates give the name 
of Senganan’s son, Nalladikkon. It is not till we get to the 
Periya Puranam that the king gets transformed out of re- 
cognition and figures as the son of Subhadeva and Kamalavati, 
and the founder of Jambukesvara. That Sekkilar’s account 
includes the absurd story of the birth of Senganan being de- 
layed by artificial means in order to ensure its taking place 
at an auspicious moment, is clear proof that we have here a 
highly embellished account of things long since forgotten. 
The name Senganan, his birth in the Cola family and the 
foundation of numerous Siva temples besides the Jambu- 
kesvara are the only elements in Sekkilar’s narration which 
indicate the ultimate identity of the Nayanar. 

Before this straggling notice the early Colas is brought 
to a close, some attempt must be made to 
Chronology. their age a little more precisely than has 

been done up to this point. One thing is clear, that these 
kings are anterior to the earliest time to which we are taken 
by the existing monuments of the historical period. Though 
the names of Uraiyur and Kaverippattinam still survive, noth- 
ing has been discovered yet in these places that furnishes even 
a trace of their former greatness. 109 We are left only with the 
evidence of literature and synchronisms with the history of 
neighbouring lands. When the suggestion was first made that 
Gajabahu, the king of Ceylon, who was the contemporary of 
the Cera Senguttuvan, was no other than Gajabahu I of the 
Mahdvamsa. who ruled from a.d. 113 to 135, Dr. Hultzsch 
entered a caveat, saying: 110 ‘With due respect to Mr. Kuma- 
raswami’s sagacity, I am not prepared to accept this view, 
unless the identity of the two Gajabahus is not only supported 
by the mere identity of name, but proved by internal reasons, 
and until the chronology of the earlier history of Ceylon has 
been subjected to a critical examination.’ Now, the chrono- 
logy of Ceylonese history has been the subject of consider- 
able discussion, and as a result, 111 the dates of the early kings 



54 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


of Ceylon are as well established as can be desired. There 
is only one Gajabahu in the Ceylon list before the twelfth 
century, and he ruled from a.d. 173 to 195. 112 The only 
question, therefore, is whether the synchronism suggested by 
the Silappadikaram between Senguttuvan and Gajabahu is 
to be taken into account, or whether, in view of the romantic 
and the supernatural elements in that poem, this synchro- 
nism must be rejected as untrustworthy. If there were no 
other factors to be considered, our answer to such a 
question must remain inconclusive. But there are several 
important factors which render it difficult, not to say impos- 
sible, for anyone to reject the synchronism, and with it the 
scheme of chronology arising from it. 

There is perfect concord between the Sangam anthologies, 
the notices of South India in classical works of the early centu- 
ries of the Christian era, like the Periplus and Ptolemy’s geo- 
graphy, and the numerous finds of Roman coins of the early 
Roman Empire in several places in Southern India. This 
would lead any unbiassed student to the conclusion that the 
Tamil anthologies were contemporary with the classical 
works and the Roman coins. 113 

Attention has been drawn already to the occurrence, in 
the Mahavamsa account of the early relations between Ceylon 
and the Tamil country, of names of Tamil chieftains which, 
with variations natural in the circumstances, are repeated in 
the poems of the Purananiiru, Pattuppdttu and so on. The 
story of Elara in the Mahavamsa is doubtless the Ceylonese 
version of the Tamil Cola story of the king who condemned 
his son to death for calf-slaughter. The Mahavamsa places 
Elara in the second half of the second century b.c. and the 
other Tamil princes mentioned in the later half of the first. 
If we remember that the early chapters of the Mahavamsa 
were composed in the fifth century a.d. from earlier chroni- 
cles, 114 we shall see that the somewhat confused account of 
the Tamil invasions of the island in this early part of its history 
are not bottomless fabrications, but preserve for us the faded 
memory of real events, and the dates assigned to these events 
cease to be altogether valueless for Tamil chronology. 115 

Again, the dates of the three Devaram hymnists and of 
Tirumangai Alvar have been fixed on proper grounds in the 



MANIMEKALAI 


55 


seventh century and after; Appar, the oldest of them all, 
must have lived in the early part of that century. The most 
superficial student of Tamil literature can hardly fail to notice 
striking differences in vocabulary, diction, and metre between 
the compositions of these holy men and the entire body of 
Sangam literature, which surely indicate a growth through 
some centuries. The fact that Appar knows of Senganan as a 
spider transformed into a Cola king, by showing that Sen- 
ganan had already become a legendary figure, points in the 
same direction; and Senganan was apparently among the 
latest of the early Colas of whom we have spoken in this 
chapter. 

With these considerations before us, it is no longer true 
that one has to depend on the mere identity of the name to 
accept the Gajabahu synchronism. Once that is accepted, it 
follows that, as Senguttuvan and his contemporaries had some 
generations of predecessors and successors, the best working 
hypothesis is to assign the Sangam Age to the first three or 
four centuries of the Christian era. 

Recent discussions centering round the twenty-ninth 
canto of the Manimekalai and its relation 
Manimekalai to Dinnaga’s Nyayapravesa have turned out 
and Dmnaga. to j ess conc lusive than they appeared at 
first. The resemblance between the Nyayapravesa and this 
canto of the Manimekalai is, doubtless, ‘so complete that the 
Nyayapravesa must be supposed to be either inserted in or 
extracted out of the Manimekalai / 116 We may go further and 
assert with some confidence that the Nyayapravesa has been 
inserted in the Manimekalai . 117 But one can hardly fail to 
notice that a different and a simpler exposition of logical 
principles has already been given earlier in the canto , 118 and 
that the exposition of fallacies in accordance with the Nyaya- 
pravesa has come in as a clumsy afterthought, introduced by 
the impossible statement 119 that upanaya and nigamana may 
be subsumed under drstanta. This statement gives, in our 
view, the clue to the real history of the chapter. In its original 
form it contained only the exposition which takes the first 
place in the chapter, was pre-Dinnaga in its content, and stood 
for a syllogism of five members. Some pious student of Din- 
naga, in his anxiety to glorify his master, by giving a render- 
ing of the Nyayaprai'esa to the Tamil world, hit on the idea 



56 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


of putting it into the standard romance of Tamil Buddhism, 
and when he was up against the five-member syllogism in the 
original work, he solved the difficulty in a crude manner and 
annexed to the chapter a discussion of fallacies based on the 
three-member syllogism. This conclusion gains in force from 
a study of the other systems of philosophy, like the Sankhya, 
which are reflected in the Manimekalai in their earlier 
phases . 120 


1. There are still some who do not accept this view. See, how- 
ever, PIC. pp. 16 ff. and Studies, pp. 1-18 and 70-2 

2. This is how the obscure line pirangu-nilai-mddattu-urandai- 
pdkki (1. 285) of the PaWnappdlai has been generally understood by 
modern writers. But under the name of Kakandi (Manimekala i-xxii, 
1. 37) the city seems to have had great celebrity from very early times. 
Cf. n 2 at p. 561 of Pattuppdttu 3 (1931). A nun Soma from this place 
seems to be mentioned in the Barhut inscriptions of the second cen- 
tury b.c. (Luders, No. 817). The Silappadikdrom gives a legend of the 
foundation of Uraiyur (Koli) being due to a cock (koli) winning in 
a fight against an elephant on the spot, x 11. 247-8. 

3. Kanakasabhai’s work The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago 
(1904) remains still invaluable in many respects. But working solely 
upon mss. of works little understood at the time, he succumbed to a 
natural temptation to formulate conclusions on material that had 
not been subjected to any proper criticism. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyan- 
gar Seran-Senguttuvan, (ed. 2, pp. 106-7 n) raises several valid objec- 
tions to Kanakasabhai’s scheme of genealogy of the Ceras and the 
Colas. But the Pandit’s own scheme of Cola genealogy (i bid. p. 103) is 
not altogether free from uncertainties, though it must be admitted that 
it is the best among those put forward so far. That Karikala had two 
sons Manakkilli and Peru-Virar-Killi; that Nedungilli was the brother 
of Narconai, and that these were the children of Manakkilli, and that 
Perunarkkilli of Rajasuyam fame ( Puram 16) was the son of Nedungilli 
and identical with the prince who sought refuge with Malaiyaman 
Tirumudikkari ( Puram 174), that Killi Valavan (of the Manimekalai ) 
and Nalangilli (the foe of Nedungilli) were the sons of Virar-Killi, all 
these statements are based on assumptions which, however plausible, 
seem to lack positive evidence. Again, it appears unlikely that the 
same prince, Irayasuyam-Vetta Perunarkkilli, was aided on the same 
occasion both by Senguttuva and Malaiyaman Tirumudikkari; there is 
nothing in the language of Silapp. xxvii 11. 118-23 and Puram 174 to 
suggest such an identification: on the other hand there is something to 
differentiate the two 

4. Manimekalai: sengadirc-celvan tirukkulam, Padigam I 9 gil 
vii-27: xxix 11. 1-2. 



NOTES 


57 


5. Mani, Padigam, 11. 10-2. 

6. Mani. xxii 11. 25-37. 

7. Puram 39 and the reference quoted thereunder. This recalls the 
Tripura-samhara of 6iva. 

8. Man i. i, 11. 1-9. 

9. Mani xxii 1. 210 and n. It should be observed that this story 
does not occur in the earlier anthologies. 

10. Puram 37 11. 5-6 and n 

11. Ibid 1. 6. 

12. This story is localised at Tiruvarur by the Priyapvrdnam. a 
work of the twelfth century' a.d. 

13. ‘Uruvappahrer.’ Paranar ( Puram 4) and Perungunrur Kilar 
( Puram 266) celebrated him. Line 130 of the Porunar-arruppadai gives 
his relationship with Karikala. 

14. Verse 3, end of Porunar-arruppadai. 

15. Pattinappalai 11. 220-228 and Porunar. 11. 131 ff. — translated 
below. A venba in the Palamoli says that a certain Pidarttalai rendered 
much help to Karikala. 

16. Naccinarkkiniyar explains this by an absurd story. This means, 
apparently, that he did not come of the direct male line of the Colas, a 
fact which may account both for his early troubles and for his father's 
name — Ilaiyon, ‘prince.’ Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Ancient India p. 92 

17. The text has: iru-peru vendarum oru kalat-tavvya (146. Poru- 
>tur). Naccinarkkiniyar takes this to mean that they died (padujiipadu : 
but the Cera, we know, sustained a wound in his back, and committed 
suicide by the process of slow starvation - Vadakkiruttal. on which see 
Puram 65 11. 9-11 and Pandit V. Swaminatha Aiyar's n. thereunder. 
Also Studies p. 20 and n. 

18. Aham 55, 246; also Puram 65, 66. 

19. ‘Val-vadakkirundanan’ ( Puram 65. 1. 11) does not seem to mean 
that the king cut his throat with a sword (P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar 
Tamils p. 336) but that he held a sword while starving, to indicate the 
cause of his action-valodu vadakkirundan (comm.) 

20. I may say once for all that in the translations that follow. I 
have made use of all existing translations — Kanakasabhai. Pope. P. T 
Srinivasa Aiyangar. 

21. A reference to another legendary Cola king. 

22. Aham 125. 

23. 11. 228-73; the following lines 274-82 are translated here. 

24. Aham 141-selkudi nirutta perumbeyark-Karikal. This poem has 
been misunderstood as containing a reference to the Kurumbar. 

25. Kadu konru nadakki kulandottu valam-berukki-i.e. destroy- 
ing forests to extend the inhabited country, and digging tanks to im- 
prove fertility. Pattinappalai 11. 283-4. 

26. ibid 11. 295-9. 

27. Tolkdppiyam. Porul. Aha. 30. 

C. 8 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


b8 


28. Sil. xxi 11. 11 ff. and n. 

29. Puram 224. 

30. Sil: v. 11. 89-110. 

31. Kavera — tanaya — velollanghana — prasamana — pramukha 
— dyanekatisayakarinah * * * * Karikalasya, EL xi — No. 35, 11. 3-5. 

32. ‘He who caused the hanks of the Kaveri to be constructed by 
all the (subordinate) kings led by the Pallava Trinetra whose third eye 
was blinded by his lotus foot.’ 

33. See Studies, essay II, for a full discussion of these points. 

34. Though Nedungilfi figures without any attribute in some colo- 
phons, there is nothing to prevent his being identified with the kina 
who died at the Kariyaru. 

35. Puram 43. 

36. Purandnuru Introdn. pp. 39-40. 

37. xix, 11. 125-7. 

38. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar op. c't pp. 101-2. 

39. Purarn 27. 1. 10. 

40. Puram 31; Kanak. p. 73. 

41. Puram 45; Kansk, p. 73. The palm and the margosa were res- 
pectively the Cera and Pandya emblems. 

42. Puram 73; Kanak. pp. 74-5. 

43. Puram 30 11. 10-12. 

44. ibid 400, 1. 19. 

45. ibid 27, 29. 

46 Col. to Puram 61 where he is called NalangiUi Setcenm 

47. Puram 44. Kanak. pp. 73-4. 

48. Puram 47. Kanakasabhai, 73. 

49. Puram 373. 

50. IA. xxix p. 250 n 2. Dr. Pope says that Kurap-pajli is the same 
as Kulamurram, ‘Pavilion by the tank.’ 

51. Puram 36. 

52. Puram 173. 

53. Puram 69, 1. 12. 

54. IA. xxix pp. 251-2. Puram 35; I have reproduced Pope’s trans- 
lation. 

55. Puram 36. IA. ibid p. 252. 

56. Puram 37; IA. ibid. 

57. Puram 40; IA. ibid, 254 

58. Puram 373. 

59. Aham 345. 

60. This identification was first suggested by Kanakasabhai, p. 76. 
But I am unable to follow him in identifying this king further with- 
(a) Valavankilli who was ‘maittunan’ to the Cera king Senguttuvan. 
and was established on the C61a throne by the latter after suppressing, 
in the battle of Nerivayil, a rebellion in which nine princes of the blood 
royal had taken part (p. 75)- and (hi the Cola king of the Mauimekalai 
and the father of Udayakumaran (p. 77). It is not certain that the 



NOTES 


59 


twin Epics of the Anklet and the Jewel-belt relate to the same period 
of time as the poems of the Purandnuru and the other anthologies, and 
it is not clear how far the incidents mentioned in the epics may be 
treated as historical, and not simply meant to furnish a familiar back- 
ground to a romantic story; there is, above all, a total lack of corres- 
pondence in the facts relating to the different kings whom Kanaka- 
sabhai proposes to identify. The phrase ‘maittuna-valavankilli’ of the 
Silappadikaram (xxvii-1. 1X8) is not the same as ‘Killivalavan,’ and as 
there is nothing in the numerous poems of the Puram to suggest that 
the latter’s succession to the throne was disputed, we must be slow to 
accept the identification in this case. It must also be observed that, 
as Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar, (op. cit. p. 33) points out, the Cola 
contemporary of Senguttavan was according to the Silappadikaram, 
Perungilli, whom Adiyarkkunallar calls Perunarkilli; and the Pandit 
himself identifies him with Rajasuyam-vetta Perunarkilli and this, in 
itself, is really more plausible than the suggestion of Kanakasabhai. 
The absence of all mention of a fight at the Kariyaru or a combination 
of the Pandya and the Cera against Kulamurrattu-tunjiya Killivalavan 
taken along with the positive references to his siege and capture of 
Vanji and his defeat at Madura, all of which are admitted by Kanaka- 
sabhai, is fatal to his other proposition. See also P. T. Srinivasa Aiyan- 
gar History of the Tamils pp. 430-31. 

61. Puram 46; IA. xxix p. 256. 

62. Puram 39; IA. xxix pp. 253-4. 

63. Puram 226; IA. xxix 283. 

64. Puram 227; IA. xxix 284. 

65. Author of Kwrundogai Nos. 20, 53, 129, 147. 

66. The grammarians explain it, however, as Adan tandai (Adan’s 
father) . 

67. Puram 184. 

68. Parimelalagar on Kural 785; and Naccikarkkiniyar on Toi 
Karpu-Su. 52. 

69. Puram 191; IA. xxviii, p. 30. 

70. Puram 212; IA. ibid. 

71. A play on words: potti means ‘hollow’; but there is no hollow- 
ness in this Potti. 

72. Puram 213; IA, ibid. p. 29. 

73. Puram 214; IA. xxviii pp. 29-30 

74. Puram 215, 216. 

75. Puram 217. 

76. Puram 218, 219. 

77. Puram 222. Apparently this means that persons with enceinte 
wives were ineligible for vadakkiruttal. 

78. Puram 220. IA. xxviii p. 32. 

79. Puram 221; IA. ibid. 

80. Puram 367; Kanakasabhai, p. 78. 

81. Puram 16. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar assumes that this poem is 
an account of a war in which the king had to defeat recalcitrant £ola 



60 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


princes before bringing the whole of ihe Sola country under las sway’. 
Tamils p. 432. The other poem mentioned above is Puram 125. 

82. Pandit V. Swaminatha Aiyar has ‘indeed suggested (Aivguru- 
,n-ru- introd. p. 15.) that the Cera enemy was the same as Yanaikkatcey- 
mandaran-jeralirumporai who was defeated and captured by Pandya 
Nedunjeliyan, the victor of Talaiyalanganam. Great as is the weight 
of his authority, I hesitate to follow him here. See. however, Mr. 
K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient Dekkhnn p. 202. 

83. Puram 203 

84. Puram 13 

85. This king was wrongly identified with Karikala by Kanaka- 
sabhai. — See P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamils, p. 367. n. 

86. Puram 58. Kanakasabhsi. 68-9. 

87. Puram 197. 

88. Puram 62. 63, 368. 

89. Puram 83, 84, 85. 

90. Puram 80-2. 

91. Puram 80. 352. 395- Ah am 6. 122. 152 188. 226. 

92. Aham 226. 

93. Aham 6-Paranar. 

94. Puram 190 

95. Puram 239 

96. Puram 74. 

97. See Hultzsch's discussion of this point — S1I. ii. pp. 152-3; 253, 
.377-9. 

98. Appar-Kurukkai v. 4. Tiruppasur- (Tiruttandakam) v. 6. Also 
Sundarar Tiruvaduturai v. 2. Tiruvalangadu plates-v. 43: luna-lutanga- 
bundhah 

99. See 1A. xviii pp. 259-65 for a translation and critique of the 
poem by V. Kanakasabhai. 

100. See Seran Sengutturaa p. 183. Aham 44 seems to give some 
details of the events which preceded the battle 

101. The allusion is to a custom by which kings who died a natural 
death were supposed to secure the vlrasvarga if their corpses were cut 
with u sword before their final disposal; cl. Manimekalai, xxiii, 11. 11-14, 

102. Tvnjiya' in the colophon to this Puram verse must be taken to 
mean ‘slept,’ not ‘died’, as this is the only way in which it can be 
reconciled with the colophon to the KalavalJ. See Studies pp. 14-16. 

103. By understanding ‘Kanaiyan’ in Aham 44 as the abbreviation of 
Kanaikkalirumporai, it is possible to avoid much unnecessary confu- 
sion Contra Pandit Anantarama Aiyar, Kalavali-introdn. pp. 6-7. 

104. It must, however, be noted here that several scholars of repute 
are opposed to the identification of the two Poygais, and Pandit E. V. 
Anantarama Aiyar who is among them proposes to postulate two gen- 
ganans as well (see his edn. of the Kalavali- introdn. p. 9). The debate 
has not been altogether academic, as religion, always an explosive sub- 
ject, seems somehow to have got mixed up in it On the strength of 
data drawn from the Yapparungala-virutti, a work of the tenth cen- 



NOTES 


61 


tury a.d. or the eleventh at the latest. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar 
first proposed the identification of Poygai of Sangam fame with the 
Alvar (The Sen-Tamil Vol. i p. 6: also his Alvarkal Kalanilai 2nd edn. 
pp. 23 ff). The author of the Virutti quotes a number of verses as those 
of Poygaiyar, and some of them are from the first Tiruvandadi of the 
Alvar (see the Virutti pp. 220 where the text seems to be defective, 350 
and 459-60) ; he also counts the poet among the sages whose vision 
comprised eternity (350). Among the verses quoted in the whole work, 
however, there is not one from the Kalavali. And Tirumangai’s pasuram 
is silent about Kalumalam and the Kalavali. But considering that the 
religious hymns of Poygai- Alvar are all, like the Kalavali, in the Venba 
metre, the presumption arises (especially as there seems to be no essen- 
tial difference in style between the two) that they are compositions of 
the same writer. One argument that has been urged against this view 
is worth serious consideration, and that is the argument that a bhakta 
like Poygai-Alvar would not have stooped to the base flattery of an 
earthly monarch; the Alvar himself declares this expressly in his hymns. 
A complete answer to this position is furnished by the fact that some 
of the verses quoted in the Ydpparungala-virutti and ascribed to the 
Alvar are on secular subjects and include the praise of kings. We may 
suppose the Alvar’s statements about his exclusive devotion to Visnu 
to have been made in the later stages of his life when he had found 
his true self. So that, unless we put the late traditions of the Guru- 
paramparai regarding his age against the categorical evidence of Guna- 
sagara, the author of the Yapparungala-virutti, it seems necessary to 
accept the correctness of Pandit Raghava Aiyangar’s position. See, on 
the other side, K. S. Srinivasa Pillai-Tamil Varaldru pp. 176-7, Sen- 
tamilccelvi Vol. ii, article on Poygaiyar by Pandit N. M. Venkatasami 
Nattar, and Kalavali. ed. Pandit Anantarama Aiyar, introduction. Tim 
novel suggestion of Pandit Anantarama Aiyar that Senganan. the Saiva 
nayanar, was different from Koccenganan of the Kalavali is based 
entirely on the silence of the Periyapuranam on the Kalavali. The 
Pandit naively discovers another reason in that, according to him, Sek- 
kilar has marked off the nayanar from the other person by calling the 
former Senganan I! 

105. Periya Tmnnoli VI, 6. 

106. Verse 3 line 3 of the hymn looks almost a copy of the Kalavali 
of course allowing for the difference in metre: Ka vvai-makalirundi 
venni-yerrakalal-inannar manimudimet kakamera; also verse 4, 1. 3. 

107. Ten - Tamilan Vaclapulakkon Solan (5): Tennadan Kudakongaa 
tfolan (6) ; see vv. 4, 6. 9 of the hymn. Also Pandit Raghava Aiyangai 
Alvarkal Kalanilai pp. 157ff. The Vel of Vilandai might have been a 
commander on the Cera side. 

108. Akhila-janapadd-klpta-gaurisa-dhdmd (v. 13), El. xv p. 60. 

109. ARA. 1909-10, pp. 16-17. 

110. SII. ii, p. 378. 

111. See EZ. iii pp. 1-47. 

112. ibid p. 9, No. 43. 



62 


EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


113. Periplvs and Ptolemy have been noticed above p. 28. Sewell's 
discussion of the Roman finds in the South in the JRAS. (1904) is still 
the most comprehensive. See also Ancient India No. 2 pp. 116-21. 
Recent studies of the nature and direction of the foreign trade of the 
Roman Empire tend, as will be seen later, to confirm the soundness 
of our position. 

114. Geiger. Eng. Tr. pp. x-xv. 

115. See Ante pp. 3311. Notice also the names Panaya maraka and 
Pilayamaraka in the Ceylon list recalling Palaiyan Maran of Tamil lite- 

116. Nyayapravesa ed. A. B. Dhruva p. xv. 

117. The grounds for this view may be briefly indicated here. The 
publication of the Sanskrit text of the Nyayapravesa makes the Mani- 
mekalai account much more intelligible than it was when Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar wrote his ‘Manimekalai in its Historical Setting.’ In repro- 
ducing almost word for word the treatment of fallacies in the Nyaya- 
pravesa, the Manimekalai (xxix 11. 111-468) differs from it in some 
remarkable ways. It compresses the N. m parts and expands it some- 
times as in the treatment of Ubhayavyavrtti in Vaidharmya Drstanta- 
bhasa, (two lines and a half of the Sanskrit text being renderd into 
11. 424-49). Again some refinements are introduced by the Tamil author, 
which, though not found in the Nyayapravesa, are clearly suggested by 
it. The instance cited above is a good example of this also: and in dis- 
cussing the example akasavat as an instance of avidyamana-ubhaya- 
siddha-sadharmya-drstantabhasa, the N. explains the example only as 
referring to the asattva-vadi; but the M. (11. 383-4) applies it to the 
sattva-vadi as well. Again there are differences in terminology which 
can only be noted, without criticism, as some at least of them may be 
merely textual errors in the Tamil work: (a) In the enumeration of 
paksabhasas the M. has aprasiddha-sambandha, the ninth category, in 
the place of prasiddhasambandha of the N.; (b) for anyatarasiddha and 
sandighda-siddha of the N. among hetvabhasas, the M. substitutes anya- 
thasiddha and siddhasiddha; (c) for viruddhavyabhicari of the N. we 
have viruddha-vyabhieari in M; (d) in naming dr?tantabhasas where 
the N. has sadhanadharma asiddha etc., the M. gives sadhana-dharma- 
vikala etc. It may be noted that Dharmakirti too uses ‘vikala’ for 
‘asiddha.’ See Jiff, x pt. ii. for a review of the Nyayapravesa (ed. 
Dhruva) by S.S.S. 

118. 11. 45-108. 

119. 11. 109-110. On this Mr. Dhruva remarks: ‘The author of the 

Manimekalai does not perceive that the last two avayavas can never 
be included in the drstdnta as he ignorantly imagines.’ (p. xv) . 

120. Mr. S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, has studied the Sankhya in the 
Manimekalai and proved its early character. Vide Jiff. Vol. viii (1929) 
pt. Hi. See also ix pt Hi for his paper on Buddhist Logic in the Mani- 
mekalai. 



Chapter IV 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE IN THE 
SANGAM AGE 

In the present state of our knowledge it is not possible 
for us to view the political events of the Sangam age as a 
connected whole and study them in their sequence. They 
pass before us in kaleidoscopic confusion, more or less the 
same accidental results of the ambitions and fears, the hopes 
and blunders of kings and chieftains that they must have 
appeared to their contemporaries. We totally miss the 
mutual connection and the perspective in which it is the task 
of history to set the events of the past. What we lack in 
this direction seems, however, to be more than made good 
in another. There is no age without its peculiar background 
of social and cultural ideas and ideals, a kind of communal 
psychology which possesses men’s minds and to a large extent 
supports their institutions and determines their actions. Of 
this psychological background, the literature of the Sangam 
gives us an unusually complete and true picture. 

The most striking feature of the culture of the age is 
its composite quality. It is the unmistak- 
cMture mP ° Site a ^le result of the blend of two originally 
distinct cultures, best described as Tamilian 1 
and Aryan. There is no task more fascinating, and none less 
easy, in the study of the pre-history of Southern India than 
that of disentangling the primitive elements of these dispa- 
rate cultures, the stages by which they mingled and the con- 
sequences of their mixture . 2 Our task is the simpler one of 
studying the resultant culture as it is reflected in the extant 
literature of the Sangam. In the absence of a settled internal 
chronology, and of reliable data bearing on the growth of the 
Tamil language in this period, the relative dates of individual 
poems can hardly be fixed with any confidence. Attempts to 
base inferences on a fifth century date for Karikala. or on 
subjective tests like the assumption that kings began to loom 
large only after Karikala’s time , 3 or the assumption that 
minor chieftains gained power after the eclipse of the three 



64 GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

dynasties in the Kalabhra interregnum, 1 cannot be received 
with too much suspicion. Our course must 
be to treat the entire corpus of the Sangam 
works, (including also the Silappadikaram and the Manime- 
kalai in this description but making more cautious use of 
them than of the other poems), as depicting the culture of 
a definite epoch extending over a period of three centuries; 
and thus to gain some knowledge of the background against 
which must be set the wars and disputes, the friendships and 
jealousies that have been sketched in the last chapter. 

To trace fully the elements of pre-Aryan Tamil culture 
that survived into historical times would 
Blend of cultuies. invQ j ve an ex tensive application of compa- 
rative methods to the literature of the Sangam age. such as 
cannot be undertaken here. These survivals are seen some- 
times to exist by the side of the newer practices: just as the 
electric train and the country cart are both seen in use today, 
so in the Manimekdcii we see the prevalence side by side of 
no fewer than five modes of disposing of the dead which 
included cremation, exposure, and burial with and without 
urns. 5 Other instances show evidence of a conscious effort 
to blend the new with the old, and dovetail into one another 
modes originally distinct and self-contained. It is well-known 
that the earliest Dharmasutras 6 mention eight forms of mar- 
riage as part of the Aryan code ; these eight forms are men- 
tioned in the Sutras of the Tolkappiyam 1 and the Iraiyandr 
Kalaviyal. and much ingenuity is spent m accommodating 
them to Tamil forms. The Tamils had a relatively simple con- 
ception of marriage; they recognised the natural coming 
together of man and woman (ktimakkuttam ) , and the slight 
differences in the manifestation of love, perhaps ultimately 
traceable to differences in the physical conditions of the 
different parts of the country. These they recognised as the 
five tiiiais. They had also names for unilateral love, kaik- 
kilai. and abnormal love — perundinai. Into this scheme the 
eight Aryan forms are squeezed with results not altogether 
happy. 8 The five tinais are treated as varieties of Gandharva, 
and the Asura, Raksasa and Paisaca forms are grouped under 
kaikkilai — courses not very satisfactory in themselves. But 
the attempt to impound the remaining Aryan forms. Brahma. 



VILLAGES 


65 


Prajapatya, Arsa and Daiva under perundinai is even less 
happy, and shows that the synthesis was not easy or natural. 
But the most tangible result of the meeting of the Tamil and 
the Aryan is the tremendous richness and fecundity that was 
imparted to the Tamil idiom thereby, and the rise of a litera- 
ture which combined a good deal of classic grace with verna- 
cular energy and strength. This is the literature of the 
Sangam Age. 

In a few broad sweeps of his pen. the poet of the Pattinap- 
R 1 L'f pdlai 9 conveys to us the general aspect of 

rural life in the ancient Cola country 
studded with numberless small villages. The unfailing 
Kaveri spread its fertilising waters on the wide fields yield- 
ing golden harvests. The white water-lilies growing in wet 
fields withered under wreaths of smoke issuing from hot 
ovens boiling the sweet juice of the dark cane. The buffalo 
crammed its maw with well-grown ears of corn, while its 
young ones slept in the shadow of the tall barns. Cocoanut 
palms and plantains with bunches of fruit, the areca-palm and 
the fragrant turmeric, the mango in its variety and the pal- 
myra with clusters of palm-fruit, the broad based sembu 
(Colocasia antiquorum) . and the tender ginger grew in 
abundance around each village. Bright-faced maidens, wear- 
ing tasteful jewels and innocent looks, keeping watch over 
the paddy drying in the open, flung their curved ear-orna- 
ments of gold at the fowl that came to eat the grain. Little 
children, with anklets on their feet, played about on the 
thresholds of houses, with their toy-carts having three wheels 
and no horses, and shouted out to people to get out of their 
way. Such were the many villages in which lived the rich 
families of the extensive Cola country. The wonderful ferti- 
lity of the soil is a favourite theme with the poets, and 
making all allowance for the license of poets, especially of 
court-poets, one can hardly deny the reality of the substance 
behind such utterances as that of Kovur-Kilar : 10 

Glory be thine, O giver, whose brow knows no sweat 
From labour done, but only that from eager feasting ! 

[ — Like drops of rain 

That fall in the full lake, drips down the fat 
From the meats they serve up; roasted flesh is 



66 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


Carved and eaten; from their emptied porringers they 
Quaff large draughts of milk! — 

Thy fields of rice, — wide are their borders, where 
The sweet cane flowers! Thy pasture lands, — with stalls 
For herds, — there cattle graze! 

Archers with fortified camps guard the flocks, and from 

[tree-tops 

On the wooded shore count the ships that cover thy sea! — 
In the bay they load the abounding salt with which thy 
[craggy mountains teem! 

Avur Mulam-kilar affirms 11 that the small space in which an 
elephant can lie down produced enough to feed seven; another 
poet 12 states that a veil of land produced a round thousand 
kalams of paddy. 

The government of the land was in form a hereditary 
monarchy. Disputed successions and civil 
Monarchy. wars were, as we have seen, not uncommon; 
and if the accounts we possess of the ravages that followed 
a conquest contain any truth, war was not, as so often made 
out, the pleasant diversion of a few professionals which left 
the normal course of life in the country untouched. The 
Sanskritic conception of the state ( rajya ) as an organism with 
seven limbs ( angas ) was known and accepted, and the 
Rural , 13 introducing a slight but significant 
The Polity change, makes the remaining six elements 
subject to the king. In other respects as well, the concepts 
of polity gain a certain clarity and precision in the hands of 
Tiruvalluvar. unknown to their sources. The ten verses 14 in 
which he deals with the essentials of nadu ( rastra ) are far 
more clear-cut in their analysis of the physical basis of the 
life of the state than the corresponding statements in the 
Arthasastras known to us, and the concluding declaration : 15 

‘Though blest in every other way, it avails nothing 
to a nadu if there be no peace between the people and 
the king’ 


shows a firm grasp on the part of the author of the funda- 
mentally moral foundations of political independence. Again, 
the same combination of shrewd practical wisdom and high 
political principle characterises his discussion of the place of 



MONARCHY 


67 


treasure in state life, 1 ® and in this section we have the remark- 
able statement that the king’s treasury is replenished from 
three sources 17 — land-tax, customs and tolls, conquest. And 
in striking contrast to Kautilya’s maxims on pranaya (‘bene- 
volences’) , is the sound rule of Tiruvalluvar : 18 

‘A sceptered king imploring a gift is like a robber 

with lance in hand crying “give” ’ 

It may be noted in passing that a verse in Ahandnuru 19 states 
that the Colas had a strongly guarded treasury at Kumba- 
konam. 

The king was in all essential respects an autocrat, whose 
autocracy was tempered by the maxims of 

Nature of the wise and the occasional intercession of 

Monarchy. 

the minister. The sphere of the state’s acti- 
vity was, however, very limited, and in a society where 
respect for ancestral custom was very deep-rooted, even the 
most perverse of autocrats could not have done much harm; 
and it must be owned that the general impression left on the 
mind by the literature of the age is one of contentment on 
the part of the people who were proud of their kings and 
loyal to them. The great author of the Kural. much of 
whose work is devoted to a systematic treatment of the 
affairs of state, may be accepted as a safe guide to the pre- 
vailing theory of the time; and theory is never so completely 
divorced from practice that we can make no inferences from 
the one regarding the other. No better method can be availed 
of to understand the nature of Tamil monarchy in this period 
than to discuss some of the salient statements of Tiruvalluvar 
on the subject. He warns kings, for instance, against the 
corrupting influence of unlimited power, saying : 20 

The king with none to censure him, bereft of safe- 
guards all 

Though none his ruin work, shall surely ruined fall. 

The possibility of oppression and its consequence to the 
tyrant form the subject of some verses which seem to imply 
that even in the face of intolerable misrule there were no 
formal remedies open to the people: 21 



68 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


His people’s tears of sorrow past endurance, are not they 
sharp instruments, to wear the monarch’s wealth away? 

‘Ah! cruel is our king’ where subjects sadly say, 

His age shall dwindle, swift his joy of life decay. 

The importance attached to espionage would likewise imply 
that the king had little direct means of ascertaining popular 
opinion : 22 

These two: the code renowned, and spies, 

In these let the king confide as eyes. 

And the duty is cast on the minister of even braving the 
anger of a worthless king and speaking out to him when the 
occasion demanded it : 23 

'Though, himself unwise, the king might cast his 
wise words away, it is the duty of the minister to speak 
the very truth.’ 

Lastly, the important place of learned men in the polity of 
the land and the potency of their influence in the country 
and on the court is neatly brought out in the Rural : 24 

Although you hate incur of those whose ploughs are bows, 
Make not the men whose ploughs are words your foes! 

Nothing can furnish more striking evidence of the great 
gulf that separated royalty from common humanity than the 
awe. with which the power of the king for good and for ill 
was contemplated. In theory, he was not merely, nor even 
primarily, the guardian of the people from physical danger, 
internal and external, but he was the custodian of the Uni- 
versal Order. On his right rule rested the penance of the 
sage, the purity of the wife , 25 nay the very course of the 
seasons. The Rural affirms : 26 

The learning and virtue of the sages spring from the 
[sceptre of the King: 

again, 

Where King, who righteous laws regards, the sceptre 
, [wields, 

There fall the showers, there rich abundance crowns the 

[fields. 

Not lance gives kings the victory. 

But sceptre swayed with equity. 



ROYAL PARAPHERNALIA 


The result of misrule then is not rebellion, but famine. 
Some of these ideas, though not in so clear-cut a form, are 
also the common stock of Sanskrit treatises on polity. These 
statements, doubtless, are by no means to be understood 
literally ; they are only meant to emphasise the importance 
and the glory of a just rule: and are part of the armoury of 
maxims and exhortations intended for the guidance of kings 
and for the good of their subjects. But from this mystic con- 
ception of kingship, it is a far cry to the control of the royal 
power by popular representation and the power of the purse. 
The early Sanskritic political thinkers, like some Roman 
Catholic writers of the sixteenth century, justified tyrannicide 
under conditions. Tamil literature does not seem ever to 
sanction resistance to the king’s will. 


The kulns and 
dyams. 


Mention is made in the Silappadikaram and the Mani- 
mekalai of groups called aimperungulu and 
enperayam. Another group of five cate- 
gories of persons is sometimes added to 
these to make up the 1 eighteen kilaippalor ' as the early 
lexicon Divakaram calls them, or the ‘ eighteen surram ' as 
they are more commonly known. There are noticeable 
divergences among the earliest authorities on the content of 
aimperungulu and enperayam : 27 this, taken along with the 
contexts in which these phrases occur outside the lexicons, 
is enough to convince a student of Tamil Literature that these 
various groups are part of the royal paraphernalia which ac- 
companied kings on ceremonial occasions. The Rural knows 
nothing of them. Kanakasabhai . 28 who recognised that the 
■’ enperayam ’ were the eight groups of attendants who contri- 
buted to the ‘ pomp and dignity ’ with which the king was 
surrounded, somehow convinced himself that the ‘ aimper- 
ungulu ’ was of another order, and has made a number of 
statements not one of which is warranted by his sources. 

‘ The council of representatives safeguarded the rights and 
privileges of the people ; the priests directed all religious 
ceremonies ; the physicians attended to all matters affecting 
the health of the king and his subjects : the astrologers fixed 
auspicious times for public ceremonies and predicted im- 
portant events ; the ministers attended to the collection and 
expenditure of the revenue and the administration of justice. 



70 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


Separate places were assigned m the capital town, for each 
of these assemblies, for their meetings and transaction of busi- 
ness. . . . The power of government was entirely vested in the 
king and in the “ Five Great Assemblies.” It is most 
remarkable that this system of government was followed in 
the three kingdoms of the Pandya, Cola and Cera, although 
they were independent of each other. There is reason to 
believe therefore that they followed this system of govern- 
ment which obtained in the country from which the founders 
of the “ three kingdoms ” had originally migrated, namely, the 
Magadha Empire.’ Of this string of astonishing assertions, 
we can only observe that everything in them except the names 
of the groups is pure imagination, and the reader will search 
the texts in vain for support for these statements. What is 
here called 1 the council of representatives ’ is described by 
the vague term ‘ masanam ' which at best may mean ' elders ’. 29 

For the germ of a popular assembly, not organised on any 
scientific basis of representation, but still 
Assembly. virtually representing such public opinion as 

there was, we must turn really to the institution called 
c manram ’ (hall) and ‘ podiyil ’ (common place) in this early 
literature. The two sections on ‘ avai ’ ( sabha ) in the Kural 
are quite general, and some verses in them may raise a doubt 
whether anything more than meetings for purposes of learned 
disputation is contemplated by them ; but the term ‘ avai ’ is 
also applied in other works to the ‘ manram ’ and in the Kural 
itself, the avai is clearly part of the mechanism of politics. 
We may therefore hold with Parimelalagar that these sections 
have reference to the king’s sabha. Frequent as are the 
allusions to the ‘ sabha ’ or ' manram ’ in the works of the 
period, few specific details of its nature and working are 
forthcoming. Its place in the administra- 
, tion of justice, especially in the capital city 

of the king, is well attested. The sons of Malaiyaman were 
tried and sentenced, and later released by the intercession of 
Kovur-Kilar, in the manram of Uraiyur p° and Pottiyar, after 
the death of his friend Kopperunjolan, could not bear the 
sight of the same manram bereft of him. The Porunar- 
arruppadaP 1 makes a pithy statement about adults setting 
aside their feuds while they entered the sabhci. which might 



TAXATION 


71 


mean either that they got their disputes adjudicated or laid 
their private quarrels aside for the discharge of common 
duties. We can infer naturally that the sabhd or manram was 
also availed of by the king for purposes of general consulta- 
tion ; Tiruvalluvar lays stress on the importance of ready 
speech in the assembly by saying that the learning of a man 
who is afraid to speak out in the assembly is like a bright 
sword in the hands of a eunuch on the field of battle . 32 

Even less specialised and more entangled in the social and 
religious complex of village life was the 
' ' * ‘ ' manram of the rural areas. Each village 

had its common place of meeting, generally under the shade 
of a big tree where men, women and children met for all the 
common activities of the village ; there were held the folk 
dances in which the women took part and which were suspend- 
ed in the midst of a war or siege . 33 Lacking evidence on the 
place occupied by the manram in the politics of rural life, we 
may still trace to these primitive folk-gatherings, at least in 
part, the beginnings of the highly developed svstem of village- 
government which came into existence and functioned so 
admirably in later Cola times . 34 

The chief sources of royal revenue appear to have been 
land and trade. The ma and the vili as 
measures of land were already known i 35 
but we have no means of determining precisely the king’s 
share of the produce of agriculture. The peasant was the 
backbone of the country’s prosperity and was held in great 
esteem. The author of the Kural affirms that his was the 
only life worth the name, the life of all the rest being one of 
servitude and sycophancy 36 The importance of foreign trade 
in the period, and the vivid account of the activity of customs 
officials given in the PattinappalaP 1 must go a long way to 
convince us of the high place occupied by customs duties as 
a source of revenue. 

* In the broad street near the sea beach where are 
seen (to grow) white long-petalled clusters of talai 
(Pandanus), officials of established renown guarding the 
property of the good king, collect customs from day to 
day, untiring like the horses yoked to the chariot of the 
hot-raved sun ; yet. without abating, in the manner of 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


showers in the rainy (season) when the water absorbed 
by the clouds is poured on the hill, and the water poured 
on the hill is despatched to the sea, immeasurable quanti- 
ties of various articles are being brought ashore from the 
sea and sent to the sea from land ; in heavy bales, 
precious articles come crowding in endlessly into the 
strongly guarded enclosure, and are sent to the stack 
after being stamped with the (seal of the) mighty and 
fierce tiger.’ 

The prison formed part of the system of administration . 38 

The Cera Kanaikkal-Irumporai was detain- 
Prisons. e d by Senganan in a prison, which, from its 

name Kudavayir-kottam, is sometimes taken to have been in 
Kumbakonam or a smaller place, also near it, now called 
Kodavasal . 39 

An army of well-equipped professional soldiers was 
regularly maintained and no doubt found 
Army ' frequent employment in those bellicose 

times. The captains of the army were distinguished by the 
title of enddi conferred on them in a ceremony of formal 
investiture at which the king presented his chosen commander 
with a ring and other insignia of high military rank . 40 The 
Purandnuru contains two poems 41 on such military leaders 
who served the Cola monarchs ; of these, one gives a very 
clear notion of the ideals cherished by a good soldier in those 
days : 


‘ You, when you see a fight, you rush to the front, 
divide your enemy’s forces, stand before them, and get 
your body scarred by the deep cuts of their swords ; 
thus are you (your fame is) pleasant to the ear, not so 
your body to the eye. As for them (your enemies) , when 
they see you, they turn their backs, and with bodies whole 
and unscarred, they are pleasant to the eye not so (their 
infamy) to the ear. Hence, you are pleasant in one way, 
they in another ; what is there else in which they do not 
equal you ? Yet, what wonder is it, tell us, noble one ! 
that this world cherishes you, O ! Killi, of the fleet steed 
and of the victorious anklet-adorned foot.’ 



WAR 


73 


Even the common soldier when he fell fighting was cherished 
by his compatriots. The spot was usually 
Hero stones. marked by a stone bearing on it the name 
and the fame of the fallen hero. Such hero stones also some- 
times became objects of worship . 42 This custom survived till 
at least the tenth century in the Tamil and Kannada country 
where several inscribed hero stones bearing dates in the ninth 
and tenth centuries and answering to the description given of 
them in Sangam literature have been brought to light. The 
setting up of memorial stones for this and other purposes 
was so common that, at an early date, literary convention 
came to standardise the procedure adopted on such occasions . 43 

Kings often took the field in person and delighted to 
rejoice with the common soldiers in their 
War successes ; on the other hand, if a king was 

killed or even seriously wounded in the midst of the fight, 
his army gave up the struggle and accepted defeat . 44 Yet 
only a warrior’s death was held worthy of kings ; one Cera 
monarch, as we have seen, having been wounded in his back, 
decided to starve himself to death ; another, less heroic, 
mourned his captivity in pitiful terms. It was a common 
practice to lay on a bed of kusa grass the corpses of kings 
who died otherwise than in a fight, and cleave them with a 
sword before burial or cremation in order to ensure for them 
a place in the Valhalla of the Tamils . 43 The vanity of the 
victor often inflicted deep personal humiliations on his 
vanquished foe, the memories of which rankled and brought 
on further strife. The crowns of defeated kings furnished 
the gold for the anklets of the victor . 46 The horse, the 
elephant and war chariot, the sword, lance and bow, and the 
war-drum are among the paraphernalia of war most 
frequently described in the literature of the age. Elephants 
are often said to have carried flags in the battle-field, no 
doubt, the distinctive standards of each side which had, 
besides, other less prominent emblems like flowers and 
garlands of a particular variety. The Kalavali is one of the 
most detailed descriptions we possess of the battle-field in the 
Tamil country, and the poem supplies in a casual way much 
interesting information on military affairs. 4 ' The soldiers. 
C. 10 



74 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


infantry and cavalry alike, wore leather sandals for the pro- 
tection of their feet. 4s The nobles and princes rode on ele- 
phants, and the commanders drove in pennoned chariots. 
Poygaiyar mentions that women who had lost their husbands 
bewailed their loss on the field of Kalumalam ; 49 unless this 
is mere rhetoric, we may suppose that women, at least of 
the higher orders, sometimes accompanied their husbands to 
the field. 

Besides being the head of the government and leader in 
war, the king also held the first rank in 
social life. He patronised poetry and the 
arts, and kept an open house. War and women were, in fact, 
the universal preoccupations of the leisured classes, besides 
wine and song. The king and his enddis with their retinues 
must have formed a gay boisterous crew at the top of society 
with a huge capacity for enjoying the simple pleasures of life 
such as eating and drinking. No occasion was lost for hold- 
ing a feast and the poets are most eloquent 
Feasts. in their praise of the sumptuous fare to 

which they were so often asked. One poet 
declares to his patron : 50 

‘ I came to see you that we may eat together the 
unctuous chops of meat, cooled after boiling and soft like 
the carded cotton of the spinning woman, alternating with 
large pots of toddy.’ 

Another records in grateful detail his exhilarating reception 
at the hands of the great Cola king Karikala : 51 

‘ In his palace, beautiful women decked in fine jewels 
and sweet smiles, often poured out and filled the ever- 
ready goblet of gold with intoxicating liquor, unstinting 
like the rain ; thus drinking my fill, and chasing out my 
fatigue and my great distress, I experienced a new elation. 
* * * In good time, he plied me with the soft boiled 

legs of sheep fed on sweet grass, and hot meat, cooked 
at the points of spits, in large chops which were cooled 
by being turned in the mouth from one side to another ; 
when I said I would have no more of these, he kept me 
on, and gave me to eat sweets made in varied shapes 
and of excellent taste. In this wise, entertained by the 
music of the sweet drum and the well tuned lute of the 



LITERATURE 


75 


bright faced viraliyar, I spent many pleasant days. On 
occasions, he entreated me to eat food prepared from 
rice ; then I ate fine cooked rice which, with unbroken 
edges and erect like fingers, resembled the buds of the 
mullai (flower), together with curries sweetened with 
milk, in such quantity that they filled me up to the neck. 
So I stayed happily with him, and by eating flesh day 
and night, the edges of my teeth became blunt like the 
ploughshare (after) ploughing dry land. Getting no 
time to rest, I began to dislike food ; and one day I said : 
O ! prosperous (king) ! expert in collecting tribute 
from your angry foes, let me go hence, back to my old 
city.’ 

The habit of eating betel leaves after food was well- 
known. Women are said to have given up 
Bete1- eating betel leaves and bathing in cold 

water when their husbands fell in battle . 52 Kovalan’s wife 
Kannaki gave him, after his last meal, betel leaves and areca- 
nuts to eat, before he went out on his fatal mission for the 
sale of the anklet in Madura . 53 

Easily the most cultured among the amusements open 
to the upper classes in those days were 
Literature. poetry, song and dance. The poets were 

men and women drawn from all classes ; they composed 
verses to suit the immediate occasion and were often reward- 
ed very well for their literary exertions. How much we owe 
to these occasional songs, gathered subsequently and arrang- 
ed in ‘ the eight anthologies ’, must be clear from the numer- 
ous examples quoted already. The profits of poetry in this 
age were believed, at any rate by people of later times to 
be absurdly high ; and the author of the Kalingattupparani 
tells us that Kadiyalur Rudrangannanar got for his Pattinap- 
pcilai over a million and a half gold pieces from Karikala . 54 
If legend says true, only a small part of early Tamil poetry 
has come down to us; but what we possess of this literature 
bears evidence of its great qualities. The poems, specially 
the shorter ones, are full of colour and true to life. They 
abound in fine phrases giving compact and eloquent expres- 
sion to the physical and spiritual experiences of the poet. 



76 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


They are generally free from the monotony and the artificia- 
lity that mar much of later Tamil poetry. And they do not 
lack width of range. The short poem, the long ode, the 
dramatic epic and the religious lyric were all known ; and 
in the Rural of Tiruvalluvar we have a work that transcends 
the limitations of time and place. 

Besides these poets, some of whom were resident com- 
panions of kings and chiefs, while others. 

Minstrels the humbler ones, moved from one court 

to another in search of patronage, there were also roving 
bands ol musicians followed by women who danced to the 
accompaniment of music. They were the panar and viraliyar 
who moved about the country in companies carrying with 
them all sorts of quaint musical instruments. They seem to 
have been the representatives of primitive tribal groups 55 who 
preserved the folk-songs and dances of an earlier age. Their 
numbers and their poverty form a frequent theme of the 
poetry of the age, and, from all accounts, they seem to have 
lived from hand to mouth and seldom known where their 
next meal was to be had. Here is a very humorous account 56 
of their experiences after meeting a generous patron : 

‘ The Cola king showered great quantities of wealth 
in (the form of) fine and costly jewels not suited to us ; 
on seeing this, some among the large group of my 
kinsfolk, used (only) to abject poverty, put on their ears 
ornaments meant for the fingers ; others wore on their 
fingers things meant for the ear ; others put on their 
necks jewels meant for the waist ; yet others adorned 
their waists with ornaments properly worn on the neck ; 
in this wise, as on the day when the mighty raksasa 
carried off Sita, the wife of Rama of the swift chariot, 
the great group of red-faced monkeys shone in the fine 
jewels (of Sita) that they discovered on the ground, we 
were the cause of endless laughter ' 

Of the class of poems called arruppadai. in which a poet 
narrates his experiences of a patron and invites others to 
bring themselves to his notice, some are addressed to the 
panar and one of these poems, a relatively short piece, may 
be reproduced here . 57 



MUSIC AND DANCE 


77 


Minstrel, with little lute of sweetest strain ! 

Suppliant with words of ancient wisdom full ! 

Importunate thou askest me to rest and listen to the 
pleasant sounds of thy tambourine. 

But hear what I shall say ! 

The modest home of Pannan, whose hands are full of 
gifts, is near the wide city. 

There food inexhaustible is found like the waters of 
the cool tank under January’s moon, and the humming 
bees explore the sweets of the fragrant water-lily. 

There he meditates the praise and glory of Killi- 
valavan, king of the good land that yields in abundance 
rice and sweet water, and that knows the fire that cooks, 
but not the fire that consumes. 

If thither, — together with thy songstress, whose hair 
diffuses fragrance of the ‘ trumpet-flower,’ the bright- 
browed, sweetly smiling — you softly advance, you shall 
prosper well. 

His gifts are not mere chance, like gold found by 
the woodman in the forest. 

Hesitate not. 

Long may he flourish ! 


That the arts of music and dancing were highly develop- 
ed becomes clear from the celebrated 
dancing ^ third canto, the Arangerrukadai of the 

Silappadikaram which gives a full account 
of the technique of the theatre and the dance, and of the 
music and musical instruments accompanying the dance. If 
we may trust the earliest glossator to whom we have access 
on this highly abstruse section of the Silappadikaram, the 
dancing and music, of which hetaerae like Madhavi were the 
exponents in high society, comprised at least two strains 
which had come together to form a complex scheme. These 
were the desi and vnarga , the former doubtless as its name 
implies the strain indigenous to the country, and the latter 
an exotic Aryan mode. We may also infer the existence of 



78 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


an extensive literature on these arts most of which has been 
lost to us. Eleven scenes 58 from Aryan mythology seem to 
have been selected for standardised presentation and formed 
the classics of the arts. The Manimekalai , 59 like Vatsyayana’s 
Kamasutra, indicates that the nadaka magalir, the hetaerae, 
underwent a regular course of instruction extending over a 
number of years and comprising royal dances, popular dances, 
singing, lute-playing, flute-playing, cookery, perfumery, paint- 
ing, flowerwork and so on. Several varieties of the vlnai 
and ydl are mentioned; it is not easy to understand their exact 
forms now, though it is clear that a high stage of development 
had then been reached in these arts, apparently after a long 
evolution. 


The richer classes dwelt in houses built of brick and 
mortar , 60 of which the walls were often 
Ro uses and covered with painting of divine figures and 
pictures of animal life , 61 and surrounded by 
tastefully laid out pleasure gardens . 62 Such gardens possessed 
shallow wells or tanks with mechanical fittings, artificial 
hillocks, rivulets and waterfalls, bowers of flower plants and 
glass houses, for the amusement of the inmates of the man- 
sions that stood in their midst. Mirrors were also known 
and used . 63 The opening canto of the Silappadikaram gives 
an account of a wedding in high society which, though no 
doubt slightly idealised, may perhaps be 
Marriage. accepted as based upon reality. The bride, 

Kannaki, was twelve years of age; the bridegroom, Kovalan, 
was sixteen. Their marriage was arranged by their parents, 
who were wealthy merchants, and announced to the citizens 
of Puhar by ladies riding on an elephant. 


‘ On the day when the moon was in conjunction 
with Rohini, in a mandapa adorned with pearls and 
flowers and supported on jewelled pillars with flower- 
festooned capitals, underneath an azure canopy, Kovalan, 
led in the Vedic rituals by an aged Brahman (priest) , 
went round the fire in the company of her who rivalled 
Arundhati — blessed are the eyes of those who saw the 
sight.’ 



THE PEOPLE 


79 


The ceremonial over, the women strewed flowers and prayed 
for the life-long happiness of the couple, and the prosperity 
of the Emperor, and then followed the consummation . 64 

Of the life of the common folk, literature furnishes fewer 
details. The Pattinappalai gives a vivid 
The common folk. accoun t D f the life 65 of the Paradavar, the 
deep-sea fishermen of Puhar, including some of their holiday 
amusements. On the wide dune of black sand, the large clan 
of rough working Paradavar were seen eating the cooked 
flesh of the sea-fish and the boiled field-turtle. Wearing 
flowers of the adumbu ( Ipomaea bilboa) and the water-lily, 
they gathered in the spacious manram like the stars and 
planets revolving in the blue sky. The stronger ones among 
them entered the wide arena and, without turning back, they 
fought fierce duels hurting one another with their fists and 
their weapons. Birds flew from the mottled palms, frightened 
by stones shot from slings. In the outer streets, pigs were 
wallowing in puddles with their young ones, together with 
many kinds of fowl, and rams and quails were seen fighting. 
Their huts with low thatched roofs in which were stuck the 
long handles of fishing rods resembled the little enclosures 
round hero stones made of rows of shields and spears. In 
the midst of these huts, fishing nets were drying on sandy 
thresholds, like patches of darkness in bright moonlight. 
Wearing the garlands of the cool white convolvulus growing 
at the foot of the screw pine (with aerial roots) they planted 
a branching jaw-bone of the sword fish and invoked a mighty 
god to dwell in it. Decked in the long-petalled tdl_ai (pan- 
danus) flowers, the big red-haired fishermen drank the toddy 
of the rustling palm in the company of their dark women 
clad in garments of green leaves. Refraining from going 
afishing on the wide blue water, they ate and sported on 
the sandy beach reeking of the smell of fish. Like the ruddy 
cloud embracing the high mountain, like the baby clinging 
to its mother’s breast, the red waters of the Kaviri mingled 
with the clear sea water roaring at its mouth; there, the 
Paradavar washed their sins in the sea and the salt of the 
sea in the water of the river. They played with the crabs 
and, amidst the spreading waves of the sea, made dolls of 
sand and, feasting their senses in other ways, they spent the 



80 GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

whole day in games. In the night, they heard music and 
witnessed the play acted in pillared mansions; lovers, chang- 
ing silks for lighter robes and drinking wine without limit, 
slept on the sands in the last watch of night. 


Puhar or Kavirippumpattinam was one of the few great 
cities of the time, and. being on the sea coast, 
Puhar - was also the great emporium of the kingdom. 

The city, its port and trade are fully described in the poems. 
The author of the Silappadikdram says that the wise consi- 
dered the prosperity of Puhar as stable as the Himalaya and 
the Podiya mountains: 66 again. 


' This celebrated city, full of riches coveted by kings 
and teeming with sailors, is so well stocked that it will 
not fail in its hospitality even if the whole world encircled 
by the roaring sea become its guest; indeed in the hoards 
of (merchandise) brought in ships and carts, (the city) 
resembles a congregation of (all) the alien tracts pro- 
ducing precious goods.’ 

A poet, 67 addressing the Cola king, says that big ships entered 
the port of Puhar without slacking sail, and poured out on 
the beach, inhabited by the common people, precious mer- 
chandise brought from overseas. In the extensive bazaar of 
Puhar, 68 says the author of Pattinappalai. 
Its bazaar. were seen many tall mansions surrounded 
by platforms reached by high ladders. These mansions had 
many apartments and were provided with door-ways, great 
and small, and wide verandahs and corridors. Well-dressed 
damsels glittering in jewels were looking out from the 
windows of the upper floors, and their palms joined in their 
front in salutation to Muruga resembled bunches of sengdndal 
( gloriosa superba ) flowers seen high on the slopes of moun- 
tains. When Muruga was taken out in procession in the 
bazaar, which was done quite often, music and dancing 
parties accompanied him, and the sound of the 
Flags flute, lute and drum mingled with the noises 

in the street In all parts of the town there were flags of 
various kinds and shapes 65 flying in the air; some were flags 
that were worshipped by many as a high divinity, and the 
entrances to their precincts were decorated with flowers. 



TRADERS 


81 


Others were white flags raised on frames supported by posts, 
below which were made offerings of rice and sugar to pre- 
cious boxes of merchandise. Yet others were flags that 
announced the challenge of great and renowned teachers who 
had mastered many sciences . 70 There were also flags waving 
on the masts of ships heaving in the port of Puhar like huge 
elephants chafing at their posts. Yet others, flying over shops 
where fish and flesh were being sliced and fried and whose 
thresholds were strewn with fresh sand and flowers, 
announced the sale of high-class liquor to their numberless 
customers. 

In the same poem which so vividly describes the external 
appearance of the city, there occurs the fol- 
Merchants. lowing idealised description of its merchants 
and traders and their morale : 71 

‘ They shunned murder, and puts aside theft; pleased 
the gods by fire offerings; raised good cows and bulls: 
spread the glory of the Brahmans; gave (their guests) 
sweets to eat and (sometimes) foodstuffs raw; in these 
ways was their kindly life filled with endless good deeds. 
Holding to the golden mean, like the peg of the loving 
farmer’s yoke, they feared the untrue and ever spoke the 
truth; they regarded others’ rights as scrupulously as 
their own; they took nothing more than was due to them 
and never gave less than was due from them; trading 
thus in many articles of merchandise, they enjoyed an 
ancient heritage of prosperity and lived in close proxi- 
mity to one another.’ 

The general plan of the town of Puhar is described in 
considerable detail in canto V of the Silap- 
the^city ™ 3 ° f padikaram. The town built on the northern 
bank of the Kaveri near its mouth com- 
prised two parts, Maruvur-pakkam near the sea and Pat- 
tinap-pakkam to its west. These were separated by a stretch 
of open grcund taken up by a garden of trees under the shade 
of which was held the daily market of the city. Near the 
beach, in Maruvur-pakkam were terraced mansions and 
warehouses with windows shaped like the eyes of the deer. 
C. 11 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


82 

There was the abode of the prosperous yavanas whose 
pleasant features arrested the eyes of spee- 
Maruvur. tators, and of other foreigners who, for the 

gains from their maritime trade, lived close to one another 
on quite friendly terms. Vendors of fragrant pastes and 
powders, of flowers and incense, weavers who worked silk, 
wool or cotton, traders in sandal, agil, coral, pearls, gold and 
precious stones, grain-merchants, washermen, dealers in fish 
and salt, sellers of betel-leaves and spices, butchers, sailors, 
braziers and copper-smiths, carpenters and blacksmiths, 
painters and sculptors (stucco-workers), goldsmiths, tailors 
and cobblers, makers of toys in pith and cloth, and the 
numerous panar who were experts in the music of the lute 
and flute — these and others had their residence in Maruvur- 
pakkam. In the Pattinap-pakkam were the 
Pattinam. broad royal street, the car street and the 

bazaar street. Rich merchants, brahmans, farmers, physi- 
cians, astrologers lived in their respective quarters. ‘ Sur- 
rounding the palace were the houses of charioteers, horse and 
elephant riders and the soldiers who formed the body-guard 
of the king. Bards, minstrels and panegyrists, actors, musi- 
cians and buffoons, chank-cutters and those skilled in making 
flower garlands and strings of pearls, time-keepers whose 
duty it was to cry out the nalilcais or divisions of time, as 
each passed, and other servants of the palace also resided 
within the limits of Pattinap-pakkam .’ 72 

Of the overseas trade of the Cola kingdom in the Sangam 
Age again we get an excellent idea from a 
Foreign trade. f ew jj nes 0 f the Pattinappalai. The city of 
Puhar had a large colony of foreign merchants from different 
parts of the world. 

‘ Like the large crowd gathered in a city of ancient 
renown on a festival day when people from many differ- 
ent places betake themselves to it with their relatives, 
persons from many good countries speaking different 
tongues had left their homes and come to reside (in 
Puhar) on terms of mutual friendship \ 73 

Of the articles of foreign trade we have the following descrip- 
tion from the same source : 74 



CLASSICAL EVIDENCE 


83 


1 Under the guardianship of the gods of enduring 
glory, horses with a noble gait had come by the sea; bag- 
fuls of black pepper had been brought in carts; gems and 
gold born of the northern mountain, the sandal and agil 
from the western mountain, the pearl of the southern sea. 
the coral of the western sea, the products of the Ganges 
(valley) , the yield of the Kaveri, foodstuffs from Ceylon, 
and goods from Kalagam , 75 all these materials, precious 
and bulky alike, were heaped together in the broad 
streets overflowing with their riches.’ 

Of the ports in other parts of the Tamil country we have 
similar descriptions in the literature of the Sangam . 76 Even 
inland cities like Madura had guards of ‘dumb mlecchas’ and 
‘yavanas’ in complete armour keeping watch in the king’s 
palaces. The Perumbanarruppadai P a poem of the same 
period, speaks of tall lighthouses on the coast summoning 
ships to harbour by the night. 

If we compare this evidence with that of the classical 
writers of the early centuries of the 
Classical writers. Christian era, we shall see that the data 
drawn from these two disparate sources work into one another 
so closely that it becomes quite obvious that they relate to 
the same period of history. The author of the Periplus says 
positively that the Roman merchants raised every year 
beautiful maidens for the harems of Indian kings and the 
fact is confirmed by what passes in some dramas of India . 78 
The chart of Peutinger, prepared at a time when the Roman 
Empire was flourishing in all its power, carries on the sheet 
devoted to India, by the side of the names of Tyndis and 
Musiris, the words ‘Temple of Augustus .’ 79 Large quantities 
of Roman coins found in the interior of the Tamil land 80 
attest the extent of trade, the presence of Roman settlers in 
the Tamil country and the periods of the rise, zenith and 
decay of this active commerce. Casual statements made by 
the classical authors and, more decidedly, the evidence of the 
early Chinese annals, prove that along the sea-route from 
the Far-East to the West, India acted as an intermediary for 
many generations. The maritime trade of the Indian ocean 
in the early centuries of the Christian era is in itself a subject 
too vast, and authentic evidence on it is too extensive , 81 for us 



84 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


to attempt anything more than to draw attention to a few of 
its aspects that should interest students of Cola history. 

The feeble beginnings of the trade between the Roman 
Empire and India, confined at first to arti- 

History o± cles of luxury, may be traced to the reign 

overseas trade. ’ 

of Augustus, if not to an earlier time. Trade 

with the East was one of the chief factors that brought about 
the extension and consolidation of the Roman Empire in that 
direction, and the Arabian expedition of Aelius Gallus, 
though not a complete success, secured good harbours in the 
south of Arabia for the Roman traders on their way from 
Egypt to India. In the reign of Augustus, despite the 
‘embassies’ to him from the Pandya country, this commerce 
was by no means extensive or economically important; the 
notices of some contemporary writers, whose imagination was 
struck by such trade, has led modern scholars, on the whole, 
to exaggerate its significance. But it soon assumed new and 
unexpected proportions, and ceased to be the negligible 
branch of Roman trade that it was in the beginning. The 
growth proceeded steadily through the times of the Julii and 
Claudii, and though there was a lively trade by land, the 
maritime commerce of Egypt with Arabia, and through 
Arabia with India, was the most considerable branch of the 
commerce with the East. So long as the trade was confined 
to luxuries and carried on through Arab intermediaries, the 
Romans paid for it mostly in gold and silver, and the oft- 
quoted statement of the elder Pliny that not a year passed 
without the Empire paying out a hundred million sesterces 
(about £ 1,087,500) to India, China and Arabia 82 has, most 
likely, reference to this early phase. After Augustus, the 
trade with India grew naturally in the favourable atmosphere 
of a great Empire. ‘ The discovery of the monsoons by 
Hipparchus of Alexandria in the late Ptolemaic or early 
Roman times, as well as the natural tendency of a growing 
trade to become more than a trade in luxuries and a merely 
passive trade on one side, led to the establishment of a direct 
route by sea between Egypt and India. The main centre of 
traffic was now Alexandria. The Arabian harbours lost their 
importance. . . . The new route was fully established at the 
date of the Peri-plus, that is, under Domitian. The trade with 



OVERSEAS TRADE 


85 


India gradually developed into a regular exchange of goods 
of different kinds between Egypt on the one side and Arabia 
and India on the other. One of the most important articles 
which came from India was cotton , 83 another probably was 
silk. Both of these products were worked up in the factories 
of Alexandria, which sent in exchange glass, metal ware, and 
probably linen .’ 84 Nothing can prove better the increasing 
volume and regularity of the Indian trade of the Roman 
Empire than the contrast between the meagre description of 
the direct trade route to India given by the author of the 
Perivlus and the elaborate precision of Ptolemy’s descriptions 
in the first half of the second century a.d. Ptolemy’s account 
shows that the Roman trade now reached beyond India to 
Indo-C-hina and Sumatra, and that the trade with India and 
China was highly developed and auite regular. Relatively 
few Roman merchants visited the lands of the Far-East 
themselves ; Southern India obviouslv acted as intermediary 
in the trade between China and the West. The carrying trade 
between the Malaya Peninsula and Sumatra in the East and 
the Malabar coast in the West was largely in the hands of 
the Tamils . 85 The direct trade between Rome and Southern 
India declined and died out in the period of military anarchy 
in the Roman Empire of the third century. ‘ Practically no 
coins of the third century have been found in India. Busi- 
ness relations were not resumed till order and a stable gold 
currency had been re-established in the Bvzantine period .’ 86 
and then mostly through intermediaries. 

Of the carrying trade of the Indian ocean and the Arabian 
Share of the •'ea, the Co^s had an important share and 
c ° las - controlled ‘ the largest and most extensive 

Indian shipping ’ of the Coromandel coast . 87 In the harbours 
of the Cola country, says the author of the 
Shipping Periphis. * are ships of the country coasting 

along the shore as far as Damirica : 88 and 
other very large vessels made of single logs bound together, 
called spnciara ; but those which make the voyage to Chryse 
and to the Ganges are called colandia and are very large .’ 89 
Here three kinds of craft are distinguished by the author of 
the Peri-plus — light coasting boats for local traffic, larger ves- 
sels of a more complicated structure and greater carrying 
capacity, and lastly the big ocean-going vessels that made the 



86 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


voyages to Malaya and Sumatra, and the Ganges. Quite 
obviously, the light coasting craft is what the poet Rudran- 
gannanar had in mind when he described rows of roomy boats 
which had returned laden with grain secured in exchange 
for the white salt they had sold and which were seen in the 
back-waters of the port of Puhar tied to rows of pegs and 
looking like so many destriers . 90 The same writer mentions 
elsewhere larger ships which carried flags at their mastheads 
and which he compares to big elephants. Navigation in the 
high seas and the dangers attendant on it in foul weather are 
picturesquely described in the Manimekalai in a forcible simile 
in which the mad progress of Udayakumara in search of 
Manim§kalai 91 is compared to that of a ship caught in a storm 
on the high sea : 

‘ The captain trembling, the tall mast in the centre 
broken at its base, the strong knots unloosed and the rope 
cut asunder by the wind, the hull damaged and the sails 
rent and noisy, like the ship caught in a great storm and 
dashed about in all directions by the surging waves of 
the ocean.’ 

This coincidence of testimony drawn from the early literature 
of the Tamil country and the Peri-plus on the conditions of 
maritime trade in the Indian seas in the early centuries of the 
Christian era is indeed very remarkable in itself. When one 
considers this in the light of other evidence from Indo-China 
and the islands of the archipelago on the permeation of Indian 
influences in those lands from very early times, one can hardly 
fail to be struck by the correctness of the conclusion reached 
by Schoff : 92 ‘The numerous migrations from India into 
Indo-China, both before and after the Christian era, give 
ample ground for the belief that the ports of South India and 
Ceylon were in truth, as the Periplus states, the centre of an 
active trade with the Far-East, employing larger ships, and 
in greater number, than those coming from Egypt.’ We shall 
see that, when after a long eclipse, the power of the Cola 
kings revived in the tenth and eleventh centuries, the sea- 
faring instincts of the people had not deserted them and that, 
in the favourable conditions then obtaining, they attempted 
tasks more venturesome than anything they had achieved in 
the earlier age. 



AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY 


87 


Before turning to a study of the internal trade and in- 
dustry of the Cola country, mention must 
Lamp sac us^ ° f made of a unique example, in the second 

or third century a.d., of the working of 
Indian influence on the art and culture of the Roman Em- 
pire. The wide sway of Greco-Roman influences in India in 
Gandharan art and the art of Amaravati is now generally ad- 
mitted. A silver dish found at Lampsacus, partly inlaid with 
gold and partly enamelled, 93 ‘ furnishes a valuable proof of 
the excellent knowledge which the Romans possessed about 
India and of the interest which they took in that country.' 
The dish figures a ‘ personification of India seated on a pecu- 
liar Indian chair, the legs of which are formed by elephant 
tusks. Her right hand is lifted in the gesture of prayer, in 
her left she holds a bow. Around her are grouped Indian 
animals — a parrot, a guinea hen and two pet monkeys. 
Under her feet are two Indians leading a pet tiger and a pet 
panther, ready to fight, and making the gesture of adora- 
tion.’ 94 It is possible that the animals represented on the dish 
formed the chief objects of trade by the land route from 
India to the Roman Empire. 

Among the industries of the Cola country as of South 
India in general, in this period as always. 
IndStry ltUre ^ chief P lace was held by agriculture. 

The high place of agriculture in the 
national economy and the phenomenal fertility of the soil in 
the basin of the Kaveri are, as we know, clearly reflected in 
the literature of the time. Many agricultural operations were 
done by women especially of the lower classes, the ‘ last 
classes ’ 95 ( kadaisiyar ) as one of the poets of the Purananv.ru 
calls them. There is no clear evidence of the prevalence of 
predial slavery, though it is possible that most of the 
labourers of the ‘ last classes ’ did not differ much from slaves 
in their status. The bulk of the land was owned by 7-ellfilar. 
the agriculturists par excellence, who commanded a high 
social rank. The late commentator Naccinarkkiniyar distin- 
guishes between the rich and the poor vellalas by describing 
them 96 as ‘ those who maintained themselves by causing 
Hand) to be ploughed, and ‘ those who maintained them- 
selves by ploughing (land).’ Of the former he says that 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


besides owning land, they held official posts under the king 
in the civil and military administration, and the titles of Vel 
and Arasu in the Cola and of Kavidi in the Pandya country, 
and enjoyed the jus connubii with royal families. These were 
doubtless the nobles of the land who shared with the king 
the pleasures of war and chase and the table. The poorer 
vellalas did not shun manual labour and for the most part 
worked on their own lands, and not as hired day labourers 
on estates belonging to others. They were in fact the 
peasantry of the country who worked themselves and sought 
the assistance of hired labour as necessity arose. A casual 
simile in the Purananuru 97 which mentions the poor farmer 
who having no income from his fields had to eat up the seed- 
corn, may lead us to infer that drought and failure of crops 
were not altogether unknown. We have no information on 
tenancy-rights or on the taxation of land in this period. 

Spinning and weaving of cotton, and perhaps also of silk, 
had attained a high degree of perfection. Spinning was then, 
as in later times, the by-occupation of women . 98 The weav- 
ing of complex patterns on cloth and silk is often mentioned 
in literature, and we have the authority of the Periplus that 
Uraiyur was a great centre of the trade in fine cotton stuffs. 
The Porunararruppadai mentions 99 cotton cloth, thin like the 
slough of the snake, bearing fine floral designs and so finely 
woven that the eye cannot follow the course of the yarn. 
The same poem alludes elsewhere 100 to silk cloth with its 
threads gathered in small knots at its ends. The Manimekalai 
speaks 101 of artistic patterns of cloth giving evidence of the 
marvellous dexterity of expert weavers. The cotton and silk 
trades, therefore, must have provided occupation to a con- 
siderable part of the population. No detailed or specific 
information is forthcoming on the other trades of which a 
general idea may be gathered from the descriptions of city 
life quoted above. Cots made of leather straps plaited 
apparently on wooden frames are mentioned ; and the leather 
workers came from the low class of the pulaiyas . 102 If the 
mention, in the Manimekalai , 103 of Magadhan artisans. 
Mahratha smiths, blacksmiths from Avanti and Yavana 
carpenters working by the side of Tamil craftsmen is not 
mere rhetoric, we may believe that by the side of foreign 



RELIGION 


89 


merchants from different countries in India and outside, there 
were also some industrial workers who had found more or 
less permanent employment in the Tamil lands by their excep- 
tional skill in particular crafts. Much of 
1 “ l ' ' the internal trade was carried on by barter, 

paddy forming the most commonly accepted medium of ex- 
change. Salt, we have seen, was sold for paddy. We learn 
also 104 that honey and roots were exchanged for fish-oil and 
toddy, the sweet sugar-cane and aval 105 for venison and ar- 
rack. The ladies of the prosperous agriculturist families in 
the Pandya country poured the white paddy from their barns 
into the pots in which the hunter from the forest had brought 
venison, or the shepherdess had fetched curds . 106 Paddy was 
accepted as the most common measure of value in rural eco- 
nomy in the Cola empire of the tenth century and later ; the 
numerous inscriptions of that time furnish unmistakable 
evidence of the subordinate role of coin in the transactions 
of everyday life : the same feature survived until very 
recently in the rural parts of the Tamil country. It may be 
inferred, therefore, that in the early centuries of the Christian 
era paddy was the common measure of value in internal 
trade; and that metallic currency entered only in transactions 
of foreign commerce. It must be noted however that some 
evidence, not quite conclusive, seems to indicate the presence 
at this period in Madura, and only there, of a body of foreign 
colonists who appear to have used regularly small copper 
coins in their day to day transactions . 107 


In no 


Religion ■, 
Mythology. 


sphere is the influence of Aryan ideas on Tamil 
culture in early historical times more evi- 
nd dent than in that of religion and ethics. 
These ideas embodied in a number of 


myths, legends and social practices which form the common 
stock of practically the whole of India, had already become 
an integral part of the civilisation of the Tamils, and the 
Sangam literature affords instances without number of the 


thorough acquaintance of the Tamil poets with the Vedic and 
epic mythology of Sanskrit, and the ethical concepts of the 
Dharmasastras. An exhaustive study of the history of Indian 
Mythology, by tracing the stages through which each single 
legend passes before attaining a final and fixed form which 


C. 12 



90 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


it retains ever after, might lead to results of value to the 
internal chronology of the body of Sangam literature. Even 
otherwise, one can see that poems like the Silappadikdram 
and the Manimekalai which differ from the other poems of 
the Sangam, not only in their great length and their literary 
form, but in the much freer use they make of these northern 
legends and myths, must he accounted to come rather late 
in the period if not after its close. In any case, it seems best 
not to mix up the evidence of the anthologies in these matters 
with that of the Silappadikarayyi and the Manimekalai. but 
keep these apart. 

The burning of the Three Cities ( tripnra ) by Siva, a 
feat often attributed also to a mythical Cola king; Sibi saving 
the dove from the claws of a falcon; perhaps also the exca- 
vation of the eastern ocean by the Sagaras, and the stories 
of the Ramayana and the Mahabhdrata are among the legends 
known to the poets of the anthologies. In the Silappadikdram 
and the Manimekalai we come across a much larger body of 
Aryan myth and legend more freely used by the authors in 
many contexts. The whole cycle of Krsna legends including 
his adventures with shepherdesses, Visvamitra eating dog’s 
flesh, Indra’s misconduct with Ahalya and the curse of Gau- 
tama, the incarnation of Visnu as a dwarf to bring ruin on 
Bali, the demon king 108 — these and other stories are used in 
these epics in so casual a manner that there can be no doubt 
about their common currency in the Tamil land at the time 
they were composed. 

A number of quaint social customs and beliefs, some of 
which may be of a non-Tamil origin, can be 
Some social traced in the literature we have been deal- 
ing with. The practice of speeding the 
parting guest known as saptapadi in Sanskrit, is clearly men- 
tioned in the Porunar-arruppadai , 109 which says that Kari- 
kala accompanied his guest on foot for a distance of ‘seven 
steps’ before requesting him to mount a chariot drawn by 
four milk-white steeds. Each householder laid out some 
food, rice mixed with flesh, every day before his meal, for 
crows to feed on . 110 The slaughter of a cow, the destruction 
of a foetus, the killing of a brahman were counted among the 
most heinous offences, but worse than these was ingratitude, 



FUNERARY CUSTOMS 


91 


according to the established code . 111 Women of the courtesan 
class when they were guilty of unprofessional conduct were 
punished by being compelled to carry seven bricks on their 
heads round the public theatre ( arangu ) and apparently 
expelled from the class thereafter . 112 A bath in the sea at 
Kanyakumari was held to absolve a woman from the sin of 
incest; at any rate it was accepted as an act of penance for 
those who had incurred the sin . 113 After child-birth women 
bathed at night in tanks on the tenth day . 114 The phenomena 
of possession and the evil eye were believed in 115 and care- 
fully guarded against by the hair of children being dressed 
with ghee and white mustard. Divination was practised 116 
and faith in omens was common. The author of the Silap- 
padikdram says picturesquely that coming events were fore- 
shadowed by the throbbing of the left eye of Kannaki and 
the right one of Madavi 117 on the day of the festival of 
Indra. 

There was no single method adopted for the disposal of 

, , the dead, and both cremation and inhuma- 
Disposal of , . 

the dead. tion with or without urns are freely men- 

tioned. And there appears to have prevailed considerable 
latitude in the choice of the method to be followed on each 
particular occasion in the same family . 118 And the Manime- 
kalai mentions the construction of brick tombs of various 
shapes built by the relatives of the dead whether they were 
sages or kings or women who had become Satt . 119 It would 
appear that the shapes of these structures varied with the 
caste and rank of the persons commemorated by them. The 
funeral drum striking terror into the hearts of listeners is 
also mentioned in the same poem . 120 

Sati is frequently mentioned and was fairly common, but 
by no means universal. The celebrated 

' utterance of the queen of Bhuta Pandya 121 

shows that it was more or less the general practice to dis- 
suade women who had lost their husbands from immolating 
themselves and that the practice was by no means encouraged, 
much less enforced. There can be no manner of doubt, 
however, that the heroism and devotion of the Satl were 
applauded by public opinion. The true wife was indeed she 
who, at the death of her husband, entered his burning pyre 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


as if she were entering the cooi water in a tank for bathing . 122 
Still, the more human, though less heroic, ideal that women 
were ordinarily expected to adopt is perhaps best expressed 
in the lines of the Manimekalai , 123 which contrast the daily 
life of the family woman with that of the hetaera by saying 
that the former was under guard in her maidenhood as in her 
married state, and so also when her husband was no more, 
that she controlled her mind and did not meet strangers and 
that she offered worship to no god other than her wedded 
husband. The Rural is silent on Satl. To lead a life of reli- 
gious devotion in widowhood was recognised as proper for 
women of all classes. The Satl then was the exception rather 
than the rule, and we do not hear of a single instance of an 
unwilling woman being forced to it. 

That the ritualism of Brahmanical Hinduism had struck 
root in the Tamil country in this early period 
Brahmanism. mus t have become clear from the references 
already cited to the costly sacrifices performed by the Cola 
monarchs of the time. The regular day to day fire-worship 
of the Brahmans is mentioned by the Manimekalai ; 124 and a 
song of Avur Mulam-kilar in the Purana-nv.ru which eulogises 
the Brahman Vinnandayan of the Kaundinya-gotra who 
lived in Punjarrur in the Cola country gives an idea of the 
high position held in society by prominent Srotriya 
families : 125 

1 O! Scion of the celebrated race of wise men who 
laid low the strength of those that opposed Siva’s ancient 
lore, who saw through the sophistry of the false doc- 
trines, and preferring the truth and shunning error, com- 
pleted the twenty-one ways of Vedic sacrifice ! 126 Worn 
by you on the occasion of the sacrifice, the skin of the 
grass-eating stag of the forest shines over the sacred cord 
on your shoulder. Your wives, suited to your station, 
gentle and of rare virtue, wearing the netlike garment 
laid down in the Sdstra (for such occasions) , sparing of 
speech, with small foreheads, large hips, abundant tresses, 
are carrying out the duties set for them. From the forest 
and from the town, having twice seven pasus in their 
proper places, supplying ghee more freely than water, 
making offerings which numbers cannot reckon and 



RITUALS 


93 


spreading your fame to make the whole world jealous, 
at the rare culmination of the sacrifice your exalted 
station gains a new splendour. May we ever witness it 
so! I, for my part, shall go, eat, drink, ride and enjoy 
myself in my village by the cool Kaviri, which gets its 
flowery freshes when the thunder cloud roars on the 
golden peaks of the Western mountains; may you, for 
your part, stand thus stable without change, like the tall 
Himalaya which towers above the clouds and whose sides 
are covered with bamboos.’ 

This ode shows not only the dominance of Vedic ritualism, 
but contains an allusion to disputes between the followers of 
the Veda and other religionists, the latter being stigmatised 
as followers of false doctrines and sophists who make the 
false appear true. What these other religions were can only 
be guessed; most likely they were Buddhism and Jainism 
which had a vogue in the Tamil country from very early 
times. The ceremony of upanayana is clearly known to the 
Manimekalai which mentions Brahmans who began the study 
of the Veda soon after they were invested with the sacred 
cord . 127 The twice-born are mentioned in the Puram. 12& Even 
in the houses of merchants marriages were, as has been seen, 
performed according to Vedic ritual. The Tolkappiyam defines 
karpu in a manner which implies that, in one important res- 
pect, the distinction between kalavu and karpu was based on 
the difference between the indigenous Tamil form of marriage 
and the exotic Aryan form which had been superposed on it: 

‘Karpu is that (form) in which a bridegroom from 
a family fit to accept accepts a bride given by persons 
of a family fit to give her and takes her to wife with the 
(proper) ritual .’ 129 

We learn further that the rites of marriage might be per- 
formed even when there happened to be no one to dispose 
of the marriageable girl, and that the rites primarily meant 
for the three higher classes, might also be adopted on occa- 
sions by the lower . 130 We are told, in fine, that these rituals 
were ordained by the sages ( aiyar ) after falsehood and sin 
had made their appearance . 131 This last statement distinctly 
recalls the legends of the origin of human marriage current 
among Sanskrit writers and detailed fully in the Mahabha- 



94 GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

rata. As has been rightly pointed out, 132 such ‘myths are 

interesting but of no scientific value When men meditated 

upon the marriage ceremonial and system, they would natu- 
rally infer a time when there was not only no rite, but no 
institution of marriage.’ 

From all accounts, Hinduism was the dominant religion 
in the Tamil country in this period. Within 
The Pantheon. itg spac fo us fold we re worshipped all the 
gods of an extensive and eclectic pantheon ranging from the 
Great God with an eye on his forehead to the little demon 
( bhutarn ) of the cross-roads. 133 Four divinities seem to have 
occupied a more distinguished position than the rest, 134 and 
they were Siva who is often placed at the head of the pantheon. 
Balarama and Krsna who are frequently described together, 
and Murugan. apparently the favourite deity of the Tamils. 
The worship of Murugan embodied some indigenous features 
like the velanadal. Indra came in also for special worship 
as on the occasion of the festival held in Puhar in his honour. 
That music and dance were from early times closely inter- 
twined with religious rites is seen from the descriptions in 
the Silappadikaram of the more or less primitive worship of 
Korravai by vettuvar. of Krsna (Kannan) by shepherdesses 
and of Murugan by Kuravas. A temple of Saraswati is men- 
tioned in the Manimekalai, 135 which also alludes to the pre- 
sence of kapalikas . 136 If the author of the Kalavali was the 
same as the Vaisnava saint Poygaiyar who is counted among 
the three earliest alvars, then we shall have to trace to this 
period also the beginnings of the bhakti cult of the Vaisnavas. 
and there is nothing improbable in this. The Manimekalai 
appears to mention even the Visnupurana. 137 


Belief in reincarnation, the effects of karma in succes- 
sive births and the power of Fate was part 

Influence of c f the common basis of all religion in India, 
Buddhism. b 

and this is clearly seen to have been gene- 
rally accepted in the Tamil country also. The practice of 
austerities (tapas) was held to be meritorious and produc- 
tive of great good. 138 The joyous faith in good living that 
breathes through the poems of the Sangam age gradually 
gives place to the pessimistic outlook on life that is, in the 
last resort, traceable to the emphasis laid by Buddhism on 



BUDDHISM 


95 


the sorrows of life and its doctrine that the only way of 
escape was the repression of the will to live. This note of 
sadness, already traceable in Uraiyur Mudukannan Sattanar , 139 
becomes more pronounced in the setting of the Manimekalai 
which contains a round denunciation of the fools who, not 
meditating upon the ruthlessness of Death, spend their time 
in the blind enjoyment of carnal pleasures . 140 In all im- 
portant centres in the Tamil country there were Jaina tem- 
ples and Buddhist caityas and monasteries in which Buddhist 
and Jaina monks lived and preached their tenets to those who 
cared to listen . 141 Aravanavadigal, the celebrated Buddhist 
monk, whom the Manimekalai connects successively with 
Puhar, Vanji, and KancI, even though he may not be a histori- 
cal figure , 143 may well be looked upon as a type familiar to 
town-dwellers in those times. We have no means whatever 
of estimating with any certainty the numbers professing these 
religions or the extent of their influence in society. 


1. The old term Dravidian, now fallen into much contempt with 
some writers, does not mean anything essentially different. Inferences 
from language or culture to race are of course not warranted. 

2. Much recent writing on this subject makes one reflect on the 
justice of the remark made in another context by Wingfield-Stratford: 
‘This is a field that has hitherto been largely left to free lances, and 
it is perhaps a pity that a closer liaison has not been maintained between 
orthodox historians, and imaginative pioneers, the boldness of whose 
conclusion is apt to take one’s breath away, and demands from the 
reader exercise of the critical faculty not always apparent in the author. 
The argument from words, of which the free lance is so glibly prolific, 
is one that ought to be used with the utmost caution, considering how 
easy it is, with a little ingenuity, to make out a philological case for 
the wildest absurdity.’ (The History of British Civilisation, i. p. 14). 

3. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamils p. 485; surely there were heroes 
before Agamemnon! . 

4. ibid p. 537. 

5. vi. 11. 66-7. 

6. E.g., Gautama iv. 6 ff. (Mysore edn.). 

7. Maraiyor-te-ettii-manral ettanul. Su 92 in Porul; Iraiyavar. 
Su. 1. 

8. Tolkappiyam Porul. 104-6. 

9. 11. 1—28. 

10. Puram 368, 1A. xxix pp. 282-3. 

11. Puram 40, 11. 10-11. 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


12. Porunar-arruppadax. 11. 245-6. 

13. No. 381. 

14. Nos. 731-40. 

15. No. 740. 

16. Nos. 751-60. 

17. No. 756 Farimelalagar has taken uruporul to mean escheat and 
treasure-trove; but see Divakaram, sec. 9. 

18. No. 552. 

18. No. 60, 11. 13-5 — Korrac-colar kudandai vaitta nadu tarn n:di- 
t/< }* unjeriya-varun-gadi. 

20. No. 448, Pope's translation. 

21. Nos. 555, 564. 

22. No. 581. 

23. No. 638. 

24. No. 872. 

25. Mani. xxii 1. 2C8. 

26. Nos. 543; 545—6. cf. also Mam—v ii 11. 8 ff. 

27. See PK. pp. 32-3. 

28. The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago. pp. 109-10. 

29. As may be expected, scholars who are not in a position to 

control Kanakasabhai's statements by going to his sources have bean 
much intrigued by them. In his thoughtful work on Corporate Life in 
A.ncient India, for instance, R. C. Majumdar takes a big leap forward 
from the point to which Kanakasabhai had taken him, and affirms: 
It appears to me that the so called Five Assemblies were really the 
five committees of a Great Assembly. The writer has traced them to 
the Magadha Empire, but they seem to me rather the modifications of 
the Vedic Samiti which left its reminiscence in every part of India.' 
And these hoary assemblies also by a miracle anticipated the most 
modern developments in political organisation! For Majumdar con- 
tinues: ‘In any case the representative character of these bodies, and 
the effective control which they exercised over the administration is 
clearly established. It is interesting to note also that the ‘ministers’ 
l’crmed one of the assemblies. The assemblies, taken together, may 
mstly be compared with the Privy Council referred to above, the as- 
sembly of the ministers corresponding with the Cabinet composed of a 
selected few.’ (Second Edition pp. 130-1). Aho nirankusatvam 
utpreksayah! 

30. Pit ram 46. 

31. 11. 187-8 — mudiyor-avai-pvku-poludir-ram pakai muransela- 
i am. Here 'mudiyor' is to be taken in contrast with the ‘ilaiyor’ im- 
mediately preceding in the sentence ilaiyor vandal-ayaravum. Nacci- 
narkkiniyar indeed does not do so, and understands ‘mudiyor’ to mean 
old men’, and finds occasion to introduce the legend about Karikala 
putting on a wig of grey hair in order to appear older than the old men 
who came to lay their differences before him. 

32. No 727 

33. Puram. 373. 



NOTES 


97 


34. See Studies pp. 74ff. 

35. Porunar. 11. 180. 246. 

36. No. 1033. 

37. 11. 118-137. 

38. Maui xix 11. 42-3. 

39. See Kalavali-ed. Anantarama Aiyar p. 10. (Introdn.) . 

40. See Naccinarkkiniyar on mdrdyaui-perra-nedumoUydnum ( Tol . 
Porul. Purattinai, Su. 8). 

41. Nos. 167, 394. 

42. Rural 771; Ahatn 131; Puram 306. 1. 4. 

43 Tol Porul Su. 63 (end.) 

44. Puram 62, 1. 13. 

45. Mani. xxiii II. 13 ff and n. 

46. Puram 40. Modern warfare is no stranger to such unchivalrous 
practices. Witness enemy guns cast into memorial shields. 

47. Kanakasabhai has edited and translated the poem. IA. xviii. 
p. 258. An old commentary says that the Kalavali was addressed to 
Vijayalaya. This, if correct, alters the chronological position of the 
poem which contains no clear reference to Senganan. 

48. Kalavali 9. 

49. Verse 29. 

50. Puram 125. 

51. Porunar-arruppadai 11. 84-9; 102-21; see also Puram 34 trans- 
lated by Pope IA. xxix p. 251. 

52. Puram 62 1. 14. 

53. Sil'xvi 1. 55. 

54. v. 185 — The figure given is 1600,000; ‘Pattoddmnurdyiram.’ 

55. Puram 335. 

56. Puram 378. 11. 10-22. 

57. Puram 70; IA. xxix p. 281. 

58. These are detailed in &il. vi 39 ff 

59. Mani ii 11. 18-32. 

60. Puram 378. 

61. Maui, iii, 11. 127 ff. 

62. Maui xix 11. 102 ff. 

63. Mani. xix 90. 

64. See also Aham 86, quoted by P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamils 
pp. 78-80. 

65. 11. 59-117. 

66. i, 11. 14-19. ii, 11. 1 ff. 

67. Puram 30 11. 11-14. 

68. Pattinappalai 11. 142-158. 

69. Ibid. 11. 159-183. 

70. This method of exhibiting one’s learning in public disputations 
is also mentioned in the Manimekalai, i 11. 60-1. It was quite common 
in Europe till modem times; and in India, it is well-known even now 
among pandits. 

71. 11. 199-212. 

C. 13 



98 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


72. The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago. p. 25. The Mam- 
mekalai xxviii 11. 31-67 has a description of Kanclpuram which, ap- 
parently similar to the description of Puhar reproduced above from the 
Silappadikaram, strikes one as too conventional to be accepted as having 
any close relation to facts. The Silappadikaram account is much more 
convincing. 

73. 11. 213-17. 

74. 11. 184-193. 

75. The annotator makes this Kadaram (Kedah) in Malaya. 

76. PK. p. 35. Kanakasabnai op. cit. Chh. ii and iii. 

77. II. 346-50. 

78. Reinaud JA. 1863 i. pp. 301-2, cf. Periplus. sec. 49 

79. Ibid., p. 183. 

80. Thurston Coins, Cat. No. 2. (Madras Museum). Second edition 
1894. Sewell JR AS. 1904; Ancient India. No. 2. 

81. Warmington, The Commerce between the Roman Empire and 
India (Cambridge 1928). 

82. Warmington op. cit. pp. 274 ff. W. thinks that Pliny's 'Seres' 
were the Ceras. But see Hudson, Europe and China (Arnold, 1931) 
pp. 100-2. Roman coins need not actually have reached China. 

83. Periplus Sec. 59. 

84. Rostovtzeff — Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, 
p. 93 (Oxford 1926); cf. Warmington Pt. I, ch. ii. 

85. Warmington op. cit. pp. 128-31. 

86. Rostovtzeff— op. cit. p. 421. Warmington. pp. 139-40. 

87. Warmington, p. 65. 

^88. This means the west coast of India ‘Naura and Tyndis, the 
first markets of Damirica' (Sec. 53). 

89. Section 60 and Schoff’s notes thereon. For a discussion of this 
passage in the Periplus with reference to Indian boat-designs, see 
Hornell, Memoirs of the Asiatir Society of Bengal, vii. pp. 215 ff. He 
suggests that the Colandia of the first century had close kinship with 
the two-masted Javanese outrigger ships of the Boro-Budur sculptures. 
But surely the two-masted ships without outriggers on the An dhr a 
and Kurumbar coins seem to be nearer the vessels mentioned by the 
Periplus than Javanese sculptures of the 8th or 9th century a.d. 

90. Pattinappdlai 11. 29-32. 

91. iv. 11. 29-34. 

, 92. Periplus p. 261. 

93. Rostovtzeff op. cit. p. 126. 

94. See also Warmington op. cit. p. 143 for a slightly different inter- 
pretation. 

95. Puram 61. 1. 1. 

96. Tol. Porul. Ahattmai Su. 30. 

97. No. 230 11. 12-3. 

98. Puram 125, 1. 1. 

99. 11." 82-3. 

100. 1. 155. 



NOTES 


101. iii. 167-8. 

102. Puram 82. 

103. xix" 11. 107-9. 

104. Porunar. 11. 214-17. 

105. Rice-flakes obtained by pounding fried paddy-corn 

106. Puram 33, 11. 1-7. 

107. Sewell JRAS. 1904, pp. 609-15. 

108. Mani xi 11. 84-87, xviii 11. 90 if., xix 11. 51 if. 

109. 11. 165-7. 

110. Porunar. 11. 182-4. 

111. Puram 34, 11. 1-7. 

112. Mani xviii, 11. 33-4 cf. Sil. xiv, 1. 146 

113. Mani v. 37; xiii. 5-7. 

114. ibid vii, 75-76 and n. 

115. ibid vi. 1. 127; iii, 134 

116. ibid xxi, 128-9. 

117. Sil. v, 237-40. 

118. Puram 239. 11. 20-21. 

119. Mani vi. 54-59 

120. ibid. 1. 71. 

121 Puram. 246. 

122. Puram 246 and Mam. ii 11. 42-5; xvi 23 ff.; xviii 11-15. 

123. xviii, 11. 98-102 

124. v, 1. 133. 

125. Puram 166. 

126. i.e., performed the twenty-one varieties of Vedic sacrifices 

127. xiii 11. 23-24. 

128. No. 367, 1, 12. 

129. Tol. Porul. karpu Su. 1. 

130. ibid. Su. 2, 3. 

131. ibid.. Su. 4. 

132. Crawley-The Mystic Rose ii. 259. 

133. Man i. i 11. 54-5. 

134. Sil. v 11. 169-72. xiv 11 7-10 

135. xiii. 1. 106. 

136. vi. 86. 

137. xxvii 1. 98. See PK. pp. 20-21. 

138. Porunar. 11. 91-2 

139 Puram 27; see ante p. 39. 

140. vi 11. 97 ff. 

141. See s. v. Arugan and Puttan in the Indexes to the Silappadika- 
iom and Manimekalai: and Maduraikanji 11. 475-87. 

142. He has been identified on rather insufficient grounds with Dhar- 
mapala, JOR. 1927, pp. 197 ff. 



CHAPTER V 


FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 

The transition from the Sang am age to that in which the 
Pandyas of the line of Kadungon and the 

After the Pallavas of the Simhavisnu line divide for 

Sangam Age. • 

three centuries the Tamil land between 

them is completely hidden from our view. The same darkness 
shrouds the fortunes of the Colas for three centuries more, 
until the accession of Vijayalaya in the second quarter of the 
ninth century. Epigraphy and literature, however, provide a 
few peep-holes through which we obtain glimpses of the inter- 
esting transformations that come over this ancient line of kings 
in this long interval. One thing seems certain, that when the 
power of the Colas fell to a low ebb and that of the Pallavas 
and the Pandyas rose to the north and south of them, the 
scions of this ancient royal line found themselves compelled 
to seek service and patronage under their more successful 
rivals; this is a feature common to several dynasties of Indian 
kings in the days of their tribulation. The Western Calukyas 
in the period of Rastrakuta power, the Eastern Calukyas 
between Rajaraja’s conquest of Vengi and the accession of 
Kulottunga I to the Co]a throne, the Pandyas and the Pallavas 
themselves, besides the Gangas and the Banas after the ex- 
pansion of the Cola power under the successors of Vijayalaya, 
are among the most conspicuous examples of this common 
feature of Indian history. Ancient memories die hard; and 
great dynastic names, though borne for a time in obscurity, 
have often, with a turn in the wheel of fortune, been the 
cause of a renascence of power and glory. It may be doubted 
if, for all their troubles in this period, the Colas ever complete- 
ly lost their hold on Uraiyur. Vijayalaya when he comes into 
prominence rises from the same neighbourhood, and the re- 
motest claimants to C6]a descent in the Telugu country, and 
even further north, glory in the names of Uraiyur and Kaveri; 
contemporary epigraphical evidence may also be cited pointing 
to the same conclusion. The dispersion of 
Dispersion of the Colas in the period of their weakness, 
the Colas. ,, , 

the poor and dispossessed among them going 

out in quest of fortune, is attested by the occurrence of 
names of princes and chieftains claiming Cola connections in 



BUDDHADATTA 


101 


places as far removed from one another as Kodumbalur (Pudu- 
kottah), Siyyali (Shiyali), and Malepadu. The Pandyas of 
Uccangi, the Mauryas of Konkan, the Guttas of Guttal (Bom- 
bay), like the Colas of the Telugu country, are examples of 
what may be styled dynastic drift in Indian History . 1 

The Velvikudi grant of the Pandyas and some Pallava 
charters mention the obscure clan of the 

Kalabhras. Kalabhras who were responsible for much 
political unsettlement in the country, and whose overthrow 
formed the first step in the resuscitation of the power of the 
Pandyas and the Pallavas towards the end of the sixth cen- 
tury. We may assume that the predatory activities of the 
Kalabhras 2 brought the power of the early Colas also to an 
end. The absence of any allusion to this fact in the Cola 
inscriptions and copper-plates of the Vijayalaya line is easily 
accounted for. Unlike the Pandyas and the Pallavas who 
quickly succeeded in wresting from the hands of the Kala- 
bhras what they had lost to them sometime before, the Colas 
were submerged for nearly three centuries under the rising 
tide of the Pandya and Pallava powers. They could not find 
their feet again until these newly risen forces had spent them- 
selves in mutual hostility. In the writings of Buddhadatta 3 
we have singularly interesting evidence on the rule of the 
Kalahbras in the Cola country. The date of 
Buddhadatta. Buddhadatta is, unfortunately, not as cer- 
tain as has sometimes been assumed; the tradition that makes 
him a contemporary of Buddhaghosa is late, and not warrant- 
ed by any statement in the extensive works of either of these 
divines . 4 Buddhadatta might have been the earlier of the two 
to visit Ceylon for studying Buddhism. It is quite certain, 
however, that he lived in the dark period of South Indian 
history after the light of the Sangam literature fails, and be- 
fore a fresh dawn commences with the Pandya and Pallava 
charters mentioned above; and his evidence is all the more 
welcome. At the close of his Abhidhammdvatara, he gives 
a glowing account of Kaveripattana. with its concourse of 
rich merchants, its palaces and pleasure-gardens , 5 and states 
that, in a great monastery built there by Kanhadasa, he lived 
for a time and composed that work at the verv proper request 
of Sumati, evidently one of his pupils. Likewise he informs 
us at the end of his Vinayaviniccaya that he composed that 



102 FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


work for the sake of Buddhaslha, while he was residing in the 
lovely monastery of Venhudasa in a city on the banks of the 
Kaveri, by name Bhutamangalam, 6 described by him as the 
hub of Colarattha. He adds also that this work was begun 
and finished when Accutavikkanta of the 
Accuta Kalabha. K a ] a bhrakula was ruling the earth. 7 This 
Accuta could have been no other than the king of the same 
name who is reputed, in literary tradition, 8 to have kept in 
confinement the three Tamil kings, the Cera, Cola and Pandya. 
Some songs about him are quoted by Amitasagarar, the author 
of the Yappariingalak-karikai, in the tenth century a.d. Pos- 
sibly Accuta was himself a Buddhist. At any rate, by calling 
the Kalabhras a tribe of Kali kings and stating that they up- 
rooted many adhirajar and meddled with brahmadeya rights, 
the Velvikudi grant makes it clear that there was no love lost 
between these interlopers and the people of the lands overrun 
by them. In the colophons to his works, Buddhadatta is called 
an inhabitant of Uragapura which perhaps means that Urai- 
yur was his native place. 

Sometime after Accuta’s rule, how long after we cannot 
Obscurity of the sa F exactly, the Pallavas and the Pandyas 
Colas. established their power after overthrowing 

the Kalabhras; and the Cojas, though they could not recover 
their independent status, continued to lead an obscure exis- 
tence on the banks of the Kaveri. The newly risen powers 
in the north and south seem to have left them alone for the 
most part, though, possibly out of regard for their ancient 
name, they accepted Cola princesses in marriage, and em- 
ployed in their service Cola princes who were willing to ac- 
cept it. 


The Chinese pilgrim Yuan Chwang, who spent several 
months at Amaravatl and Kanclpuram in 
chwang AD - an ^ 640. took the kingdom of Cu- 

li-ya (Colika?) on his way south. The 
bearings recorded in the pilgrim’s itinerary led Cunningham 
to find its modern representative in the Karnul district. 9 A 
number of stone inscriptions from the Cuddapah district 10 
and two interesting copper-plate grants which give the names 
of four generations attest the rule of a dynasty of kings bear- 
ing the Cola name, tracing their descent from Karikala and 
holding sway in this region. The territory ruled by them was 



TELUGU— CODAS 


103 


called Renandu 7,000, and comprised the tract of land lying 
along the Kunderu river in the Cuddapah and Karnul dist- 
ricts. 11 On palaeographical grounds the stone inscriptions 
have been held to be anterior to the 8th century 12 and very 
good reason can be shown for assigning them, together with 
the copper-plates from Malepadu, to the seventh cen- 
tury a.d . 13 The titles borne by these kings show that they had 
rather intimate political connections witl} the Pallavas and 
the Calukyas. It is possible that though they claimed inde- 
pendent status for themselves and for the most part main- 
tained it with success, policy sometimes dictated to them the 
need for acknowledging in some vague manner the supremacy 
of their more powerful neighbours. Their crest, figured in 
the Malepadu plates, represents, not a tiger, but a maned lion 
with its tail twisted in a loop over the back; it resembles that 
of the Visnukundins and the Pallavas, and was possibly Bud- 
dhist in origin. 14 The genealogy of the Renandu Colas given 
in the Malepadu plates is as follows: 15 

Nandivarman (Kasyapa-gotra) 


Simhavisnu Sundarananda Dhananjayavarman 

I 

Cola Maharaja 
Mahendra-vikrama- 
varman, Mudita- 
silaksara, 
Navarama, Lord 
of Cola, Kerala 
and Pandya 
countries 

I 

~ ' | 

Punya-kumara, Pormukharama, 
Mardavacitta, Madanavilasa, etc. 

Of these Dhananjaya is represented by a single stone ins- 
cription 16 in the Cuddapah district. Though several of the 
stone inscriptions mentioned above belong to Cola Maharaja, 
none of them adds anything to our knowledge of the king’s 
reign, and we have no direct means of explaining his titles, 


Gunamudita 



104 FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


among which occurs an ambitious claim to the overlordship of 
the three T amil kingdoms of the South. The title of PrthivI- 
vallabha borne by Punyakumara. and the name of his queen 
Vasanta-Pori-Cola-Mahadevi 17 show his connection with the 
Calukyas. It is difficult to say whether he or his father was 
ruling at the time of Yuan Chwang’s visit; but there can be 
no doubt that this line of rulers had an important role in the 
hostilities between.the Pallavas and Calukyas of this period. 
King Cojamaharajadhiraja Vikramaditya Satyaditya and his 
mother Cola Mahadevi 18 are no doubt other members of the 
same family who do not figure in the genealogy of the Male- 
padu plates. It is to be observed that this king has a higher 
title than the usual Cola Maharaja, his territory including 
Siddhi 1000 (Sidhout country) besides the Renandu 7000. A 
Cola Maharaja Kumarankusa figures as the vijnapti in the 
Velurpalaiyam plates of the sixth year of the Pallava king, 
Nandivarman III. 19 The history of this line cannot be fully 
understood until fresh discoveries are made. But it is already 
clear that they form the link connecting the early Colas of 
the Tamil country and the numerous dynasties of petty chief- 
tains in the Telugu and Karnataka country claiming to have 
been of the Kasyapa Gotra and to have descended from Kari- 
kala and ruled at Uraiyur. 20 


Of the Colas of the Tamil country in this period we know 
even less than we do about the Renandu 
Colas in the Colas: for though there are fugitive refe- 
Tamil land. • , , , , , , 

rences to them in the epigraphs and the lite- 
rature bearing on the age, which show that the Colas lingered 
on the banks of the Kaveri all the time, they tell us little else 
of historical interest. And no epigraphical or architectural 
monuments of this period that can be directly attributed to the 
Colas have yet been discovered. No conclusion can be based 
on the absence of any reference to the Cola kingdom in the 
Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta, as the limits of 
his conquests are now known to have been much narrower 
than they appeared once. 21 The Pallava charters furnish the 
bulk of the epigraphical evidence on the C5las during this 
period, and this is. at times, finely supplemented by the W. 

Calukya and Pandya grants. The Velurpalai- 
Epieraphv. yam p l a t e s describe Buddhavarma of the late 
fourth or early fifth century a.d. as ‘the submarine fire to the 



RELIGIOUS TRADITION ON COLAS 


105 


ocean of the Cola army.’ 22 Again, Simhavisnu (c. a.d. 575-600) 
is stated to have seized the Coja country watered by the 
Kaveri and adorned by groves of areca-palms and rich paddy 
fields. 23 About the same time the Calukyas claim to have con- 
quered the Colas 24 ; either the claim is false, or the Renandu 
Colas are meant. Mahendravarman (c. a.d. 600-630) was 
proud of his sway over the Cola country; and in his inscrip- 
tions the Trichinopoly rock is called the crown of the Cola 
country, 23 and Lord Siva enjoins the king to build a temple 
for him on the rock as otherwise he would miss the sight of 
the rich splendour of the land of the Colas 26 . In a grandiose 
and apparently meaningless enumeration of kings overthrown 
by Narasimhavarman I (c. a.d. 630-660) , the Kuram grant (of 
Paramesvara-varman I) includes the Cola among the coun- 
tries conquered by him. 27 The Aihole inscription of Pulakesin 
II (a.d. 634) states that he confined the power of the Pallavas 
inside the four walls of Kanclpuram and thus brought pros- 
perity to the Cola, Kerala and Pandya. 28 Vikramaditya I, the 
successor of Pulakesin II, also claims conquest of the Cola coun- 
try, and his Gadval plates (a.d. 674) mention his victorious 
camp in the ancient Cola capital Uraiyur on the southern 
bank of the Kaveri. 29 The Velvikudi grant tells us that the 
Pandya king Koccadaiyan Ranadhira (c. a.d. 710-40) assumed 
the title Sembiyan, among others, thereby implying that a part 
of the traditional Cola country passed under his sway. The 
Trichinopoly inscription 30 of Maranjadaiyan calls him the 
tilaka of two races, the lunar and the solar. The Colas are 
counted by the Sinnamanur plates among the allies of the 
Pallavas who sustained a severe defeat near Kumbakonam 
at the hands of Sri Mara SrI-Vallabha (c. a.d. 815-62). 

Religious tradition confirms our general inference that the 
Colas, though they had lost their power, did 

Liteiature. not disappear totally from the banks of the 
Kaveri at this time. The Periya Puranam, a work of the 
twelfth century a.d., contains traditional information of some 
value. It tells us that the Pandya contemporary of Tiru-fJana- 
sambandar had for his queen a Cola princess of the name 
Mangaiyark-karasi. Pugalccola-Nayanar was a Cola ruler of 
Uraiyur who held Karuvur in subjection, conquered an 
Adigan 31 and promoted Saivism. The Puranam also affirms 
that when a petty chieftain of Kalandai, who became, later, 
celebrated as Kurruva-Nayanar, wanted the Brahmans of 
C. 14 



106 FROM THE SAN GAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 

Cidambaram to invest him with the diadem and thus confer 
the dignity of royalty on him in recognition of his extensive 
conquests, they declined to do so on the ground that only the 
ancient family of the Colas was entitled to this high privilege, 
and, to avoid further trouble, migrated to the Cera country 
in a body. The family of another Nayanar, Eyarkon-kalikka- 
man, was living in a village on the banks of the Kaveri, and 
devoting itself to agriculture and military service under the 
Cola monarchs. 32 Lastly, a Cola prince married a Pandyan 
princess and lived at Madura when Sundaramurti visited the 
place in the company of Seraman Perumal. 33 Though Sekki- 
lar, the author of the Periya Puranam, is our main authority 
for these statements, many of them are also found in Nambi 
Andar Nambi’s brief andadi which was the basis of the Pura- 
nam, and the names at least of the kings and chieftains go 
back to the time of Sundaramurti, in the eighth century a.d. 
The Divyasuri-carita and the Guru-parampard tell the same 
tale from the Vaisnava side. Devadevi, the hetaera who capti- 
vated alvar Tondaradippodi for a time, met the holy man first 
when she was returning from the court of the Cola king at 
Uraiyur. The celebrated Uraiyur-nacciyar, who declined to 
marry a mortal, and insisted successfully on her union with 
Lord Ranganatha, was a Cola princess, the daughter of Dhar- 
mavarma of the solar line ruling at Uraiyur. Tirumangai- 
alvar started life as a military official appointed by the Cola 
king. Possibly, some of these literary references to the Colas 
are due to the mere fact that the works in which they occur 
were composed in the days of Cola ascendancy; but the un- 
mistakable references to the Pallava contemporaries of the 
earlier alvdrs and ndyanars in these works are sufficient indi- 
cation that some old and genuine traditions must have sur- 
vived at the time and that a few, though not all, of the allu- 
sions to the Colas culled from these books may be quite trust- 
worthy. 

We see then that in the long historical night that envelops . 
the Colas from the third or fourth to the ninth century a.d.. 
their condition is best described as one of suspended anima- 
tion. They managed, in some manner hidden from view, to 
find a second home for themselves in the Renandu country. 
In their original abode, they bent low before every storm that 
passed over them and bided their time. For aught we know, 
they were occupied in finding suitable matches for their 



COLAS IN ECLIPSE 107 

children, often with a view to political influence, with their 
more successful rivals, and in promoting the religious move- 
ments of the time. Buddhism and Jainism seem to have domi- 
nated the land for a while; Accuta, the Kalabhra king, was a 
Buddhist; and there were adherents of Jainism among the 
Pandya and Pallava rulers; the rich monastery of Negapatam 
with its large Buddha image of solid gold was, according to 
the Guruparampara, looted by Tirumangai-alvar. Buddha- 
datta gives testimony to the construction, at an earlier period, 
of two large monasteries in the Cola country. But, thanks to 
the pious exertions of the alvars and n&yanars, who led a great 
Hindu revival, and gave fervent expression to the cult of 
bhakti in the language of the people, the spread of the protes- 
tant faiths was stopped and the orthodox creeds restored to 
their place of dominance. The Colas, in an unostentatious 
way, assisted the Hindu revival by lending their support im- 
partially to the apostles of Vaisnavism and Saivism. 


1. Venkayya observes: 'It is at present impossible to ascertain how 
these Telugu chiefs came to claim the relationship with Karikala.’ (ARE. 
1900, paragraph 45). Strictly, this is quite true. As I understand the 
matter, however, there was a somewhat live connection between the 
Colas of the Telugu (Renandu) country and the Tamil Colas; the Male- 
padu plates of Punyakumara, I think, form an important link in the 
chain of evidence, and suggest that the Pallava dominion of the Simha- 
visnu line may have been the medium through which the drift of Colas 
to the north took place. The attempts to explain the origin of the Telugu - 
Cddas by supposing that the Telugu country formed part of the empire 
of the early Cola king, Karikala, appear to be so much wasted effort. 
We can hardly treat the legends of the eleventh and twelfth centuries 
as the history of the third or fourth. See Studies pp. 33-6, 61-6. Contra 
Venkayya-ASf. 1905-6. p. 175 n. 8. 

2. See PK. pp. 47-9. 

3. Buddhadatta’s Manuals— Part I (1915) and Part II (1928) -ed. 
A. P. Buddhadatta (Pali Text Society). 

4. Cf. A. P. Buddhadatta’s introduction to Part II of the Manuals; 
contra P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar -Tamils p. 528. He makes nonsense of 
the line ‘ Ayam sumatina sddhu yacitena kato tato * by translating it: 
‘‘ (By me) who am intelligent and good and a beggar, this was composed 
and propounded extensively.” 

5. This fine description may raise a doubt whether the story of the 
destruction of the city by a tidal wave ( Manimekalai xxv 11. 194-204) is 
to be accepted as literally true. 



108 FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


6. The identification of this place with Budalur (P. T. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar op. cit. p. S31) is doubtful: in fact it is a village on the 
Koradachery-Mannargudi road. 

7. Accut Accutavikkante Kalabbhakulavaddhane 
Mahim samanusasante araddho ca samapito j | 

A. P. Buddhadatta adopts the reading Kalambakula, and holds them 
to be Kadambas. 

8. Tamil Naoalar Caritai w. 154-57. 

9. Watters, Vol. ii pp. 225 and 341. 

10. Rangachari-Cd. Nos. 309, 318, 350, 405, 409, 435. 453, 550 and 
also 455, 560. 

11. El. xi p. 343: xxvii p. 268. 

12. ARB. 1905 II, 5-6. 

13. Mad. Chr. Coll. Mag. Jan 1929. pp. 7-18. cf, El, xxvii p, 248; 
contra ibid: p. 271: 

14. El. xi p. 343-4. 

15. El. xi p. 345. 

16. 380 of 1904 (Rangachari-Cd. 435). 

17. 384 of 1904 (Rangachari-Cd 560); 

18. 393 and 400 of 1904 (Rangachari Cd. 453 and 409) . Vikramaditya 
II claims to have conquered the Colas among others. S/I. i p. 146: El. 
v. p. 204. 

19. SI1. ii 509 v. 26. 

20. 231 of 1908 (Baster) El. xi p. 338. Even the Kakatlyas some- 
times connected themselves with Karikala. See also El. v. p. 123, «. 
and Cat. of copper plates (Mad. Mus.) p. 14 for the undated plates of 
Srlkantha. 

21. Much less can anything be made of the silence of the Satava- 
hana inscription recording Gautamiputra’s conquests. Contra Venkayya- 
ASI. 1905-6, p. 176 n. 

22. SII. ii p. 508 1. 14. 

23. ibid. 11. 16-17. 

24. Kielhorn's List of SII. No. 5 (El. vii). 

25. SII. i, 33. 

26. “Vibhutim Colanam katham-aham avekseya vipulam—ibid. 
34. Hultzsch understands by ‘vibhutim Colanam’ ‘the great power of 
the Colas.’ But as it is not a proper description of the position of the 
Colas after their conquest by Simhavisnu, and as such a description is 
hardly likely to be found in a Pallava grant, I take ‘Colanam’ to mean 
the country. 

27. SII. i, p. 151 11. 14-5. 

28. El. vi. p. 6, verses 29-31. 

29. El. x. p. 103. Uragapura is not as Hultzsch thought Negapatam, 
but Uraiyur near Trichinopoly. 

30. ASI. 1903-4 p 275 

31. The dynastic name of the chiefs of Tagadur (Dharmapuri). 



NOTES 


109 


32. The references are easily got in any edition of the Periya Pura- 
nam. See also ASI. 1905-6 pp. 176-7. I cannot discover why Venkayya 
should have included Idangali, a vel chieftain of Konadu (Pudukkottah) 
in his account of the Colas of this period. It must be noted, however, 
that Idangali is said to have been the ancestor of Aditya who covered 
the Cidambaram temple with gold from Kongu. Even if this is a re- 
ference to Aditya I who conquered Kongu and annexed Tondai-nad to 
the Cola kingdom, Idangali might have been connected with the Colas 
only by giving his daughter in marriage to a Cola prince. At any rate, 
we have no evidence that the Colas were descended from the Vels in 
the male line. 

33. Seraman PerumAl-Nayanar Purdnam v. 92. 



Chapter VI 


THE RISE OF VIJAYALAYA. ADITYA I 
(c. a.d. 850-907) 

‘ At the head of the great battle of Sri Purambiya, this 
„ , . hero (Prthivipati I) quickly defeated Vara- 

guna, the Lord of the Pandyas; and having, 
at the expense of his own life, secured that his friend was 
Aparajita (unconquered) in fact as in name, he ascended to 
heaven.’ 1 In these terms the Udayendiram plates of Ganga 
Prthivipati II record the part of his ancestor and namesake 
in the decisive battle which proved to be a turning-point in 
the history of Southern India. For the Pandyas never re- 
covered from this staggering blow, and the Pallavas, though 
victory remained with them in the battle, owed it more to 
their allies than to their own strength. Thoroughly exhausted 
by incessant warfare on two fronts, against the Calukyas and 
Pandyas, they were themselves in no position to pursue the 
advantage gained. Among the allies of the Pallavas were, be- 
sides the Ganga feudatory, the Cola ruler Aditya I who, 
though he must have taken a subordinate place in the battle 
of Sn Purambiyam, very soon discovered his advantage, and 
commanded the strength and energy to pursue it. The latest 
date known for Prthivipati I is a.d. 879; 2 the battle in which 
he lost his life must have taken place about that date. 

Aditya I was the son of Vijayalaya, the first of the Impe- 
rial line of Colas. An inscription from the 
Vijayalaya Trichinopoly district 3 mentions a grant of 
land made in accordance with an earlier charter issued by 
Parakesari Vijayalaya, and this shows that the revival of Cola 
power at this time begins from the neighbourhood of Uraiyur, 
their ancient home on the banks of the Kaveri. The Tiru- 
valangadu plates 4 quaintly affirm that Vijayalaya caught hold 
of Tanjore for his pleasure as if the city 
Tanjore UeSt ° f were his lawful spouse, and that he founded 
a temple to goddess Nisumbhasudim 
(Durga). Hultzsch suggested that some Parakesari inscrip- 
tions from such distant places as Kancipuram and Sucindram 
may be assigned to Vijayalaya; 5 though naturally one may 



DATE OF V1JAYALAYA 


111 


doubt if he became so powerful as to leave stone inscriptions 
over so extensive a territory at such an early stage in the 
rise of the Colas, evidence is increasing that this king was 
really powerful, and in a record of his third year from Vlra- 
colapuram in Tirukoyilur taluq of South Arcot he is clearly 
described as Tanjai-konda parakesari , Parakesari the captor 
of Tanjore 6 . Some of the parakesari records near about Tan- 
jore are unquestionably his. 7 In a record of the fifth year of 
Vikrama Cola from Kilputtur in the North Arcot district, 
there is a specific reference to a stone inscription of the fourth 
year of Vijayalaya. Possibly Vijayalaya. though a vassal of 
the Pallava ruler, still dated records in his own regnal years 
— a privilege exercised by certain vassals at all times and by 
all of them when the power of their suzerain was on the dec- 
line. 

What was the political position of Vijayalaya and from 
whom did he capture Tanjore? In order to 
His political answer these questions, we must try and 
establish the probable date of Vijayalaya’s 
rule. This is easily ascertained by calculating backward?, 
from the accession of Parantaka I, the grandson of Vijayalaya. 
The accession of Parantaka has been fixed by Kielhorn bet- 
ween 15 January and 25 July a.d. 907. 8 

Chronology, date rests on the copious and unim- 

peachable testimony of astronomical data drawn from his 
numberless stone inscriptions, and forms the sheet-anchor of 
Cola chronology in this period. The duration of the reign of 
Parantaka’s father, Aditya I, was at least twenty-seven years, 
possibly more. A very interesting record from Tirukkaluk- 
kunram, 9 dated in the twenty-seventh year of Rajakesari, may 
for very good reasons be ascribed to Aditya; palaeographically, 
it certainly belongs to the time before Parantaka; the subject- 
matter of the record is the renewal of the gifts of some lands 
to the local temple, made originally by Skandasisya and con- 
tinued by Padavikonda Narasingapottaraiyar, both well-known 
Pallava kings. Such a renewal is normal after a conquest, and 
as Aditya I is known to have conquered the Pallavas and an- 
nexed the Tondaimandalam to the Cola country, it is practi- 
cally certain that this inscription is one of Aditya’s. It should 
also be observed that in the earliest copper-plate grant, so far 
known, of this line, Aditya I is simply called Rajakesari, 10 
without any other name. How much longer Aditya ruled after 



112 


VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


the date of the Tirukkaluk-kunram inscription cannot now be 
ascertained. But an inscription from Takkolam dated in the 
24th year of Rajakesari, no doubt Aditya I, mentions a solar 
eclipse which occurred in a.d. 894 or 895. 11 This would give 
a.d. 870 or 871 for the accession of Aditya, and a rule of about 
36 years for him till A.D. 907. We thus get 870 or thereabouts 
for the close of the reign of Vijayalaya, which might have 
begun, therefore, sometime before a.d. 850. 12 

The date thus obtained for the beginning of Vijayalaya’s 
rule is some years earlier than the date of 
.£? nt ? 1 mporaries °* the accession to the Pandyan kingdom of 
V aragunavarman, who sustained defeat at 
Sir! Purambiyam, near Kumbakonam in the Tanjore district. 
The power of the Pandyas was still, at the accession of Vara- 
guna. quite considerable in spite of the set-back it suffered 
after the battle of the Arisil in the reign of his father. 13 At 
this time, moreover, the enterprising chieftains known to his- 
tory as the Muttaraiyar were in possession of part of the fertile 
delta land in the Tanjore district; their inscriptions come from 
Sendalai 14 and clearly describe them as ruling Tanjore also, 
though they had their head-quarters at Sendalai or Niyamam. 
Like the Colas, the Muttaraiyar found it impossible to set up 
an independent rule, and had to support themselves by cling- 
ing to the Pandyas or the Pallavas. 

Their inscriptions and their titles show that they played 
a clever game and were ready to change 
The Muttaraiyar. ^ e j r allegiance to suit their interests. In 
Varaguna’s time, either of their own accord or as a result of 
temptations offered by Varaguna, they appear to have thrown 
in their lot with the Pandyas. The result was that they lost 
Tanjore, which was captured by Vijayalaya acting in the in- 
terest of the Pallavas. Little could the Pallava ruler have 
suspected that in thus employing his Cola subordinate, he was, 
as the Indian saying has it, training his tiger-cub to a taste for 
blood. Nor could Vijayalaya have dreamt that his vicarious 
victory was to be the beginning of one of the most splendid 
empires known to Indian History. 

The success of Vijayalaya meant the weakening of the 
Muttaraiya allies of the Pandya Varaguna varman, who under- 
took an expedition calculated to redress the balance. This 
began well enough, and Idavai, on the north bank of the 



CONQUEST OF TON D AIM AN DAL AM 


113 


Kaveri in the Cola country, was reached. 15 But the Pallava 
ruler Aparajita who succeeded Nrpatungavarman, just before 
this Pandya invasion, made a great effort. He got all his 
allies together, most prominent among them being the Ganga 
king Prthivlpati I. The alliance between the Gangas and the 
Pallavas was of ancient standing, and though there is no de- 
finite evidence to prove it, we may assume that the Cola Aditya. 
who had succeeded his father in the meanwhile, also fought on 
the side of Aparajita 16 in the great battle of Sri Purambiyam. 
More lucky than the Ganga monarch, Aditya lived to share 
the spoils of victory. Possibly, in his gratitude to his Cola 
ally, Aparajita not only allowed Aditya to keep what his 
father had taken from the Muttaraiyar, but added some new 
territory in the neighbourhood to the sphere of his rule. 

Of Aditya (c. a.d. 871-907) the Anbil plates state only 
that on both the banks of the Kaveri he built 
Aditya I. j n honour of Siva rows of tall stone temples 

which stood, the monuments of his success, from the Sahyadri 
mountain to the wide ocean. 17 The Tiruvalangadu plates state 
that he overthrew the strong Pallava ruler Aparajita, 18 and 
deprived him of his territory. The Kanyakumari inscription 
gives him the surname Kodandarama, and states that in a 
battle he pounced upon and slew the Pallava king who was 
seated on the back of a tall elephant. 19 A record from Tillais- 
thanam 20 confirms this evidence by clearly stating that Raja- 
kesari extended his power to the Tondainad. Aditya must 
be taken, therefore, to have put an end to the Pallava power 
by annexing Tondaimandalam, and to have 

Aparajita extended the Cola dominions, till they bord- 

overthrown. * 

ered on those of the Rastrakutas. Aparaji- 

ta’s inscriptions mention his eighteenth regnal year; and no 
record from Tondaimandalam that can be attributed to Aditya 
bears a date earlier than his twenty-third regnal year. But as 
a gift, a devcidana, was made in the 21st year, 21 the conquest 
and annexation of the Pallava territory may be dated roughly 
about a.d. 890. 

But the settlement of the newly conquered territory in 
Tondaimandalam apparently took some years and may have 
involved fresh campaigns. The Karandai plates include the 
Pallava among the kings overthrown by Parantaka I. the son 
C. 15 



114 


VUAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


and successor of Aditya I. It is not easy to decide if Paran- 
taka’s war with the Pallava was undertaken by him as yuva- 
raja in his father’s reign or if vestiges of Pallava independence 
survived into Parantaka’s own reign. A record of S. 826 
(a.d. 904) from Kappalur (North Areot) 21a omits all mention 
of a ruling sovereign and registers a gift to a local temple by a 
chieftain — some indication of conditions being still unsettled 
at this time. 

The Ganga king may have assisted Aditya in this conquest; 

at any rate we find him soon after acknow- 
Gangas ° n ^ ** Edging Aditya’s suzerainty; Pritipatiyar, son 
of Maramaraiyar, no other than the well- 
known Prthivlpati II, son of Marasimha, of the Udayendiram 
grant, presented a silver vessel ( kevdi ) to the temple of Tak- 
kolam in the twenty-fourth year of Rajakesari 22 (Aditya). 
The Coja overlordship, which is elaborately acknowledged in 
the reign of Parantaka in the Udayendiram plates, is in this 
stone inscription briefly recognised by the record being dated 
in the regnal year of Rajakesarivarman. Attention has been 
drawn already to the Tirukkalukkunram inscription recording 
the renewal of an ancient Pallava grant to the local temple. 
Aditya married a Pallava princess, as may be inferred from an 
inscription of his twenty-third year which says that the mother 
of the Cola queen was a Kadupattigal. 23 Ilangon Picci, a 
daughter of Vallavaraiyar (Rastrakuta Krsna II) is described 
as Aditya’s senior queen in a record of his twenty-seventh 
year. 232 Another record from Niyamam mentions that Adigal 
Kandan Marambavai, queen of Nandipottaraiyar of the Palla- 
vatilaka race, granted to the local temple some money for 
certain specified purposes. 24 In the eighteenth year of Raja- 
kesari (Aditya I), the same lady had made another gift to 
the Pidari temple in the same place. 25 Despite her regal 
titles, the identity of this lady and her Pallava lord must re- 
main somewhat doubtful. 26 

The Kongudesa-rajalckal affirms that Aditya. after being 
crowned at Tanjavur-patnam, came to Kon- 
Kongx? UeSt of gudesa, conquered the country and governed 
it in addition to his own; it also says that he 
took the town of Talakad. Despite the lateness and the gene- 
ral untrustworthiness of this chronicle, this statement looks 
very plausible. For one thing, Parantaka’s records are found 



DEATH OF ADITYA I 


115 


in the Kongudesa, and he does not claim to have conquered it. 
Early in his reign is mentioned an officer of his supervising 
temple affairs in Kongu . 27 So it is quite reasonable to sup- 
pose that Aditya conquered the Kongu country. The men- 
tion of Talakad implies that Aditya took the country from 
the Western Gangas; there is again nothing improbable in 
this, and we have seen Prthivlpati II acknowledging the over- 
lordship of Aditya. About the same time the Pandya king 
Sri Parantaka Viranarayana claims to have fought in Kongu; 
Aditya might have taken part of the Kongu country from him. 
The Anbil plates, which say that Aditya built temples along 
the entire course of the Kaveri from the Sahyadri to the sea, 
also seem to lend support to the statement in the chronicle of 
Kongu kings. 


An undated inscription 28 from Tillaisthanam shows that 
Aditya was on very friendly terms with his 
C§nf atl ° n t0 Cera contemporary Sthanu-Ravi. This re- 
cords a gift by Kadamba-madevi, on 
whose husband, Vikki-Annan, the two monarchs jointly, 
conferred the personal privileges, of ‘throne, chauri, palanquin, 
drum, a palace, ponakam (?), bugle, elephant-corps’ and the 
hereditary title Sembiyan Tamila-vel. Here is clear indica- 
tion that Vikki-Annan who was so honoured must have dis- 
tinguished himself in some manner that greatly pleased these 
two kings. Can it be that he was a Cera general whom Sthanu- 
Ravi employed to co-operate with Aditya in his Kongu cam- 
paign against the Pandya? We know that Aditya’s son Paran- 
taka married a daughter of the Cera king. It is natural to 
assume that this friendship between the two ancient lines of 
rulers began with the extension of Cola rule to Kongu . 29 There 
is mention of a Vikkiyanna, son of Prthivlpati, in a Ganga 
inscription 30 of this period. 


It is not possible to point with certainty to the temples 
erected by Aditya. We know of several 
Temples. stone temples whose consecration took place 

in the reign of Aditya’s son and successor; some of these might 
have been commenced in the time of Aditya . 31 


Aditya died at Tondaimanad. near Kalahasti, in the Chit- 
toor district. A temple was erected over his 
' 1 remains by his pious son Parantaka and call- 

ed by the names KSdandaramesvara and Adityesvara : 32 he 



116 


VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


also provided for the feeding of a thousand people on certain 
festival days. Aditya had besides Parantaka another son, 
Kannaradeva by name . 33 

It is remarkable that the kings of the Vijayalaya line were 
. . . ardent Saivites. Vijayalaya himself estab- 

lished a Durga temple in Tanjavur after he 
captured it; Aditya built temples to Siva. His son raised a 
shrine over his sepulchre, establishing a linga on it — a Saivite 
adaptation of the Buddhist practice of erecting memorial 
stupas. 

The Cola rulers of this time were not slow to acquire for 
,, , themselves a pedigree; and a mythical an- 
cestry tracing their descent from the sun was 
soon provided, though some kings of lunar genesis were also 
mixed up in it. The earliest version of it is in the Anbil 
plates which give fifteen names before Vijayalaya including 
the genuinely historical ones of Karikala, Killi and Koccen- 
ganan. The Tiruvalangadu plates swell the list to forty-four, 
and the Kanyakumari list runs up to fifty-two, while the 
Leyden grant is satisfied with a dozen. There are others of 
varying lengths to be gathered from literary works like the 
Kali ngattuppa ra n i , the ulds of Ottakkuttan and so on. No two 
of these lists agree, though some names and details are com- 
mon to all. An eponymous Cola finds a place in all the 
copper-plates, and the Kanyakumari inscription dresses up a 
pretty story 3 * about his advent to the south. He was drawn 
in that direction in pursuit of a Raksasa who had assumed the 
form of an antelope, and he was followed by some of his com- 
manders. Then he killed the Raksasa and moved along the 
banks of the Kaveri, ‘the river which brings to the earth, in 
the guise of water, the nectar obtained by the gods after 
churning the ocean of milk.’ Having bathed in the river 
when he looked for some brahmans, apparently to bestow 
some gifts on them, he found none there; and so he summoned 
many excellent brahmans from Aryavarta and settled them 
on the banks of the river. He then cleared the forest, planted 
groves of areca-palms and laid out fruit-gardens and other- 
wise improved the country. Such is the quaint account of 
the origin of the Cola kingdom as it was imagined by the 
court-poet of Virarajendra 35 



NOTES 


117 


1. SII. ii. No. 76, V. 18: 337 of 1912. 

2. Rangachari, NA. Nos. 536-7; EL iv. pp. 180-3. 

3. 675 of 1909. A Vijayalaya-caturvedimangalam is mentioned 
among the brahmadeya villages which were required to supply men 
for service in the Tanjore temple in Rajaraja’s reign (SII. ii 69, para 
139). See also 164 of 1915 (Vikrama Cola 5) for a reference to a kal- 
vettu of the fourth year of Vijayalaya in the North Arcot district. A 
Pandya inscription of the thirteenth century from Narttamalai (Pd. 
282) mentions a Vijayalayacolesvara temple. Nos. 125 and 126 of 1943-4 
from near Tiruttani (Chittoor dt.), though only late Vijayanagar records, 
mention a temple named after Vijayalaya. 

4. SII. iii, No. 205 vv. 45 and 46. The Kanyakumari inscription of 
Vlrarajendra ( TAS . iii, p. 142, v. 54) exaggerates this and says that 
Vijayalaya founded Tanjore. The Anbil plates pun on his name Vija- 
yalaya in praising his valour on the battle-field (v. 16). 

5. SII. iii p. 17 n. 14; El. v, p. 42; SII. iii No. 11 from Ukkal is now 
seen to belong to Uttama Cola. ARE. 1939 40—1942/43, II 30. 

6. 51 of 1936, ARE. 1935-6 II 34. Another record of the eighth 
year of Parakesari with no title from Kappalur, fifty miles north of 
Viracolapuram, may also be his — 283 of 1938-9. ARE. II 12. MAR. 1909 
para 18 comments suggestively on a single line fragment from Kudalur 
in the Mysore area. See also ARE. 1909 para 35, and 1916 II 17. 

7. E.g., 436 and 439 of 1908 from Tiruvllimilalai. 

8. EL viii p. 260. 

9. 167 of 1894; El. iii. p. 279. 

10. Anbil Plates (El. xv) vv. 17-18. 

11. EL xix, No. 12. 

12. K. V. Subrahmanya Aiyar observes: 'If Vijayalaya came of 
the same family as the Cola Maharaja Kumarankusa, it is very likely 
that he was the grandson of his.' TAS. iii, p. 108. Kumarankusa, as we 
have seen, figures as the vijiiapti in the Velupalaiyam plates of Nandi- 
varman III. It is extremely doubtful, however, if he and Vijayalaya 
belonged to one and the same branch of the Colas. See ante p. 104. 

13. PK. pp. 73 ff. 

14. EI. xiii pp. 134 ff. where these records are tentatively referred to 
the first half of the 8th century a.d. (p. 136). Note particularly Tanjait- 
tmm padi ninrar ; Tanjaik-kon: Tanjai narpugalalan occurring in them. 

15. 609 of 1905 (Rangachari - Mr. 8). The name Pandiyanai -ven - 
kanda - sola-caturvedimangalam is applied to this place in a late record 
(42 of 1914) dated S. 1369: this can hardly be a reference to the dis- 
comfiture of Varagunavarman. Contra Rangachari Tj. 185. 

16. Inscription 337 of 1912 (Rangachari Ct. 226) of Priduvayya 
mentioning the Cola-raja is too fragmentary to throw any light on the 
political relations of the age. Contra Dubreuil, Pallavas p. 83. T. A. 
Gopinatha Rao writes (E.I. xv, p. 49): 'It is known from other records 
that Aditya and the Pandya king Varaguna marched against the Pallava 



118 


VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


Nrpatungavarman, otherwise known also by the name ol Aparajita- 
varman, defeated and killed him.’ Apart from the identification of 
Aparajita with Nrpatunga for which there is no evidence, it is difficult 
to believe that the expedition which led to the overthrow of Aparajita 
had anything to do with Varagunavarman's campaign. As I understand 
the evidence, it was different, and most probably, some years later. 
(See Dubreuil-Pallavas p. 84). 

It must be admitted, however, that our view of the relation bet- 
ween the Colas and the Pallavas in the time of Vijayalaya and in the 
early years of Aditya I is not final. It is quite likely that the aggrandise- 
ment of Vijayalaya at the expense of the Muttaraiyar had nothing 
whatever to do with the struggle between the Pandyas and the Pallavas. 
In that case, Vijayalaya took advantage of the confusion in the border- 
land between the dominions of the Pandyas and the Pallavas, and his 
son also gained by the weakening of both after Sri Purambiyam. See, 
however, El. xix p. 87 n. 6. Yet another view may be taken: The Mutta- 
raiyar being allies of the Pallavas, the Colas may, under Vijayalaya, 
have found occasion to join the Pandyas and to throw off the Pallava 
yoke. On this supposition the capture of Tanjore by Vijayalaya would 
be at once an act of aggression undertaken by him against the Pallava, 
to favour the Pandya, and a decisive step in the assertion of Cola inde- 
pendence from Pallava suzerainty. On this assumption, it is not un- 
likely that Aditya fought on Varaguna’s side at Sri Purambiyam. An 
objection to this view is the difficulty of explaining how, after the 
defeat he suffered on this occasion, Aditya recovered sufficiently to 
overthrow Aparajita later, and why Aparajita failed, after his success 
at Sri Purambiyam, to reassert his supremacy over the Cola. 

17. v. 18. 

18. v. 49. 

19. v. 55. 

20. 286 of 1911. 

21. S/I. iii No. 142. 

21a. 271 of 1938-9, ARE. II 12. See JOR. xix pp. 148-9, and Potdar 
Comm. Vol. pp. 29-31. 

22. 5 of 1897; El. xix No. 12. 

23. 161 of 1928. 

23a. 14 of 1920: El. xxvi p. 233. 

24. 16 of 1899. The regnal year 24 is given by Krishna Sastri (S1I. 
iii No. 94) but does not seem to be borne out by the text. 

25. 13 of 1899. 

26. The place of Aparajita, though not his relation with his prede- 
cessor Nrpatunga, is well attested. The narrow range of the provenance 
of his inscriptions needs an explanation. It seems strange that the 
victor of Sri Purambiyam appears to have left no inscriptions to the 
south of Kanclpuram. The death of Prthivlpati on the field perhaps left 
Aparajita at the mercy of his overbearing ally Aditya who managed 
to take the southern Tondaimandalam as the price of his co-operation 
He chose the next opportunity to complete the destruction of the 
Pallavas. 



NOTES 


119 


It may be that Marambavai was the queen of Nandi III of Tellaru, 
whose reign ended about a.d. 860. The earliest Cola record which men- 
tions her is in the 18th year of Rajakesari, c. 889. She is also named 
in two of Nrpatunga’s inscriptions, both from the Tanjore dt. (Nos. 
300 and 303 of 1901). See ARE. 1901, paragraph 10; Sir. ii. p. 513, n. 

27. 258 of 1907. The regnal year of this record is 10, not 30. 

28. 286 of 1911. 

29. ARE. 1912 II, 11 suggests the identification of Sthanu-Ravi with 
Kokkandan Ravi of the Candraditya family (148 of 1910) on palaeo- 
graphical grounds. The epithet ‘pa l-yanai-kok-kaiidan’ in the Tillai- 
sthanam inscription, like the phrase ‘Tondai-nadu-imvina-Sdlan, 1 
applies to Rajakesari and not to Sthanu-Ravi, as ARE. (ibid) appears 
to suggest. ‘It is not impossible that Sthanu-Ravi substantially assisted 
Aditya in his conquest of the Pallavas and the acquisition of their 
territory, and that Vikki-Annan distinguished himself on this occa- 
sion as an able general.’ (ibid). In the same paragraph we find the 
suggestion thrown out that Vikki-Annan was, like his wife Kadam- 
ba-madevi, of Karnataka origin, and that he was a Velir chieftain of 
Kodumbalur (Pudukottah) . 

30. 332 of 1912. Sembiyan Mahabali Banarasa (of this record) is 
no other than Prthvlpati n. 

31. El. xv, p. 50. 

32. 286 of 1906; also 230 of 1903. Before the Kanyakumari inscrip- 
tion gave us the information that Aditya had the name Kodancjlarama, 
the only Kodandarama known was his grandson Raj aditya; but Raja- 
ditya must have been living in the 34th year of his father's reign. El. 
xviii pp. 23-24. 

33. 38 of 1895. 


35. See TAS. iii. for a full discussion of the legends in this record. 
Also SII. iii, Introd. pp. 4-5 for those in the copper-plates, and EI. 
xviii pp. 26 ff. 



Chapter VII 


PARANTAKA I (a.d. 907-955.) 

At the time of the battle of Sri Purambiyam, the Colas 
held a small principality including Tanjore 
Cola expansion. Uraiyur, perhaps in subjection to the 

Pallavas. But within twenty-five years their power became 
formidable. This expansion was exclusively the work of 
Aditya I, a remarkable warrior and able diplomat. Circum- 
stances favoured him and he made full use of his opportuni- 
ties. The Paijclyas, after 6rx Purambiyam, were engrossed in 
their own troubles at home; Varaguna died soon after the 
battle, and his successor Sri Parantaka Viranarayana had to 
deal with a serious rising headed by the haughty Ugra. 1 With 
the Pallava Aparajita, Aditya was on friendly terms for some 
years after Sri Purambiyam. He then turned against him and 
deprived him of the bulk, if not the whole, of his possessions; 
in this enterprise, Aditya was possibly aided by his Ganga 
contemporary; and the obscure conflicts that were engaging 
the Banas, the Vaidumbas, the Gangas and the Nolambas, of 
which the battle of Soremati was the central event, must 
have indirectly facilitated Aditya’s success. Before the end 
of his reign Aditya conquered Kongu and annexed it to his 
territories. Thus at the accession of his son Parantaka, a.d. 907, 
the Cola kingdom embraced the whole country between 
Madras and Kalahasti in the north, and the Kaveri in the 
south, with the exception of the Mysore table-land and the 
strip along the west coast. It kept the Ganga power in a posi- 
tion of subordinate alliance and was friends with the Cera. 
The first conflict with the Pandya power had perhaps already 
taken place in the Kongu country. 2 

Parantaka I ruled for forty-eight years, as the latest ins- 

„ , cription of his reign is dated in his forty- 

Parantaka I. . , • , 

eighth regnal year.-* Early in his reign 

he resisted with success the attempt of Rastrakuta 
Krsna II to put his own grand-son Kannaradeva on 
the Cola throne. Thenceforth Parantaka’s rule was 
one of increasing success and prosperity for the best 
part of it; he followed up his father's victories by 



PANDYAN WAR 


121 


putting an end to Pandyan independence and extending the 
empire up to Kanyakumari in the south; he even invaded 
Ceylon, though the raid, as we shall see, failed of its object. 
Elsewhere, he subjugated the Banas, and the Ganga king 
Hastimalla acknowledged his sway. The last vestiges of Pal- 
lava power disappeared and the dominion of Parantaka ex- 
tended up to Nellore in the north. Towards the end of his 
reign, however, Krsna III invaded the Cola empire in great 
force from the north-west, and in the conflict that ensued 
Parantaka’s eldest son Rajaditya lost his life, and Parantaka 
himself did not long survive the cataclysm. A heavy gloom 
settles on Cola power for a period of over three decades there- 
after untii the accession of the celebrated Rajaraja I in a.d. 985, 

Parantaka invaded the Pandya country very soon after 
his accession. He bears the title Madurai- 
Pandyan War ko ^ a ( wko cap tured Madura) as early as 
his third year. 4 The conquest and subjugation of the Pandyan 
kingdom was, however, a gradual process: the earliest ins- 
cription of Parantaka actually found in the Pandyan country 
is dated in his 24th year. 5 The Sinnamanur and the Udayen- 
diram plates concur in the name of the Pandya king, Raja- 
simha. who suffered deprivation and exile at the hands of 
Parantaka. Says the Mahdvamsa 6 : 

‘While thus the sovereign of Lanka (Kassapa V. 
a.d. 913-23) held sway in justice, the Pandu king was 
vanquished in battle by the Cola king. To gain military 
aid he sent numerous gifts. The king, the ruler of Lanka, 
took counsel with his officials, equipped military forces, 
appointed his Sakkasenapati as leader of the troops, and 
betook himself to Mahatittha. Standing at the edge of the 
coast he spoke of the triumph of former kings, and hav- 
ing thus aroused their enthusiasm, he made his troops 
embark. With his army the Sakkasenapati thereupon 
safely crossed the sea and reached the Pandu country. 
When the Pandu king saw the troops and him, he spake 
full of cheer: “I will join all' Jambudipa under one 

umbrella.” The king took the two armies; but as he could 
not vanquish him (the king) of the Cola line, set out 
once more with the purpose of fighting further, made 
halt, and died of the upasagga (plague) to the undoing of 
the Pandu (king) . When the ruler of Lanka heard that 
C. 16 



122 


PARANTAKA I 


the troops were also perishing of the same disease, out of 
pity he had the army brought back.’ 

In this account we can recognise three stages in the con- 
flict. In the first the Pandyan king suffers a defeat at the 
hands of Parantaka. The second stage begins with his appeal 
for aid to the Ceylonese ruler and ends with a fight in which 
the Pandyan and Ceylonese troops together sustained defeat 
and retreated before the Cola forces. Lastly, another effort 
made by the Ceylonese commander came to nothing owing to 
a plague which killed him and led to the recall of the Ceylo- 
nese army. The inscriptions so far as they go corroborate this 
account in every respect; only, they make no mention of the 
second effort of Sakkasenapati and the plague. 

The first stage in the account of the Mahiivamsa corres- 
ponds, doubtless, to the raid on Madura in the first years of 
Parantaka’s rule which led to his adopting the title Madhu- 
rantaka, the destroyer of Madura. The second stage in the 
war is thus graphically pictured by the Udayendiram plates 
of Prthivipati in a.d. 921-2. 7 

‘His (Parantaka's) army, having crushed at the head 
of a battle the Pandya king together with an army of 
elephants, horses and soldiers, seized a herd of elephants 
together with (the city of) Madhura. Having slain in an 
instant, at the head of a battle, an immense army, des- 
patched by the lord of Lanka, which teemed with brave 
soldiers (and) was interspersed with troops of elephants 
and horses, he bears in the world the title Sangrama Rag- 
hava (i.e., Rama in battle) which is full of meaning. 
When he defeated the Pandya (king) Rajasimha, two 
persons experienced the same fear at the same time: 
(Kubera) , the lord of wealth, on account of the death of 
his own friend (and) Vibhlsana on account of the proxi- 
mity (of the Cola dominions to Ceylon)’. 

These events must have taken place some years before 
the date of the Udayendiram grant. As early as a.d. 923 we 
find the title Maduraiyum Ilamum Konda. in a record of 
Parantaka. 8 Two inscriptions of the twelfth year make casual 
allusions to incidents in the battle of Vellur in which the 
Pandya and Ceylonese forces were defeated 
Battle of Vellur Q5j a One is a gift to commemorate 

the victory of Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Amudanar on the 



RAJASIMHA’S FLIGHT 


12 - 


occasion when the Pandya king, helped by the Ceylonese 
army, attacked the Cola king at the battle of Vellur. 9 Another 
is an endowment for the merit of four soldiers ( sevakar ) who 
died in a frontal attack (nerrisenra) led by Sennipperaraiyan 
at Velur (Vellur) on the occasion when the Pandyan and 
Ceylonese kings came and fought a deadly battle with the 
Cola. 10 It is clear that there was a great and decisive battle 
at Vellur in which the Cdla troops had to fight hard before 
securing victory and which was well remembered for some 
years after the event for the exceptional heroism of its inci- 
dents. It seems probable that this battle was fought about 
a.d. 915. 

The victory of Parantaka at Vellur paved the way for 
the progressive conquest and annexation of the Pandyan 
country. Frustrated in all his attempts to stem the tide of 
the Cola invasion, the unlucky Rajasimha took to flight, leav- 
ing his ancient heritage to fall into the hands of his enemy. 
In the reign of Dappula IV (a.d. 923-934) the MaMvamsa 
records: 11 

‘At that time the Pandu king through fear of the 
Cola (king) left his country, took ship and came to Maha- 
tittha. The king had him brought to him, rejoiced greatly 
when he saw him, gave him an abundant income and 
granted him a dwelling outside the town. When the king 
of Lanka had armed (with the purpose) : “I will make 
war on the Cola king, take from him his two thrones 12 
and give them to the Pandu king,” the nobles dwelling 
on the island for some reason or other stirred up a sorry 
strife to the undoing of the Pandu king. The Pandu king 
thought his sojourn here was of no use to him. He left 
his diadem and other valuables behind and betook him- 
self to the Keralas. ’ 

This is confirmed by a verse 13 in the Tiruvalangadu plates 
saying: 

‘Encircled by the fire of his (Parantaka’s) prowess, 
the Pandya, as if desirous of cooling the heat caused by 
it, quickly entered the sea (embarked for Ceylon) , aban- 
doning his royal state and the kingdom inherited from 
his ancestors.’ 



124 


PARANTAKA I 


Rajasimha proceeded to Kerala from Ceylon because it was 
the home of his mother Vanavan-mahadevi. 14 The rulers of 
Kerala were in such close political alliance with the Colas in 
this period, that Rajasimha depended more on the Ceylonese 
king for help in the first instance, and went to Kerala only 
as a last resort, even then leaving his crown and other valua- 
bles behind in Ceylon. The flight of Rajasimha may be dated, 
following the chronology of the Mahavamsa, sometime bet- 
ween the sixteenth and the twenty-sixth year of Parantaka’s 
reign. 

Parantaka spent many years in reducing the newly con- 
quered country to subjection, and when he 
Ceylon Wai. j e ^ ^e was near the end of his task, he 
wanted to celebrate his success by a formal coronation at 
Madura at which he was to invest himself with the insignia 
of Pandyan monarchy. These had been carried away by Raja- 
simha and left in the custody of the Ceylonese king, and 
Parantaka made an unsuccessful effoi-t to secure them in the 
reign of the slothful and intemperate Udaya IV a.d. 945-53. 15 

'The Cola king hearing of his sloth was greatly 
pleased, and as he wished to achieve consecration as king 
in the Pandu kingdom, he sent (messengers) concerning 
the diadem and the other (things) which the Pandu (king) 
had left behind (in Lanka). The king did not give them 
up, so the mighty Cola equipped an army and sent it forth 
to fetch them by force. Now, at that time the Senapati 
here (in Ceylon) was absent in a rebellious border pro- 
vince. The king had him fetched and sent him forth to 
begin the war. The Senapati set forth, delivered battle 
and fell in the fight. Thereupon the king (Udaya) took 
the crown and the rest and betook himself to Rohana. 
The Co]a troops marched thither, but finding no way of 
entering Rohana, they turned and betook themselves 
through fear from here to their own country.’ 

The exact date of these occurrences cannot be determined; the 
Ceylonese account is no doubt right in placing them in the 
last years of Parantaka’s reign. 16 His failure was remembered, 
and made up for. years later, bv his powerful descendant 
Rajendra I. 



KRSNA II’ S INVASION 


Besides the friendliness of the Kerala ruler and the assis- 
tance of the Paluvettaraiyar chieftains of 
Parintaka^ Kilappaluvur, Parantaka was aided in his 

Pandyan campaigns by the Velir chiefs of 
Kodumbalur. Records dated very early in Parantaka’s reign 
show that prince Arikulakesari, one of the sons of Parantaka, 
had already married Pudi Adicca Pidari, daughter of Tenna- 
van Ilangovelar of the Kodumbalur line. 17 Other evidence 
of the close connection in this period between the Cola line 
and the Kodumbalur chieftains is furnished by records from 
Pudukottah and the Trichinopoly district. 18 Their hostility 
to the Pandya king Rajasimha becomes clear from the Sinna- 
manur plates of the sixteenth year of Rajasimha (c. a.d. 916) . 
While giving an account of Rajasimha’s relations with the 
Colas in the early years of Parantaka’s rule, the Pandyan in- 
scription says that Rajasimha ‘defeated the king of Tanjai 
(Tanjore) at Naippur, fought a battle at Kodumbai (Kodum- 
balur), the seat of one of the powerful Cola subordinates, 
burnt Vanji and destroyed the king of Southern Tanjai (per- 
haps another subordinate of the Colas) at Naval.’ 19 This 
rather obscure and, no doubt, highly embellished account, 
from the Pandyan side, of the early stages of the Cola war is 
valuable in two respects. It confirms the impression derived 
from the MciMvamsa and the inscriptions of Parantaka that 
his conquest of the Madura kingdom was a gradual and diffi- 
cult process which involved much fighting spread over many 
years. It provides, moreover, a clear idea of the alinement of 
the political powers in these struggles, and corroborates the 
view that the Cera and the Kodumbalur chiefs 20 were friendly 
1o the Cola and fought on his side. 

The intervals between his Pandyan wars were employed 
by Parantaka in extending his power else- 

Other Wais w here The Sholingur rock inscription 21 of 
the ninth year mentions that the Ganga Prthivipati II got the 
title of Banadhiraia from Parantaka and that he distinguished 
himself in a fight at Vallala. The Udayendiram plates of 
Prthivipati 22 state that Parantaka uprooted tw r o Bana kings 
and conquered the Vaidumbas. 

In the early years of Parantaka’s rule the Rastrakuta king 
Krsna II appears to have made an attempt to set aside Paran- 
taka and bestow the Cola throne on his daughter’s son Kannara- 



126 


PARANTAKA I 


deva. He invaded the Cola kingdom from the north-west and 
the Banas who were his feudatories joined their forces to his. 
In his turn Parantaka was assisted by his subordinate, the 
Ganga Prthivipati II. The decisive engagement was fought 
at Vallala, modern Tiruvallam some time about 910-11. 
Krsna II and his allies suffered a signal defeat, and the Kan- 
yakumari inscription of Virarajendra categorically affirms that 
Parantaka earned the name Vira-Cola by his victory over 
the invincible Krsnaraja. 23 Thus Krsna’s attempt ended in 
failure, Parantaka became secure on his throne, and eventually 
punished the Banas and other allies of Krsna for their part in 
the war started by him. 

The Banas were an ancient line of kings who ruled for 
over two centuries in the tract that came to be called Perum- 
banappadi, the big Bana country. 24 This was the area to the 
north of the Palar, between Punganur in the west and Kala- 
hasti in the east. There is reason to believe that at an earlier 
period they ruled the territory further north and were forced 
to migrate south in the period of the rise and expansion of 
the Calukyas of Badami. In the last stages of their existence 
as an independent power their capital was at Parivi 25 which is 
first mentioned in the Sholingur inscription and may be iden- 
tical with Parigi in the Hindupur taluq of Anantapur dis- 
trict. The last ruler of the line was Vikramaditya III, Vijaya- 
bahu, described as the dear friend of Krsnaraja, doubtless 
Krsna III, his powerful Rastrakuta neighbour. The course 
of events which is nowhere described in explicit terms can 
only be inferred from a careful study of the dates which, for- 
tunately. are clearly recorded in the inscriptions. 

Hastimalla got the title Banadhiraja from Parantaka be- 
foi*e a.d. 916. (Sholingur record.) Vijaya- 
With the Banas. jj^ya jj Prabhameru ruled the Bana terri- 
tory independently till a.d. 909. 26 The conquest of the Banas 
by Parantaka must have taken place in the intervening period 
of six or seven years. The great-grandson of Vijayaditya Pra- 
bhumeru is known from his Udayendiram grant to have been 
the friend of Krsnaraja III Rastrakuta. There were two Bana 
kings intervening — Vikramaditya II and Vijayaditya III, 
Pugalvippavarganda. Considering the fact that the Rastra- 
kuta Krsna III could not have begun his reign much earlier 
than a.d, 940, it seems proper to infer that the two Bana rulers 



VAIDUMBAS. SITPULI 127 

who were dispossessed of their kingdom and perhaps forced 
by Parantaka to seek refuge within the Rastrakuta dominion 
were Vikramaditya II and Vijayaditya III. The title con- 
ferred on Prthivipati II, Banadhiraja, was not then an empty 
name; it carried with it the real overlordship of the Bana 
country for some years. And this uprooting of the Banas, so 
proudly proclaimed by the Ganga ruler who benefited thereby, 
contributed to the invasion of the Cola lands by Krsna III 
which ended so disastrously for the Colas. 

Forming part of the campaign against the Banas, or at 
With the an y rate closely connected with it. was the 

Vaidumbas. war against the Vaidumbas. These were a 

Telugu family who have left behind a few records in that lan- 
guage and in Kannatla. In the ninth century they claim to 
have had the Renandu 7000 country under them, and their 
inscriptions tell us that in the great battle of Soremati (c. 
a.d. 850) they took the side of the Banas against the Nolambas 
and the Gangas. This alliance with, and possibly subordina- 
tion to, the Banas continued until the time of Parantaka's 
war with them. We have no direct means of identifying the 
opponent of Parantaka. Some records 27 of Kannaradeva 
(Krsna III) from the South Arcot district mention the Vaidum- 
ba Maharaja Sandayan Tiruvayan and Timvayan Srikantha: 
the Vaidumba chief reduced to submission by Parantaka about 
a.d. 915 must have been Sandayan Tiruvayan himself or his 
immediate predecessor. The Vaidumbas, like the Banas. 
sought refuge with the Rastrakutas from the onslaught of the 
Colas. In later times, under Rajaraja I and Rajendra, when 
the Cola empire regained its ascendancy, the son and grand- 
son of Tiruvayan accepted subordinate positions under the 
Colas. 

Two inscriptions 28 from Tiruvorriyur contain the most 
casual reference to a campaign in the Nellore 
Sitpu 1 Na u. district. An officer of Parantaka. Maran 
Paramesvaran. a native of Sirukulattur. overthrew Sitpuli and 
destroyed Nellur, and on his way back to the south, he stopped 
at Tiruvorriyur to make a thanks-offering to Mahadeva in 
the form of a grant of land, which four years later was re- 
leased from the fiscal dues falling upon it. The original gift 
was made in the thirty-fourth year of Parantaka (a.d. 941) . 



128 


PARANTAKA 1 


This campaign was probably directed against the power of 
the Vengi ruler Calukya Bhima II. Sitpuli was a district in 
the southern regions of the Eastern Calukya kingdom. 29 Con- 
sidering that no records of Parantaka have been discovered in 
the east coast region to the north of Tiruvorriyur, it may be 
doubted if the campaign had any permanent results. 30 

From about a.d. 940, Parantaka experienced the increasing 
difficulty of defending an empire at a great 
Difficulties many points; in less than fifty years a small 

principality had grown into a widespread 
dominion at the expense of its neighbouring states; the very 
quickness of the expansion was fraught with danger and dynas- 
ties which had been dispossessed and driven out of their 
traditional homes could not all be expected to give in without 
further struggle. Nor was it likely that other powers like the 
Rastrakutas and the Eastern Calukyas would view without 
concern the progress of the Cola power. We have seen al- 
ready that some time after a.d. 945, Parantaka experienced a 
repulse in Ceylon and failed to take from Udaya IV the Pand- 
yan diadem. We must now turn to a narration of the occurren- 
ces elsewhere that must have had no small share in forcing 
Parantaka to give up the fight in Ceylon and acquiesce in his 
failure. 

The death of Ganga Prthivlpati II, the trusted friend and 
vassal of Parantaka I, which must have oc- 
Pr^ivipaa cur-red about a.d. 940, 31 may be said to mark 

the commencement of Parantaka’s troubles 
from this quarter. Prthivlpati left no son, Vikkiyanna having 
pre-deceased him. 32 Butuga II, who had married a Rastra- 
kuta princess Revaka, the sister of Krsna III, and assisted 
Krsna in securing his throne from a usurper, was now left in 
unquestioned supremacy in the Ganga country, because he 
had murdered his elder brother Racamalla and annexed his 
possessions also. 33 And the Banas and the Vaidumbas were 
already by the side of Krsna soliciting his protection and aid 
against the powerful Cola. Krsna was in the prime of life and 
had just encountered and overcome opposition at home and 
was not reluctant to seize the favourable moment that chance 
offered to him for making a great advance to the south. 34 



KRSNA’S INVASION : CHRONOLOGY 


129 


Rajaditya. 


It is possible that these developments were fore-shadowed 
even in the life-time of Prthivipati and a 
little before the accession of Krsna to the 
Rastrakuta throne. A record 35 from the North Arcot district 
commemorates the death of a hero in a.d. 936 in a cattle-raid 
by a Western Ganga king (Perumanadigal) , and this may be 
taken to give the first indication of the coming storm. There 
is also evidence to show that about this time Rajaditya, the 
eldest son of Parantaka, was stationed with a large army in- 
cluding an elephant corps and some cavalry 36 in the district 
known in inscriptions and literature as Tiru- 
padii Tirumunalp ' munaippadi-nadu. Vellangumaran, a Kerala 
general of Rajaditya’s forces, was present at 
Gramam as early as a.d. 936 37 where seven years later he con- 
structed a stone temple to Siva on the banks of the Pennar. 38 
Tirunavalur, a village near Gramam, called Rajadittapuram 
till about a.d. 1140 39 was the residence of Rajaditya for many 
years. We also find Arikulakesari 40 in the same region about 
the same time, no doubt assisting his brother Rajaditya. It 
is clear, therefore, that Parantaka was not 
Par5ntaka° f unmindful of the repercussions of his ag- 

gressive policy against the Banas and the 
Vaidumbas, and that though he expected much from the loyal 
support of Prthivipati II, he did not leave everything to him. 
but made his own preparations to meet an emergency. 


The chronology of Krsna’s campaign against the Cola has 
been the subject of some difference of 
Krena°:f invasion °pi n i° n , but it is not incapable of precise de- 
termination. The Solapuram inscription 41 
which is dated in three different ways may furnish the start- 
ing point. This record which bears the Saka date 871 (a.d. 
949) is also dated in the second year of some king not named 
in direct relation to this regnal year. But as Kannaradeva 
started his rule in or about a.d. 940, 42 the second year cannot 
be his. Venkayya, however, affirms 43 that this is ‘evidently 
a record of the Rastrakuta king Krsna III’ and suggests that 
the date is ‘probably the second year after the occupation of 
the Tondainadu’ by him. But the suggestion is contradicted 
by the record itself which says that it was the year in which 
Krsna entered Tondaimandalam; and we have no other in- 
stance in his numerous records from that country of his using 
C. 17 



130 


PARANTAKA I 


the date of his entry into Tondaimandalam as the starting 
point of an era; they give invariably his regnal year. The 
only alternative is to assume with Hultzseh that it refers to 
Rajaditya’s rule as the inscription comes from a place within 
the sphere of his jurisdiction as viceroy. It is not to be sup- 
posed 44 that Rajaditya began to rule and issue inscriptions in 
his own name only after the death of his father; for nothing 
is more common in Cola inscriptions than for records of suc- 
cessive rulers dated in different series of regnal years to over- 
lap. Rajaditya had by a.d. 948 served his father actively in 
a subordinate capacity for over a dozen years, and it is not 
a violent assumption to make that Rajaditya was made ‘co- 
regent’ 45 in that year. 

The third method in which the Solapuram record is dated 
is by describing it as the year in which Cakravartin Kanna- 
radeva Vallabhan entered Tondaimandalam after the over- 
throw of Rajaditya. It seems likely that this record was en- 
graved very soon after Rajaditya’s death, when the conse- 
quences of the battle of Takkolam were not yet fully realised. 
By the evidence of this record the successful invasion of 
Krsna took place in a.d. 949. 

The Atakur inscription of Butuga II affords striking con- 
firmation of this date. It dates the battle of Takkolam (in 
which Rajaditya lost his life at the hands of Butuga) in the 
current Saka year 872, i.e., a.d. 949-50. 46 Again Parantaka’s 
own inscriptions tell the same tale. His inscriptions bearing 
dates in a.d. 948 are found in the South and North Arcot 
districts 47 and it is a remarkable fact that not only are his 
inscriptions not found in these districts after that date, but 
no inscriptions of his dated in his regnal years 42-44 (in- 
clusive) are at all known — a fact clearly to be accounted for 
by some great disaster like the battle of Takkolam. Thus all 
lines of evidence point to one date. a.d. 949, as the year which 
decided the fortunes of the contest between Parantaka and 
Krsna. 

One inscription 48 from Siddhalingamadam (South Arcot) , 
dated in the fifth year of Krsna’s reign, al- 
Inscrfption° US read y in AD ' 944-5 § ives him the title Kac- 

ciyum-Tanjaiyumkonda. This has created 
some confusion, and led some scholars to imagine that Krsna’s 
invasion and occupation of Tondaimandalam was earlier than 



INVASION 


131 


the battle of Takkolani. 49 But the difficulty of reconciling 
this datum with the rest of our evidence is so great as to be 
almost insuperable, and we can hardly help suspecting some 
mistake here. For if Krsna was in Tondaimandalam as early 
as a.d. 944-5, how can we account for Parantaka’s inscriptions 
being found in the Arcot districts till 948, for the presence 
of Rajaditya at Takkolam in 949, and for the battle of Tak- 
kolam itself? Again, how can we account for the fact that, 
barring this single record from Siddhalingamadam, there is no 
other inscription of Krsna dated before his sixteenth regnal 
year a.d 956, in the North and South Arcot districts? There 
is no alternative, in fact, to our rejecting this record as spurious 
at least in its date. It should be noticed that the Vyaghra- 
padesvara temple from which the inscription comes was re- 
novated in the reign of Kulottunga I by one of his officers, 50 
and that it is quite probable that an error crept into the copy 
of this old inscription reproduced on the new walls more than 
a century after it was originally recorded, and this, I think, is 
the real explanation of the difficulty. 51 

We may now turn to the actual course of events con- 
nected with the Rasfrakuta invasion. It has 
The Invasion. been pointed out before that Parantaka was 
quite alive to the danger from the north-west frontier of his 
dominions, and that he took early steps to maintain a strong 
frontier force intended to resist any hostile movements on the 
part of his enemies. It would seem that the arrangements 
made by Parantaka fulfilled their purpose for quite a 
number of years. But the long thi-eatened clash came actually 
in a d. 949, and the decisive engagement took place at Tak- 
kolam. six miles to the South-east of Arko- 
Takkolam. nam in the North Arcot district. 52 The 

Atakur inscription tells us that Kannaradeva ‘was making a 
display of triumph after fighting against and killing the 
Muvadi-Cola-Rajaditya at a place called Takkola’; it also 
adds: ‘when Kannaradeva was fighting the Cola, Butuga made 
the howdah the battle-field, and aimed at, pierced and killed 
Rajaditya’ — an act for which Krsna rewarded him by grant- 
ing him the districts of Banavase 12,000, and Belvola 300. 53 
The Cola version of what happened on the occasion is not 
different; the Tiruvalangadu plates 54 say that Rajaditya went 
to heaven after conquering Krsnaraja; the larger Leyden 
grant is more explicit and records 55 : 



132 


PARANTAKA I 


‘The heroic Rajaditya, the ornament of the solar race, 
having shaken in battle the unshakable Krsnaraja with 
his forces, by means of his sharp arrows flying in all direc- 
tions was himself pierced in his heart while seated on the 
back of a large elephant by the sharp arrows of the 
enemy, and (thus) winning the praise of the three worlds, 
he ascended to the heaven of heroes in a tall vimtina.’ 

This clearly implies that there was much hard fighting, and 
that the Cola army lost the battle mainly on account of a 
well-aimed arrow of Butuga having fatally wounded Raja- 
ditya. 

That even this decisive battle was not followed by the 
total collapse of all resistance to Krisna’s 
And after. advance, and that he had some more years 
of rather hard fighting, may be inferred from the fact that ins- 
criptions dated in his reign do not begin to appear till his 
sixteenth year, a.d. 956 or at the earliest 953. Inscriptions 
from South Arcot dated in Saka years 874-876 (a.d. 952-954) 55 
recording gifts of minor chieftains but not acknowledging 
either Cola or Rastrakuta supremacy may be taken to sup- 
port this inference. There is much uncertainty, however, 
about the exact course of the events that followed Takkolam. 
We have no Cola records from the districts of North Arcot, 
South Arcot and Chingleput for several years after the battle; 
Krsna’s records with dates ranging from the sixteenth to the 
twenty-eighth years of his reign are found in the same area. 
By assuming the tittle ‘Kacciyiim-Tanjaiyum-Konda,’ Krsna 
claimed to have captured Kanclpuram and Tanjavur. The 
‘spurious’ Sudi plates 57 state that Butuga, after conquering 
Rajaditya, assaulted Tanjore, Nalkote and a number of other 
fortresses and handed over to Krsna elephants, horses and a 
vast amount of treasure captured from these places. The 
Karhad grant a.d. 959, which shows Krsna still in his camp 
at Melpadi (N. Arcot) at the end of his southern campaigns, 
states that in the course of his digvijaya in the south, he up- 
rooted the family of the Colas, distributed their territory 
among his followers, extorted tributes from several kings, in- 
cluding the king of Ceylon, and erected a pillar of victory in 
Ramesvaram. 58 We cannot say for certain if these are merely 
empty boasts or the record of a triumphant raid across the 
southern countries. No inscriptions of Krsna or his vassals 






134 


PARANTAKA I 


are found south of the latitude of Pondicherry. 59 The Nolamba 
polalcora II and his son Vira Mahendra are seen from their 
inscriptions to have taken part in Krsna’s expedition against 
the Cola, and shared the spoils. Polacora calls himself ‘lord 
of Kanci’ in 965-6, and an undated inscription states that 
Vira Mahendra was encamped at Kolar on his return from 
his conquest of the Cola-nadu. 59a There can be no question that 
the effect of Krsna’s invasion on the Cola 

Effects. empire was ruinous, and that as a conse- 

quence of the blow in the north, much of the south also slip- 
ped out of Parantaka’s hands. The Cola empire was no more; 
it had to be built up all over again. 

Only a few inscriptions from the neighbourhood of Tan- 
jore attest the closing years of Parantaka’s 
Close of Paran- reign, and they are dated in the forty-fifth 
takas reign. an( j forty-sixth regnal years of Parantaka. 60 
An inscription from Vanamaladinne in the Punganur taluk of 
Chittoor district is dated in the 48th year of Parantaka, 
a.d. 955. This may mean that the king lived at least up to 
that year. 603 

He had many wives, of whom the names of no fewer than 
eleven occur in his inscriptions. Kokkilan 61 was the name of 
the mother of Rajaditya, called also Kodandarama, the eldest 
son of Parantaka who died in the battle of Takkolam. Another 
queen of Parantaka, a Kerala princess, 62 the mother of Arin- 
jaya, deserves special notice as her marriage, contracted pos- 
sibly in Aditya’s lifetime, not only gave proof of the friendly 
political relations that obtained between the Cola and Kerala 
rulers, but apparently furnished the occasion for a large influx 
of Malaiyalis into the Cola country in search of service under 
the king and his sons. Vellangumaran, the Kerala general of 
Rajaditya, who built a temple in Gramam was only the lead- 
ing example 63 of a large class of less known immigrants figur- 
ing as donors of small charitable gifts in the inscriptions of 
the period. Besides Rajaditya. Parantaka had four other sons: 
Gandaraditya. Arikulakesari. Uttamasili and Arindigai or 
Arinjaya of the plates. One daughter of his, Viramadevi, call- 
ed also queen of Govinda Vallavaraiyar, is mentioned; 64 and 
it is likely that another, Anupama, was married to the chief- 
tain of Kodumhalur. That Parantaka was fond of many high- 
sounding titles 65 is clear from his inscriptions, amongst which 



NOTES 


135 


the most noteworthy, in this as well as in other respects, are 
the celebrated records of the twelfth and fourteenth years of 
his reign dealing with the constitutional arrangements of the 
Sabha of Uttaramerur. 66 The Karandai plates (v. 21) stress 
his promotion of agricultural prosperity by the digging of 
numerous irrigation canals all over the country. He perform- 
ed several hemagarbhas and tulabharas. and gave brahmu- 
deyas . 67 The Tiruvalangadu plates describe Parantaka as the 
bee at the lotus feet of Siva (Purantaka). and they and tbe 
Leyden grant concur in stating that he covered with gold the 
Siva temple of Cidambaram. 68 In fact Parantaka’s reign was 
a great epoch in the history of South Indian temple architec- 
ture, and the work of temple-building begun by Aditya was 
continued vigorously during the best part of his reign. We 
have also much valuable and interesting evidence from the 
inscriptions on the details of administration, central and rural, 
on the state of religious faith and so on. These matters have 
been reserved for detailed study at a later stage. 


1. PK. p 78. 

2. Was it an accident that Aditya’s Pandya contemporary was a 
Parantaka Viranarayana, and that Aditya’s son also had the names 
Parantaka and VIranarayana? Or was it more common then to name 
the first children after their maternal grandparents than it is now? 

3. 465 of 1918 is dated 45 yr.: Krishna Sastri is sure that year 46 
is clear in 15 of 1895: 200 of 1931-2 bears the yr. 48, ARE. II 11. This 
is held by A. S. Ramanatha Aiyar to be an error due to ignorance on 
the part of the engraver. E.i. xxv. p. 38. 

4. The date in 29 of 1907 is not so clear, but see 157 of 1928 and 
11 of 1931. 

5. 446 of 1917. The copper-plates furnish little assistance in the 
study of these campaigns: the Tiruvalangadu plates, however, give some 
information which is borne out by the contemporary account given by 
che Udayendiram plates of Ganga Prthivipati II. The stone inscriptions 
of Parantaka and the Mahdvamsa provide a fairly clear and cogent 
account of what happened. 

6. CV. Ch. 52, vv. 70 ff. 

7. SII ii. No. 76 w. 9-11. 

8. 331 of 1927. ARE. 1927, II 10 seeks to effect a weak reconcilia- 
tion between the new evidence and Venkayya’s account of the wars by 
suggesting that this title was assumed after Velur (Vellur) and fully 
justified only later — -a curious instance of academic orthodoxy. See, also 
SII, iii, Introdn. p. 11. No. 332 of 1927 is a Rajakesari record, not one 
of Parantaka, as stated in ARE. 1927, App. C. 



136 


PARANTAKA I 


9. 231 of 1926. The Pandya did not die. as stated in ARE. 1926 
II, 16. There must be some mistake here. The actual phrase in the 
inscriptions is 'astigadai seyda nanvu.' 

10. S1I. iii. No. 99. Another inaccuracy here — the Ceylonese king 
did not come to the fight himsell, according to the MV. 

11. CV. Ch. 53 w. 5 ff. 

12. Meaning evidently his own Cola throne, in addition to the 
Pandyan recently captured by him. See Geiger. CV. i p. 172 n. 1. 

13. No. 51. 

14. PK. p. 79. 

15. CV. Ch. 53, vv. 41 ff. 

16. See Geiger, CV. i p. 176 n. 4. Also ii p. xx n. 18. It must be 
noted that Venkayya’s proof that it is only in his latest inscriptions of 
943 1 4 to 947] 8 that Parantaka calls himself ‘Conqueror of Ceylon’ no 
longer holds good; and the date 948 accepted by Geiger for this invasion 
is not so trustworthy as it appeared to Hultzsch. (See 332 and 331 of 
1927 of years 8 and 16 respectively of Parantaka) . The MV. goes on to 
add that a new Senapati of Udaya ‘laid waste the borderland of the 
Cola king and forced him with threats to restore all that he had car- 
ried away’ as booty. What exactly is meant by the ‘borderland’ is not 
clear. 

17. SIL iii 96. 

18. See ARE. 1908, II 84 ff. 

19. SI1. iii p. 449. 

20. We have only one inscription (129 of 1907, Pd. 14), its begin- 
ning lost, giving the genealogy of these chieftains for eight generations 
or so. It is probable that there were collateral branches of which we 
have as yet no information and if, failing to allow for this possibility, 
we seek to accommodate all the inscriptions in the genealogy of this 
single record, we come across a number of difficulties not easily settled. 
It should also be borne in mind that a title like Tennavan Ilangovelar 
may have been borne by several persons, and no identification can be 
confidently based on the recurrence of such titles in different inscrip- 
tions. At any rate, if Pudi Vikramakesari was, as there are strong 
reasons to believe, the contemporary of Aditya II who 'took the head 
of VIrapandiyan,’ it is difficult to believe that he was also the Tennavan 
Ilangovelar whose daughter Adicca Pidari had become the wife of 
Arikulakesari as early as the third year (a.d. 910) of Parantaka I. These 
chiefs were Kallar (140 of 1928 Parantaka I, year 17), and had dynastic 
connections with the Muttaraiyar (337 of 1904, Pd. 45). Idangali-Naya- 
nar was believed to be of their family ( Periya Puranam) contra Nambi 
Andar Nambi. 

21. El. iv pp. 221-5. 

22. SII. ii No. 76, v. 9. 

23. v. 58. Note the phrase ajitam-naradhipaih. See also El. xxvi 
pp. 212-4. The new title is borne by Parantaka in his 4th year (241 of 
i 943-4). 

24. On the Banas see El xi. pp. 229-40 and xvii pp. 1-7: I follow 
Hultzsch’s table (El. xvii p 3) for the numbering of the Bana kings. 



NOTES 


137 


25. Parivi and Nandagiri occupy in late Bana records a position 
similar to that of Uraiyur and the Kaveri in the Telugu Coda records. 
It may be observed that Parigi answers to the description of the Bana 
country being to the west of the Andhra. 

26. 99 of 1899. 

27. 235, 267, 268 of 1902 (EL vii pp. 142 ff) and 16, 743 of 1905; 
ARE. 1905 II, 28. 

28. Nos. 160, 236 of 1912, the former being SII. iii 108. 

29. ARE. 1913 II 18 and SII. iii 108 (Introdn.) make SItpuli a per- 
sonal name, and suggest that SItpuli was the general of Bhlma. But 
79 of 1921 (Rajak. 6) mentions fSitpuli-nadu and Paki-nadu. The latter 
is well known as Paka-rastra. It is doubtful if Calukya Bhima’s terri- 
tory could have extended up to Sitpuli-nadu between Venkatagiri and 
Gudur (Rapur tq.) It may have been an attempt of Parantaka to sub- 
due the Telugu Codas. NI. R. 47 (p. 1267) 1. 34 mentions Cedupuli- 
nadu. 

30. See Ch. viii below, under Arinjaya. 

31. Rangachari says that Prthivlpati became a vassal of Krsna III, 
end was living in a.d. 953 (NA. 586). In saying this, he overlooks 
Hultzsch’s warning that the Attimallar of this record is a different 
person (El. vii p. 195). 

32. 332 of 1912. 

33. Rice Mysore and Coorg, p. 45. 

34. A. S. Ramanatha Aiyar has argued (El. xxvi pp. 230-5) that 
Govinda IV when he was deposed from the Rastrakuta throne found 
refuge with his father-in-law Parantaka I, that Parantaka made a futile 
attempt to restore Govinda IV — an attempt which ended in the defeat 
and death of Govinda, and that Krsna Ill’s invasion of the Cola was 
a reprisal against Parantaka’s attempt to support his father Amogha- 
varsa’s enemy Govinda. That Viramadevi, a daughter of Parantaka, 
was a queen of Govinda IV is rendered probable by 245 and 246 of 
1921. But this is too slight a basis for the speculative reconstruction 
offered, and Krsna’s invasion is explained quite easily on other grounds. 

35. 1 of 1896 ARE. 1896, paragraph 6; El. iv pp. 178-9. 

36. A'SI. 1905-6 p. 181. Also 180 of 1921. ARE. 1921, II 25. 

37. 739 of 1905. 

38. 735 of 1905 dated Saturday, 14th January a.d. 943. 

39. 374 of 1902. 

40. 280 of 1902. 

41. 428 of 1902; El. vii p. 194. 

42. No. 236 of 1913 dates his death in 6. 889 (a.d. 967). It is pos- 
sible he started rule somewhat earlier. His earliest inscription is dated, 
however, a.d. 940; perhaps the conflict with Lalleya, the rival claimant 
to his throne, filled the early years. 

43. ASI. 1908-9. p. 122 n. 2. 

44. Contra. T. A. Gopinatha Rao. El. xv pp. 51-2 and El. xviii 
p. 24. See also ARE. 1911, II, 22. 

C. 18 



138 


PARANTAKA 1 


45. Though not a happy term this may be retained as familiar to 
students of South Indian epigraphy. 

46. El. vi p. 51. 

47. 419 of 1903; 184, 313 of 1906; 149 of 1916. 

48. 375 of 1909. This record is availed of by A. S. Ramanatha Aiyar 
in his rather fanciful reconstruction of Cola-Rastrakuta relations, El. 
xxvi p. 232. 81 of 1941-2 is said to be dated 7 yr.: but this is very 
doubtful. ARE. 1939; 40— 1942 1 43 II 23. 

49. K. V. S. Aiyar, EL. xii p. 123; xix pp. 82 ff. ARE 1926 II 12. 

50. See Rangachari, p. 217; Studies pp. 178-9; 197. 

51. It may also be noticed that while in some records Kannaradeva 
is given the title Kacciyum-Tanjaiyum-konda, in others he is simply 
called by his name without any distinguishing title. But as the range 
of dates and the provenance of both sets of these records are identical, 
and as no palaeographical differences divide the two groups, they may 
both be treated as relating to Kr§na III. 

52. El. iv, p. 331 n. 3. 

53. This important inscription has been edited twice by Fleet— El. 
ii pp. 167 ff; vi pp. 50-7. The text has: ‘Muvadi-C6la-Rd)ddityana mele 
(Oa) ndu Takkolal-dol kadi kondu bijayam-jeyyuttu ildu’ (1, 4); and 
‘Kannaradevam Colanam kaduvandu Butugam Raiadityanam bisugeye 
kallan-agi guri (suri) -giridu kadi kondu Banavase Pannirccasiramum 
etc.’ (11. 20-1). 

On both occasions Fleet translated the second extract so as to imply 
treachery on the part of Butuga. And in discussing No. 181 of 1912, a 
most baseless conjecture was hazarded in ARE. 1913, II, 17 that Catura- 
nana Pandita betrayed his master and friend Rajaditya to his foes. But 
the phrase ‘bisugeye kallan-agi’ must really be read: ‘bisugeye kalanagi’; 
the words ‘bisuge’ and ‘kalan’ mean respectively the howdah fastened to 
the back of elephants for riding on, and field (of battle). Butuga made 
the howdah of Rajaditya’s elephant itself the battlefield. This inter- 
pretation is borne out by the Cola inscriptions. The larger Leyden 
grant says: ‘Rdjddityas-sa vi ro ravikulatilakah, K r snardjam sasainyam 

samksobhydksobhyam-ajau * * ndgendra-skandha-varti vidalita-hrdayah 
* * viralokan-jagama’ a clear statement which leaves not the slightest 
room for the suspicion of treachery on the part of Rajaditya’s opponent. 
See JR AS. 1909, pp. 443-6. Other Cola inscriptions from Kumbakonam 
and Tirunagesvaram mention the ‘king who died on the back of an ele- 
phant.’ ARE. 1912, II, 14, Fleet’s old mistake is repeated in the Kadamba- 
kula (Bombay, 1931) p. 86. 

54. v, 54. 

55. ASSI. iv. pp. 206-7, 11. 42-45; El. xxii. 

56. 338, 356 of 1902 (Tirunamanallur) . See also ARE 1939-40 

1942-43 II, 28. 

57. El. iii p. 179-80. Also the Kudlur plates of Marasimha (a.d 
963) 11. 88 ff. MAR. 1921, pp. 11, 26. 

58. El. iv. p. 280. 



NOTES 


139 


59. Al-Biruni seems to say that Tanjore was in mins and that in 
consequence the Cola king built a new capital. Sewell, Antiquities ii 
p. 155. Is this a late reference to the effects of Krsna’s inroad, or 
merely the assignment of a wrong reason for the foundation of the new 
capital at Gangaikonda-Solapuram? 

59a. ARE. 1913 II 14. 

60. Nos. 465 of 1918, 15 of 1895, and 135 of 1931. Krishna Sastri has 
said (SI/, v, p. 226 n) that in 15 of 1895 the figure 6 is clear on the 
stone, and this must set at rest any lingering doubts on this question 
of fact. See also ASI. 1908-9, p. 122 n 1. The larger Leyden grant (v. 
19) categorically asserts that Rajaditya began to rule after the death of 
Parantaka, and then proceeds to give an account of Rajaditya’s war with 
Krsna. 1 am inclined to accept the contemporary stone records as more 
valid evidence than the statement in a copper-plate grant dated after 
more than half-a-century of the utmost confusion. 

60a. 200 of 1931-32; ARE. 1931-2 II 11. A. S. Ramanatha Aiyar 
(El. xxv pp. 35 ff.) has argued by a process of elimination that Paran- 
taka I lost his life in war in the south fighting against VIra Pandya ‘who 
took the head of the Cola’ and that this happened in a.d. 953-54. He 
supposes that the regnal year in the Vanamaladinne record is due to 
the fact ‘that the recent news of the death of the Cola king had not 
percolated so far north, at the time that record was incised’ (p. 38). 
But it may with equal propriety be suggested that the record is a valu- 
able testimony to the continued resistance of the people of the locality 
to Krsna’s intrusion and to their loyalty to Parantaka who was still 
alive and ruling. 

61. 335 of 1902. Gopinatha Rao thinks that this queen and Parantaka 
are named among the donors in the Huzur Treasury Plates of Tiruvalla. 
(TAS. ii. 141). But this is doubtful. 

62. Anbil vv. 22-3. SII. ii p. 383 v. 8. 

63. Iravi Nili, the daughter of the Cera King, Vijayaraga, is another. 
She gave 30-kalanjit of gold for a lamp in the Tiruvorriyur temple. 
(SII. iii No. 103). 

64. Nos. 245-6 of 1921 (year 31). 

65. T. A. Gopinatha Rao (El. xv. p. 50), basing himself on 110 of 
1895 suggests that Vikramasola Ilangovelar of that record must have 
been Parantaka. If that be so, the name Paluvettaraiyar favours the 
supposition, the record must be one of Aditya I, as Ilangovelar would 
not apply to Parantaka in the record of any other sovereign. Then the in- 
terval between this record mentioning the marriage of Parantaka and his 
death would be eighty years (34 plus 46) at least, which looks impro- 
bable. There were many Paluvettaraiyars, and Ilangovelar is not the 
same as Ilangd. Perhaps Vikramasola Ilangovelar was only a minor 
chieftain of some feudatory family. 

66. See Studies pp. 163 ff. 

67. SII. ii. 383 v. 7. 

68. Karandai plate, v. 18. See also Gandaraditya’s Tiruvisaippa. on 

Koyil: Tennanadum ilamumkonda tirar-cengor-colan koli-vendan 

Sembiyan ponnaninda * * * * Tillaiyambalattu (v. 8). 



Chaptkr VIII 


FROM THE DEATH OF PARANTAKA I (a.d. 955) 

TO THE 

ACCESSION OF RAJARAJA I (a.d. 985) 

I . — Chronology and order of succession. 

The relatively short interval of about thirty years from 
the death of Parantaka to the accession of Rajaraja I is one 
of the most difficult passages of Cola history. The evidence is 
confusing, and no two scholars are agreed in its proper inter- 
pretation. It is hardly possible to put forward a scheme of 
succession without a more or less full discussion of possible 
alternatives. 


We may begin by setting forth in some detail the nature 
of the evidence at hand. Stone inscriptions 
Inscriptions. constitute the chief source of our know- 

ledge, and there are several among these that un- 
mistakably belong to this period. 1 The inscriptions of 
Kannaradeva (Krsna III) bearing regnal years higher 
than twenty-three, and found in the districts of North 
Arcot and Chingleput constitute the first group of these 
records; the latest year in them is twenty-eight, and this 
would take us to a.d. 965. 2 Of the remaining stone inscrip- 
tions of the period, several belong to Maduraikonda 
Rajakesari and bear dates in regnal 
Of Maduraikonda vears ranging from five to seventeen. Four 
Rajakesari. _ 

inscriptions belong to Sundara Cola with 

titles Madhurantaka and Pandiyanaic-curam-irakkina; two of 
the e are dated in years five and seven, while 
Of Sundara. the dates in the other two are lost. A con- 
siderable number with years ranging from two to five are 
those of Parakesari who had the title (Vira) 
Of Vlra-Pandiyan- Pandivan-talai-konda: and a still larger 

ParakKarj 3 number belong to a Parthivendra-varman 

with the same title and with other variants 



INSCRIPTIONS 


141 


to his name like Vendradivarman, Parthivendradhipati- 
varman and so on; these records give dates 
Of Parthivendia. ^ thirteenth regnal year. 3 Lastly, 

we have a number of Parakesari Uttama Cola’s inscriptions 
with regnal years from two to sixteen; two of them are pre- 
cisely dated and fix the limits of his reign. 
Of uttama Cola, title Parakesari, and the dates in his ins- 
criptions 4 which couple Kali year 4083 (a.d. 981-2) with his 
regnal year thirteen, fix Uttama Cola’s place as the immediate 
predecessor of Rajakesari Rajaraja I. It should also be 
observed that some of the numerous records 
Of unidentified which give no more detailed specification of 
Par ake saris. the ruling sovereign than to call him Raja- 

kesari or Parakesari will, no doubt, on any 
scheme of chronology, be found to fall in this period: but 
these may, for the most part be left on one side in the present 
discussion. 


Besides the stone inscriptions, we have the evidence of 
copper-plate grants. The only grant that falls 
Copper-plates. - n ^his pgj.jQ^ j s that in the Anbil plates of 
the fourth year of Sundara Cola. Unfortunately for us, Mad- 
hava Bhatta, the composer of the Sanskrit prasasti in these 
plates, was less anxious to record facts which must have been 
very well known to him than to display his capacity for alan- 
kdras in his verse. As it is, even for the fact that Sundara 
Cola was a Rajakesari we have to depend on the opening of 
the Tamil part of the record. The Tiruvalangadu plates imply, 
and the Leyden grant expressly affirms, that after the death 
of Rajaditya the succession took place in the following order: 
Gandaraditya, Arindama, Parantaka, Ad it y a and Madhuran- 
taka. The Karandai plates of Rajendra I as also the Kanya- 
kumari inscription and the Charala plates of Virarajendra 
give only the names of Arindama and Parantaka II between 
Parantaka I and Rajaraja. apparently because the authors of 
the Prasastis had no other object in view than to trace the 
descent of the reigning king in the direct line from Vijayalaya. 
The genealogy of the Colas from Parantaka I to Rajaraja as 
it is given in these records may be set down before proceed- 
ing further: 



142 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 



Parantaka I 


By Kokkilan 

1 

By Kerala princess 

i 

Raj aditya 

Gandaraditya 

Arinjaya m 
Kalyanl of the 



Vaidumba race 


Madhurantaka 

I 


Uttama (Parakesari) 

Sundara Parantaka 



(Rajakesari) 

1 


1 

Aditya II. 

1 

Rajaraja I. 


One thing is clear and it is necessary to grasp this firmly; 

that we cannot treat the regnal years gather- 
Overlapping e d from the stone records as those of kings 

u "" whose reigns succeeded one another in 

regular order in the manner implied by the copper-plate 
grants. For in that case the period would, if we omit Parthi- 
vendra-varman from the reckoning and add the highest regnal 
years known of Maduraikonda Rajakesari, Sundara, Aditya 
and Uttama. extend to 45 years, a period much too long for 
the interval between Parantaka I and Raja- 
^Gandaraditya’s raja. Then there is the possibility that Gan- 
daraditya and Arinjaya also ruled as kings. 
A Rajakesari inscription possibly of Rajaraja I’s reign 5 men- 
tions the second year of Gandaradityadeva alias Mummudi- 
cola-deva. while taking stock of the gifts made by his queen 
Sembiyan Mahadevi at various times to the temple of Tiru- 
venkadu. Records of the eighth year of Rajakesari 6 show 
that Arikulakesari, the son of Parantaka, stood in the relation 
of Pillaiyar or Alvar 7 (terms often applied to junior members 
of the royal family) to the ruling king who, being a Raja- 
kesari, could only have been Gandaraditya. 

As for Arinjaya, besides the statements in the copper- 
plates regarding his rule, there is a Raja- 
Armjaya. kesari record dated in the twelfth year 8 
which mentions two queens of ‘Arinjigaivarman who died at 
Arrur’; and inscriptions from Melpadi dated late in the reign of 
Rajaraja I 9 mention the construction by him of the C6lesvara 



TALA1 - KONDA 


143 


temple as a memorial shrine (pallipadai) to Arrurttunjina- 
deva. These references render it probable that Arinjaya 
lived long enough to rule in his own right, though, perhaps, 
only for a short time. Taking all these facts into consideration, 
we see clearly that there must have been a great deal of over- 
lapping of the regnal years of the different kings quoted in the 
lithic recoi’ds. 

Another preliminary question that must be considered is 

the exact significance of the phrase ‘talai- 

Meaning of konda’ which is of some importance to the 
talai-konda. ' ' 

nistory of this period; because Vira Pandya 
claims to have done this to a Cola king and others claim to 
have done the same thing to Vira Pandya himself. The phrase 
has been generally understood to mean ‘having cut off the 
head,’ and the identity of the Cola king who died at the 
hands of the Pandya has been much discussed. 10 It appears, 
however, that the true meaning of the phrase is that the van- 
quished king had to acknowledge his defeat by humbling 
himself before the conqueror in a particular manner, as it 
were placing his head at the disposal of the conqueror, 
flultzsch has pointed out 11 that in the inscriptions of Kulot- 
tunga III, the phrase ‘Pandiyanai mudittalai kondaruliya' 
employed in some records is explained by another phrase: 
‘avan mudi mel adi vaittu’ of other inscriptions of the same 
reign; so that the process of ‘taking the head’ consisted in the 
vanquished king bowing and touching with his head the feet 
of the conqueror seated in open darbar. The celebrated 
Krsna Deva Raya of Vijayanagar only varied this traditional 
procedure slightly when he demanded that, as the price of 
peace, Adil Shah of Bijapur should visit him and kiss his 
foot. 12 The Guruparamparai, a work which often gives a true 
account of the practices of Cola times, mentioned that the 
king from Gangaikonda-solapuram mounted his state elephant 
by placing his foot on the head of his samanta, or feudatory. 13 
The above interpretation of talai-konda has a bearing on the 
discussion of this period, because it follows that a king whose 
‘head was taken’ by another need not be assumed to have 
died at the time this happened to him. It is, of course, another 
matter where we have clear statements of a person being 
killed. Applying this to the cases arising in this period, we 
see that the Tiruvalangadu plates make an express declara- 



144 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 

tion that Aditya II killed VIra Pandya in battle and brought 
his severed head to the Cola capital. 14 Even here the lateness 
of the testimony throws suspicion on the event. There is no 
clear evidence, however, that a Cola sovereign lost his life 
at the hands of Vira Pandya, and apparently Vira Pandya’s 
boastful title meant no more than that he inflicted a tempo- 
rary humiliation on a Cola king or prince. 

Evidence has been cited above showing that Gandaraditya 
was a Rajakesari and that he ruled for at 
Identification ot least eight years. His rule might have com- 
R^jak^sari. n ^ a menced from the death of Raj aditya, whose 
place he must have taken as heir apparent 
in Parantaka’s lifetime. A suggestion has sometimes been 
made that Gandaraditya was a Parakesari and that Arindama, 
placed immediately after him by the Tiruvalangadu plates, 
was identical with Maduraikonda Rajakesari. 15 This seems 
to rest really on two assumptions; that Rajaditya ruled 
after Parantaka's death, and that as he was a Raja- 
kesari, Gandaraditya who succeeded him must have 
been a Parakesari. But it has been shown that the 
first of these assumptions is not true. It is likely 
enough that Rajaditya assumed the title Rajakesari when he 
was made heir apparent; but considering that he predeceased 
his father, Gandaraditya who took his place must have assum- 
ed the same title so that the sovereign ruler next after Paran- 
taka Parakesari might be a Rajakesari. In fact the general 
opinion now prevailing is that Gandaraditya was a Rajake- 
sari, 16 though the implication that Rajaditya predeceased his 
father does not seem to have been so clearly grasped. For 
we shall see at a later stage of this discussion that an appli- 
cation of the rule that every heir apparent, whether one or 
more, adopted the title Rajakesari or Parakesari, according as 
the ruling sovereign was Parakesari or Rajakesari, furnishes 
a neat solution of the difficulties that could not otherwise be 
adequately met. 

The Rajakesari title may, therefore, be admitted for Gan- 
daraditya. But the suggestion, first made by Venkayya, 17 that 
Gandaraditya was no other than Maduraikonda Rajakesari, 
appears to have been accepted without sufficient examination 
of the evidence. 18 The title Maduraikonda was taken to imply 



MADURAIKONDA RAJAKESARI 145 

that the king was the son of Maduraikonda Parakesari, Paran- 
taka I. Hence when Gandaraditya was believed to be a Para- 
kesari, Maduraikonda was identified with Arinjaya Raja- 
kesari. 19 Later when Gandaraditya became a Rajakesari him- 
self, he was said to be also Maduraikonda Rajakesari. But 
this asumption is by no means an argument, and one must be 
prepared to relinquish it if reason is shown for doing so. Now, 
let us turn to the provenance of the records of Maduraikonda 
Rajakesari. All of them, except three records of the four- 
teenth and seventeenth years, come from the North Arcot 
and Chingleput districts. Three of these are dated in his fifth 
year, and a fourth in the seventh. One of the records of the 
fifth year belongs to a place called Karikkal, near Sholingur, 
in the Walajapet taluq of North Arcot. Its date falls about 
a.d. 954. At the latest, that is, assuming that Parantaka I died 
in 955 and that Gandaraditya did not begin his rule till after 
that event, it might be a.d. 960. It is difficult to see how this 
can be reconciled with the fact that Krsna III was still at 
Melpadi in a.d. 959 distributing conquered territory among 
his followers, and that his inscriptions are found in Tondai- 
mandalam up to about a.d. 965. These objections to identify- 
ing Gandaraditya with Maduraikonda Rajakesari are weighty, 
and should prevail even if no other identification were pos- 
sible from the later inscriptions of the time. But fortunately 
there is open to us an easy, and doubtless the correct, solution 
of the question which would be readily accepted, once the 
idea is given up that Maduraikonda must have been a son of 
another Maduraikonda, that is. Parantaka I. A single record 
from Kodumbalur, 20 from which the date has been lost, opens 
by mentioning ‘udaiy&r madurantakan Sundara-solan.’ This 
unique record disposes of the notion that the title Maduran- 
taka (Madiraikonda) in the records of this period must have 
been borne only by a son of Parantaka I, for we know of no 
Sundara-solan who was his son. This inscription offers the 
clue to the correct identity of Maduraikonda Rajakesari. 
Sundara Cola, the son of Arinjaya, was a Rajakesari, as the 
Anbil plates tell us, and he had also the title ‘Madurantakan.’ 
He has yet another title which gives evidence of his Pandyan 
war, namely, Pdndiyanaic-curam-irakkina. 21 These facts seem 
to point definitely to the conclusion that Sundara Cola Paran- 
taka II was the king who, in some of his records, is called 
Madi (u)raikonda Rajakesari. 

C. 19 



146 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 


There is one record of Maduraikonda Rajakesari which, at 
first sight, seems to render it more likely that 

His relation Gandaraditiya rather than Sundara Cola 
to Uttama Cola. , , , , . . 

was the kmg of that record. This inscrip- 
tion 22 from Tiruvorriyur is dated in the fifth year and registers 
the endowment of a lamp by one of the nobles of Udaiyar 
Sri Uttama Coja-deva who accompanied him to the temple. 
Krishna Sastri, in editing this record, says: ‘A reasonable 

doubt may arise why Uttama Cola is given here the title of 
a ruling king and not that of a prince. It was perhaps because 
he was the chosen successor of Gaiidaraditya at the time. 
We know, however, that he actually came to the Cola throne 
only after one or two other kings had reigned subsequent to 
his father’s death.’ But if this was so, if Uttama Cola was 
in the fifth year of his father’s reign old enough to be chosen 
heir apparent, to adopt regal style and to visit temples with 
his ( perundaram ) nobles, and if his father continued to rule 
for twelve years thereafter, it is hard to see why he did not 
succeed his father immediately on his death and had to wait 
until most probably Arinjaya and Sundara, possibly also 
Aditya II, had finished their rule. Not only does Krishna 
Sastri not explain this, but he says elsewhere: 23 ‘At the time 
of Gandaraditya’s death, Uttama Cola must have been a 
young boy, as he was set aside in the order of succession till 
three kings after Gandaraditya had ruled and died.’ Surely 
it is not easy to reconcile the two positions that the king of the 
Tiruvorriyur record was Gandaraditya, and that at his death, 
his son was a young boy, so young that he had to wait through 
the reigns of three successors of Gandaraditya before he could 
himself rule. There is a more serious discrepancy. Even assum- 
ing that Gandaraditya counted his regnal years from the death 
of Rajaditya (a.d. 949), if w'e identify him with Maduraikonda 
Rajakesari. who ruled for at least seventeen years, his reign 
would extend up to 966. And Madhurantaka Uttama Cola 
began to rule in 969-70. The interval of three years is too 
short to take in the reign of even Sundara Cola whose records 
unmistakably give him a rule of not less than seven years, 24 
much less those of three kings. The Tiruvorriyur record cited 
at the beginning of this paragraph cannot, therefore, be assign- 
ed to Gandaraditya. It must be admitted, however, that even 
if we take it to be a record of Sundara Cola, the difficulty still 
remains of explaining the regal title of Uttama Cola in it. See- 



TITLE OF HEIR-APPARENT 


14 ' 


ing that Sundara had a son Aditya who was ably assisting him 
in his warlike enterprises, it seems unlikely that he recognised, 
and that so early in his reign, a prince from a collateral, 
although senior, branch of his family as heir apparent. The 
only suggestion that offers itself, and for which support may 
be found in analogous cases from Cola records, is that though 
the gift recorded in the inscription was made in the fifth 
year of Sundara Cola when Uttama might have been old 
enough to have a retinue of his own with which he went about 
touring the country, it was not actually engraved on stone 
until Uttama Cola had begun to reign in his own right, which 
he did, as we shall see, immediately after Sundara Cola . 25 

There remain two further questions to be discussed — the 
position of Vira-Pandiyan-talai-konda Parakesari and the 
identity of Parthivendravarman who bears the same title. The 
former may certainly be identified with Aditya, the son of 
Sundara Cola, who according to the Tiruvalangadu plates and 
the Leyden grant fought against Vira 
Two Parakesaris Pandya . 26 But Aditya II was followed by 
in succession. , „ , . . . ,, _ , , 

another Parakesari, viz., Madhurantaka 

Uttama Cola. This appears, at first sight, to violate the normal 
rule of the Rajakesari alternating -with the Parakesari title 
among the ruling sovereigns of the Cola dynasty. Krishna 
Sastri says of Uttama Cola : 27 ‘Contrary to the usual order, 
according to which he ought to have been a Rajakesarivarman, 
his predecessor Aditya II being Parakesarivarman, he too was 
called a Parakesarivarman, evidently because he was the son 
of a Rajakesarivarman and succeeded to the throne not 
by the right he possessed, but at the request of his cousin’s 
son Rajaraja I who was the chosen successor.’ Two remarks 
may be made on this explanation: first, it seems hardly con- 
sistent with the position held by Krishna Sastri, not by us, 
that Uttama Cola was chosen successor in Gandaraditya’s 
reign, and that on account of his tender age. ‘the claims of 
Gandaraditya’s chosen successor were temporarily set aside 
and postponed .’ 28 For, if this was so, how can it be said that 
he succeeded to the throne not in his own right, but at the 
request of Rajaraja? Then again the implication that the son 
of a Rajakesari must be a Parakesari is contradicted by the 
example of Rajaraja I, who was a Rajakesari himself and the 
son of a Rajakesari. It may also be stated here that Arinjaya, 
who must have ruled a short while as Parakesari, was also the 



148 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA 1 

son of a Parakesari. The true explanation of two Parakesaris 
coming one after another seems to be that the earlier Para- 
kesari, the chosen heir apparent, Aditya II, died in the life- 
time of his father Sundara Cola, and the prince chosen next 
for the throne also took the title of Parakesari in order that 
Rajakesari Sundara might be followed on the throne by a 
Parakesari after his death. At the death of Aditya II, 29 Sun- 
dara Cola had to choose Uttama Cola and not his younger 
son Rajaraja, either because Uttama Cola forced the choice by 
threatening civil war, or because Rajaraja of his own will 
preferred to wait. The verses in the Tiruvalangadu plates, 
which are the only direct source of our information, can sup- 
port either interpretation. They declare on the one hand that 
Uttama Cola was eager to rule and on the other that Rajaraja 
was too good a ksatriya to dream of the throne for himself 
while his father’s cousin wanted it. And we shall see that 
Uttama Cola made clear his eagerness to rule by, possibly, 
instigating a political murder. 

The identity of Parthivendravarman, whose records, are 
found in the districts of North and South 
Parthivendra- Arcot, and Chingleput, is involved in much 
' 1 obscurity. The suggestion 30 that he was the 

same as Prthivlpati II, the Ganga feudatory of Parantaka, is 
the result of a very dubious inference from the resemblance 
in meaning between the names Prthivlpati and Parthivendra. 
It is also partly the result of a confusion between the Ganga 
king and a feudatory of Krsna III who, though he had the 
name Kannaradeva-Prthivigangariyar, was quite different 
from the Ganga. 31 After examining the records of Aditya II 
and Parthivendravarman, Krishna Sastri has reached the 
following conclusions: 32 ‘Both these kings claim the epithet, 
“who took the head of Pandva or Vlra-Pandya” — evidently the 
same Pandya king who was at war with Sundara Cola Paran- 
taka II — and the title Parakesarivarman. Inscriptions of the 
former are very few and found only in the south, the latest 
regnal year being the 5th. Of the latter, there are many in 
Tondai-mandalam and the latest regnal year is the 13th. Par- 
thivendra Adityavarman may have been a prince of the royal 
family and viceroy of Tondai-mandalam. Aditya Karikala 
appears to have been the actual successor.’ The inscriptions 
of Pandiyan-talai-konda Parakesari are not so very few after 
all: and what is more important, they are not confined to ‘the 



PARTHIVENDRA 


149 


south,’ if by that is meant the country to the south of and 
outside Tondai-mandalam. There are at least five inscriptions 
of his in North Arcot and more in South Arcot. On exami- 
nation we find that the Parthivendravarman records differ 
from those of Aditya Parakesari in their provenance only in 
so far as the former are found in Chingleput district also, and 
are not found south of Tondai-mandalam. We also find the 
following features which have a cumulative significance in 
the consideration of his identity. He is a Parakesari ; 33 he 
has the regal title and calls himself ‘Kovirajamarayar ’; 34 in 
an early record of the third year he is even called Parthi- 
vendra Adittaparumar ; 35 his queens have also the full regal 
style — udaiydr deviydr Villavan mah&deviydr , 36 Perumd- 
nadigal deviydrt-tanmapponnar-agiya Trailokya mahadevi- 
ydr . 31 It seems clear that, far from being a feudatory of the 
Cola kings, the ruler who can lay claim to so much distinction 
must himself be a Cola monarch, and the name Aditya and 
the title Parakesari clearly suggest his 
Perhaps iden- identity with Aditya Karikala Parakesari. 
Aditya 1 II ‘Parthivendra Adityavarman’ and its variant 

forms occurring in his records show that he 
took the title ‘Parthivendra.’ The Cola kings were very fond 
of high-sounding birudas, and almost every one of them had 
many such titles. As the latest recorded regnal year in his 
inscriptions seems to be the thirteenth year , 38 it follows that 
he must have been chosen co-regent very soon after his father 
Sundara Cola’s accession. This looks very probable consider- 
ing that the Leyden grant gives him credit for having success- 
fully attacked Vira Pandya as a young boy. Afterwards he 
must have been deputed to rule the northern part of the Cola 
dominion. Apparently he died in the life-time of his father 
and was succeeded in the place of heir apparent by Parakesari 
Uttama Cola. 


The results of the foregoing discussion may thus be sum- 
marised before the history of the period is taken up : 


Rajakesari Gandaraditya 
Parakesari Arinjaya 
Rajakesari Sundara Cola 
(Madurai-konda) 
[Parakesari Aditya II 

Parthivendra Karikala 


a.d. 949 50 39 -957 
c. a.d. 956-957 

c. A.D. 956-97°) 
c. a.d. 956 - 9691 



150 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 


There is just one record. 40 of Parthivendravarman from 
the Chingleput district which is dated in the 
^ o fr ndUr fifteenth year. Though the inscription is 
damaged, a careful examination of the im- 
pression of the record establishes two things : the date of the 
record is clearly 15; and though the chiselling of the letters 
is by no means good, and the stone is apparently much decay- 
ed, there is no reason to question the genuineness of the record 
which exhibits most of the characteristic palaeographic 
features of the period. This date must, if accepted, upset the 
scheme of chronology given above which is based on the 
identification of Aditya II with Parthivendra, for we cannot 
possibly find room for the fifteen years before the accession 
of Uttama Cola and within the reign of Sundara. The period 
of thirteen years takes us almost to the limit and involves 
the assumption, in itself by no means unlikely, that Sundara 
associated his son Aditya in his administration very soon after 
his accession to the throne. On the othei hand, this inscrip- 
tion of the fifteenth year from Parandur is the only record so 
far known of Parthivendravarman with a regnal year higher 
than thirteen. We have several records of the thirteenth 
year, none whatever of the fourteenth, and only this one of 
the fifteenth. And it is extremely difficult to see any other 
solution to the riddle presented by his records than the one 
offered above: for if Parthivendra was not Aditya himself, 
how are we to explain the numerous coincidences to which 
attention has been drawn above, and which cannot all of 
them be accidental? The suggestion may therefore be made 
that in the regnal year in the Parandur record, the second 
figure which looks like the ordinary i (£gi) contains some 
mistake on the part of the engraver. This record need not 
be taken into account, therefore, unless other records with 
higher regnal years than 13 are discovered in future years. 

One final consideration remains to be urged in addition 
to those so far dealt with. If Aditya and Parthivendravarman 
were not identical, the highest regnal year for Aditya would 
be that found in the records of Parakesari who took the head 
of Vira Pandva. namely five. We must naturally assume 



GANDARADITYA 


151 


these five years to have been those immediately preceding 
Uttama Cdla’s accession in a.d. 969-70; this would lead to 
Aditya’s initial year falling somewhere about a.d. 964/5, which 
would be in the 8th or 9th year of Sundara Cola according to 
the chronology suggested above. The fact that Sundara Cola 
is clearly described as having come out successful in the 
Pandyan war before his seventh year (a.d. 963), together 
with the statement of the Leyden grant that Aditya took part 
in the fight at Sevur when still young, may lend some sup- 
port to the view that Aditya had become sub-king eai'lier in 
Sundara’s reign. This argument cannot be pressed far, as 
it is possible that Aditya fought without being formally 
associated in the government; or a second fight with the 
Pandyas might have come about later, about the year 
a.d. 964/5 


II. History 

The rule of Rafakesari Gandaraditya is attested not only 
. by the statements of the Tiruvalangadu and 

a ' Leyden grants which, though vague, doubt- 
less imply that he ruled in his own right as king, but by 
several Rajakesari inscriptions 41 from the Trichinopoly dis- 
trict, all dated in the eighth year and mentioning Pillaiyar or 
Alvar Arikulakesarideva, and one from S. Arcot of year 2 of 
Mummudi Cola Gandaraditya. 413 The sphere of Cola rule in his 
day must have been very limited and at the time of his death, 
about a.d. 957, 42 Krsna III was still perhaps in Tondaimandalam 
consolidating his position and distributing the conquered 
country among his allies and servants. One of Gandara- 
ditya’s feudatories in the mountainous country of South 
Arcot, Siddhavadavan of the lineage of Ori of the Sangam 
age who married Pari’s daughters, claims victory over 
unnamed enemies at Viracolapuram in a record of the second 
year (a.d. 951) of Gandaraditya; he must be the same as the 
Milada chief Narasimhavarman who owed allegiance to 
Krsna III in his seventeenth year (a.d. 955). 423 This shows 
that Gandaraditya could not make much progress in recover- 
ing territory lost to Krsna III who was still aggrandising his 
position and power in the Cola country. 



152 


PAR ANT AKA TO RAJARAJA I 


Gandraditya left behind an infant son, Uttama Cola, by 
his queen Sembiyan Mahadevi. This lady who survived her 
husband and even her son for many years, 
His queen. and lived on tiU A D 1001 « must have been 

widowed in early youth. After the death of her husband, 
hers was a life devoted to religion and charity. The number 
of stone temples to Siva built by her, and of substantial 
endowments for their up-keep after the commencement of hex- 
son’s rule will be noticed later. Very pro- 
His Tiruvisaippa. Gandaraditya was the author of the 

single hymn on the temple of Cidambaram. In this hymn 
there is a distinct statement that Parantaka I conquered Pan- 
dya country and Ilain, and covered the temple of Nataraja 
with gold; and the author calls himself, like Parantaka, the 
king of Koli (Uraiyur) and the lord of the Tanjaiyar (people 
of Tanjore) 44 Gandaraditya seems to have been known also 
as Merkelundarulina-devar. the king who went to the west. 45 

The identity in meaning of the titles Arikulakesari and 
Arinjaya or Arindama has often led to the 
Arinjaya. supposition that they refer to one and the 

same person, a younger son of Parantaka I. This may be so. 
In any event, Arinjaya Parakesari succeeded his brother 
Gandaraditya and had a short reign. As yet we have no 
direct evidence of the transactions of his reign. Two of his 
queens Viman Kundavaiyar and Kodai-pirattiyar survived 
him and made gifts in his son’s reign. Though it has been 
thought that Viman Kundavai was a daughter of the Calu- 
kya Bhima II of Vengl, 46 such an alliance between the Colas 
and the Calukyas in this period when the Colas were reduced 
to virtual subordination to the Rastrakutas seems hardly 
likely. If. however. Kundavai was an Eastern Calukya prin- 
cess, her marriage with Arinjaya must have taken place 
before the invasion of the Cola country by Krsna and some- 
time after the raid on Nellore by Maran Paramesvaran, in the 
reign of Parantaka I. But two inscriptions 47 from Tiruppa- 
lanam, dated in the second year of Parakesari, mention an 
Araiyan Adittan Viman making some gifts to the local temple, 
and there is nothing to preclude this noble (Araiyan) from 
being the father of Arinjaya’s queen. 48 If this view is correct, 
these Parakesari records must be assigned to Arinjaya. and 
in view of the strict limits placed on the duration of Arinjaya’s 



CEVUR 


15: 


rule by the general chronology of the period we must assume, 
what is not unlikely, that Arinjaya was chosen heir apparent 
to Gandaraditya 49 sometime soon after the death of Paran- 
taka I. Arinjaya is said to have died at Arrur, 50 a place that 
cannot be definitely identified. An inscription of Rajaraja I 
states that he built at Melpadi a memorial shrine ( pallipa - 
dai) 51 to the king who died at Arrur and this implies that 
Arrur was somewhere in that neighbourhood. Probably, 
Arinjaya had entered upon the task of regaining the Cola pos- 
sessions in the north lost to Krsna III. This suggestion gains 
force from an inscription 52 from Tirunagesvaram which men- 
tions Arinjigap-pirattiyar, daughter of prince Arikulakesari 
and his wife of a Bana king. 


This is a record of the second or third year of a Raja- 
kesarivarman who may be identified with 

Revival of Gandaraditya. It suggests that even under 
Cola power. _ ’ * , 

Gandaraditya attempts were made to re- 
trieve the losses sustained in the closing years of his father’s 
rule, and that, possibly, the Banas, or some among them, were 
successfully seduced from their allegiance to Krsna III. This 
Bana alliance may thus be counted among the earliest indi- 
cations of the emergence, of Cola power from the eclipse it 
suffered for a time. After the death of Gandaraditya, his 
efforts were continued by Arinjaya who fell fighting at Arrur. 
If this view of Gandaraditya’s reign is correct, it is possible 
that he also sought, at first with little success, to recover lost 
ground in the south, and that Vira Pandya’s boast of ‘taking 
the head’ of a Cola may be referred to the same reign. 

Arinjaya was succeeded by his son by the Vaidumba 
princess Kalyani, the only queen of Arih- 
jaya mentioned by the Anbil plates. This 
son was Sundara Cola Parantaka II who, as we have 
seen, was also known as Maduraikonda-Rajakesari. 
The attention of Sundara Cola was first directed to 
the south. Vira Pandya, having repulsed Gandara- 
ditya’s attempt to restore Cola supremacy in the Pandya 
country, was ruling as an independent potentate. The 
Leyden grant 53 tells us that in a great battle at Cevur, 
Parantaka caused rivers of blood to flow 
from the deep cuts inflicted by him on the 
elephants of the enemy and that his son Aditya, while yet 
C. 20 


Sundara Cola. 


Cevur. 



154 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 


a boy, played with Vira Pandya in the battle, like a lion’s 
whelp sporting with a tusker. The Karandai plates (vv. 24-5) 
mention the battle of Cevur adding that Vira Pandya was 
defeated and forced to climb the peaks of the Sahyadri for 
refuge. Aditya’s heroism was probably exhibited in the field 
of Cevur to the south of the Sevali hills, the southern boun- 
dary of Pudukkottah, and that battle must have furnished 
the occasion for his claim that he ‘took the head 
of Vira Pandya.’ The Leyden grant does not, like the Tiruva- 
langadu plates, state that Vira Pandya was 
Pandya War. killed by Aditya, and it is possible that the 
composer of the Tiruvalangadu plates, struck by the forcible 
simile in the Leyden grant, embellished the account of 
Aditya’s contest with Vira Pandya; and his account of 
Aditya’s rule adds nothing else to what we learn from 
the earlier grant. The chances are that, after the battle 
of Cevur in which Vira Pandya sustained a bad defeat, 
the Cola forces led, among others, by Parantakan 
Siriyavelar of Kodumbalur, continued the campaign into the 
Pandya country, and forced Vira Pandya to seek refuge in 
the forests. 54 The Pandya sovereign was on this occasion 
also supported by Ceylonese troops in his endeavour to resist 


Extended to 
Ceylon. 

a.d. 96s. 55 


the Cola aggression; for Siriyavelar led an 
expedition to Ceylon, and there he fell fight- 
ing before the ninth year of Sundara Cola’, 
The Mahtivamsa, corroborating this account, 


records the following in the reign of Mahinda IV a.d. 956- 

72;56 


‘The Vallabha king sent a force to Nagadipa 57 to 
subdue this our country. The Ruler hearing this, the 
king sent thither the senapati Sena by name, to whom 
he had made over an army, to fight with the troops of 
the Vallabha king. The senapati betook himself thither, 
fought with the troops of this (Vallabha) king, defeated 
them and remained master of the battle-field. As the 
kings with the Vallabha (king) at their head, were unable 
to vanquish our king, they made a friendly treaty with 
the ruler of Lanka. In this way the fame of the king 
penetrated to JambudTpa. spreading over Lanka and 
crossing the ocean.’ 



VIKRAMAKESARI 


155 


The Vessagiri slab inscription 58 of Mihindu which men- 
tions the successful campaign of senapati Sena against the 
Damilas furnishes epigraphical confirmation of the statements 
in the chronicle and the Cola inscriptions . 59 

Besides Aditya II, two other persons claim success against 
Vlra Pandya. One of these is Parthivendra- 
c Allies of the varman of whom something has been said 
already. The other is Bhuti- vikramakesari 
of Kodumbalur, who claims to have conquered Vira Pandya 
in battle. The inscription 60 which gives this information, also 
states that Vikramakesari turned the waters of the Kaveri 
red with the blood shed by the army of the 
Vikramakesari p a H avaj p U t an end to Vancivel and ruled 
from Kodumbalur. He had two queens Karrali and Vara- 
guna. A Rajakesari inscription, from which the date has 
been lost , 61 mentions that Karralip-piratti was the wife of 
Tennavan Ilangovelar alias Maravan Pudiyar, which may be 
other names of Vikramakesari. Two others dated in the 
thirteenth year of Rajakesari mention Varaguna-perumanar, 
apparently the other queen of Vikramakesari. One of these 
from Tillaisthanam , 62 says that she was the queen of Paran- 
taka Ilangovelar, a title showing doubtless the subordinate 
relation in which Vikramakesari stood to Parantaka Sundara 
Cola; the other, from Lalgudi , 63 states that Nangai Varaguna 
Perumanar was the sister of the Cola king. Again, Vikrama- 
kesari called his two sons by Karrali by the names of Paran- 
taka and Aditya-varma, apparently after the Cola sovereign 
and his son. Lastly, as has been mentioned before, Paran- 
takan Siriyavelar of Kodumbalur was one of the leaders of 
the Cola army in its southern expedition. When taken 
together, these facts suggest that the close terms of friend- 
ship and loyalty that subsisted between the chieftains of 
Kodumbalur and the Colas under Parantaka I continued 
under his successors also, and that Vikramakesari 64 assisted 
Sundara Cola and his son in subduing the rebellious Vira 
Pandya. 

The other achievements of Vikramakesari are not so 
easily explained as his war with Vira Pandya. Even if we 
ignore the minor success against Vancivel, it is not easy to 



156 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 


see how Vikramakesari could have fought with the Pallavas 
on the banks of the Kaveri. This by itself might justify 
a much earlier age for the Kodumbalur inscription of Vikrama- 
kesari; but as on palaeographical considerations no earlier 
date than that of Gandaraditya can be assigned for this 
record. 63 the suggestion may be made that by the Pallava in 
this context we must understand Vallabha, and explain the 
fight in which Vikramakesari took part with such distinction 
as having occurred on the occasion of Rastrakuta Krsna’s 
raid into the Cola country which is said to have taken him 
as far as Ramesvaram. 

The reign of Sundara Cola then marked the recovery of 
the Colas from the disasters of the Rastra- 
Inconclusive kuta invasion. For all the fighting in the 
P&ndya °War 6 south, however, the Pandyas and their 

allies of Ceylon held their own, and it is not 
till the reign of Rajaraja I that Cola inscriptions begin again 
to appear in the Pandya country. In fact Rajaraja claims to 
have subdued the Pandyas when they were still powerful 
and illustrious, implying thereby that in spite of their exer- 
tions his father and his elder brother Aditya had not made 
much headway against them. The inscrip- 
north. CeSS m the tions of Adit ya. Parthivendra, and of Sun- 
dara himself show on the other hand that 
remarkable success attended the Cola efforts in the north. 
As Krsna’s inscriptions get fewer in the districts of South 
Arcot, North Arcot and Chingleput, records of these others 
become more numerous; but we have no knowledge of the 
stages by which this change came about. That Sundara Cola 
took an active share in directing affairs in the north may be 
inferred from the fact that he died in his golden palace at 
Kancipuram and was thereafter known as Pon-maligait- 
tunjina deva. 66 One of his queens, Vanavanmahadevi, a prin- 
cess of the line of Malaiyamans, performed sati at the king’s 
death, 67 and her image was perhaps installed in the Tanjore 
temple by Kundavai, her daughter. 68 Sundara left behind 
him the reputation of a second Manu born to wean the world 
from ways of evil 69 (Kali) . Another queen of Sundara Cola, 
a Cera princess, survived him till the sixteenth year of his 
son Rajaraja’s reign, a.d. 1001. 70 



MURDER OF AD1TYA II 


157 


In Sundara Cola’s reign literature, both Sanskrit and 
Tamil received encouragement; not only 
does the earliest Cola copper-plate grant 
known so far date from his time, but a highly poetic eulogium 
of his reign, in the commentary of the Vlrasoliyam. bears 
witness to his patronage of letters . 71 This eulogy, which calls 
Sundara Cola the king of Nandipura, is addressed to the Bud- 
dha to secure the strength and prosperity of the king, and 
furnishes evidence of the prevalence of friendly relations 
between the Cola monarchs and the southern Buddhist San- 
gha several years before the date of the larger Leyden grant 
which records the gift of a village to a foreign Buddhist 
monastery at Negapatam. 


Sundara Cola’s last days appear to have been clouded by 
a domestic tragedy. An inscription from 
Aditya^II ° f Udaiyargudi dated in the second year of 
Rajakesari 72 records the measures taken by 
the Sabha of Sri Viranarayana caturvedimangalam under 
orders from the king for the confiscation and sale of the 
properties of some persons who were liable for treason as 
they had murdered ‘Karikala Cola who took the head of the 
Pandya.’ This record clearly shows that Aditya II fell a 
victim to assassination. The only possible kings to whom this 
Rajakesari record can be assigned are Sundara Co]a himself, 
and Aditya's younger brother, Rajaraja, who succeeded 
Uttama Cola, a Parakesari. But the early regnal year rules 
out Sundara Cola, as we cannot suppose that Aditya. whose 
inscriptions range at least up to the fifth year, began to reign 
before his father. Therefore the inscription is doubtless a 
record of Rajaraja’s reign. If this inference is accepted — the 
palaeography and the astronomical data of the record support 
this view — then it follows that the murder of Aditya II re- 
mained unavenged throughout the sixteen years in which 
Uttama Cola ruled. Sundara Cola himself having either died 
of a broken heart soon after the murder or after having 
found the natural course of justice obstruct- 
Uttama Cola’s e( j by a powerful conspiracy. It seems im- 
possible under the circumstances to acquit 
Uttama Cola of a part in the conspiracy that resulted in the 
foul murder of the heir apparent. Uttama coveted the throne 



158 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 

and was not satisfied with the subordinate role assigned to 
princes of the blood in the administration of the kingdom ; 
as representing a senior branch of the royal family, he 
perhaps convinced himself that the throne was his by right, 
and that his cousin and his children were usurpers. He 
formed a party of his own, and brought about the murder of 
Aditya II, and having done so, he forced the hands of Sundara 
Cola to make him heir apparent, and as there was no help 
for it, Sundara had to acquiesce in what he could not avert. 
The Tiruvalangadu plates seem to gloss over the story on 
purpose, and make statements which, though enigmatic in 
themselves, are fairly suggestive of the true course of events, 
when read together with the datum furnished by the Udaiyar- 
gudi inscription. The plates say : 

‘Aditya disappeared owing to his desire to see 
heaven. 73 Though his subjects, with a view to dispel the 
blinding darkness caused by the powerful Kali (Sin) , en- 
treated Arumolivarma, he, versed in the dharma of the 
Ksattra, did not desire the kingdom for himself even in- 
wardly as long as his paternal uncle coveted his own 
(i.e., Arumolivarma’s) country.’ 

The sun of Aditya had set; the darkness of sin prevailed; the 
people wanted Arumoli to dispel it; but Uttama’s cupidity 
triumphed, because of Arumoli’s restraint. Arumoli was not 
a coward; nor was he lacking in political ability or legal right. 
Anxious to avoid a civil war, he accepted a compromise, and 
agreed to wait for his turn until after Uttama’s desire to be 
king had found satisfaction: it was apparently part of the 
compromise that Uttama was to be succeeded not by his 
children, but by Arumoli. and in the words, again, of the Tiru- 
valangadu plates: 

‘Having noticed by the marks (on his body) that 
Arumoli was the very Visnu, protector of the three 
worlds, descended (on earth), Madhurantaka installed 
him in the position of yuvaraja, and (himself) bore the 
burden of (ruling) the earth.’ 

We find accordingly Madhurantakan Gandaradittan, who 
must have been a son of Madhurantaka Uttama Cola, occupy- 
ing high office under Rajaraja when he came to power and 
loyally assisting him in the administration of the country. 74 



UTTAMA COLA 


159 


If this reading of the story of Uttama Cola’s accession is cor- 
rect, Uttama Cola furnishes an instance, by no means unique 
in history, of selfish and perverse offspring bom of parents 
distinguished for piety and right-mindedness; and his rash and 
bloody self-seeking stands out in striking contrast to the true 
nobility and statesmanship of the future Rajaraja. 

The inscriptions of Aditya Parakesari (who took the head 
of Vira Pandya) and of Parthivendra-var- 
Uttama Si ° n °* man show that, by the time of the accession 
of Uttama Cola, the Colas had recovered 
much in the north that had been lost on account of the Rastra- 
kuta invasion. These inscriptions are found in Uttaramerur, 
Kancipuram, Takkolam and Tiruvannamalai, and furnish 
clear evidence of the renewed Cola occupation of the districts 
of South Arcot, North Arcot and Chingleput, and considering 
that the bulk of these inscriptions relate to normal transac- 
tions like endowments, sales and irrigation works, we may 
conclude that general peace had been restored, and that the 
effects of the wars were fast fading out of memory. 


Of the reign of Uttama Cola we have many stone records 
and one set of copper-plates. The beginning of the latter, 
which probably contained a genealogical account of the 
dynasty in Sanskrit verse, is unfortunately lost; only the con- 
cluding prose portion mentioning the object of the grant sur- 
vives. In some of the stone inscriptions and in the copper- 
plate grant, the king is clearly described as Parakesari Uttama 
Cola; but a number of other stone inscriptions bearing only 
the Parakesari title can be assigned to his reign either on 
astronomical grounds, or because they mention the relatives 
of the king like his mother or one of his queens, or lastly, 
because they mention officials in his service. It should be 
observed also that the earliest Cola coin of 
Cdla^coin 1 ^ 65 * which we have any knowledge belongs to 
his reign; it is a gold piece, a unique speci- 
men once in the possession of Sir Walter Elliot and figured by 
him from a faithful drawing, the coin itself having been lost; 75 
its obverse and reverse are identical, the centre occupied by 
a seated tiger facing a fish to the proper right and separated 
from it by a line, the legend Uttama Colan in grantha charac- 
ters along the circular margin and a ring of beads at the peri- 
meter. Elliot estimated the weight of the coin at between 50 



160 


PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 


and 60 grains, and this conforms to the standard in the Deccan 
and Southern India before the time of Rajaraja.* 6 

The Madras Museum plates of Uttama Cola, though they 
add little to our knowledge of political his- 
The Madras tory, are of very great interest to the study 
Museum plates. ^ the social life and the administrative 


methods of the kingdom in Uttama Cola’s time; they form 
moreover beautiful specimens of the palaeography of the 
period. 77 Even the stone inscriptions of the reign contain little 
information on political transactions. Some inscriptions 
recently discovered in the Trichinopoly district, 78 dated in 
the twelfth year of Parakesari, introduce to us a high official 
of Uttama Cola’s government by name Ambalavan Paluvur- 
nakkan of Kuvalalam (Kolar). He was an officer of perun- 
daram rank who built of stone the old shrine of Vijayamanga- 
lam celebrated by Tirunavukkarasu as a temple in Govanda- 
puttur on the bank of the Coleroon, 79 commemorating Arjuna’s 
(Vijaya’s) penance for obtaining the favour of Siva; 80 and on 
this officer. Uttama Cola conferred the title Vikramasola- 
marayar, 81 from which we may conclude that Uttama had also 
the title Vikrama. The same officer continued in Rajaraja’s 
service later; in the records of Rajaraja’s reign he has the title 
Mummudisola prefixed to his personal name, and also bears 
the alternative title Rajaraja Pallavaraiyan. 82 No other evi- 
dence exists to show that Uttama Cola’s suzerainty extended 
as far as Kolar in Mysore, and all the inscriptions mentioning 
this official come from one place, and that in the Trichinopoly 
district. It must be assumed, therefore, that for some reasons 
unknown to us. this person migrated from Kolar into the Cola 
dominions and rose to a high position in the royal service. 


The inscriptions give the names of several queens of 
Uttama Cola, of whom five are mentioned 
Uttama s queens. to g e th e r ; n one i nscr ipti 0 n. 83 The chief place 
was held throughout the reign by Orattanan (Urattayan) 
Sorabbaiyar. a Kannada name (?), who is called agramahd- 
deviydr and muttanambirattiydr in the fifth and the fifteenth 
years of the reign; 84 she had also the title of Tribhuvana- 
mahadeviyar, significant of her rank as chief queen. The 
queens of Uttama Cola are almost all of them found making 
endowments in a village in the Tanjore district which bore 
the name of their mother-in-law, Sembiyan-mahadevi — proof of 



NOTES 


161 


the high regard in which the pious widow of Gandaraditya 
was held by the members of her family. One son of Uttama 
Cola is known , 85 Madhurantakan Gandara- 
' 50u ditya, who held high office under Rajaraja, 

as has been mentioned already. 

A record of the fifth year of Rajakesari 86 mentions a 
Pandya princess 87 with the name Puliccayan Sami Abbai, as 
the spouse of Vikramasola Maladudaiyar. This Malada chief- 
tain, a feudatory of the Colas, in the hilly tracts of South 
Arcot, might have got the title from Uttama Cola, who was 
also known as Vikrama; if this view is correct, the inscrip- 
tion is certainly one of Rajaraja I. 


1. Three inscriptions, all of the ninth year of a Parantakadeva, 
pose one of the minor problems in Cola epigraphy. No. 16 of 1896 from 
Tiruvalangadu, North Arcot, calls the king Parakesari and Tribhuvana- 
Cakravartin. No. 261 of 1923 from Koyil-Tevarayanpettai, Tanjore Dt., 
does the same, and in addition gives a historical introduction beginning 
pu-mangai-valara. No. 225 of 1929 from Tiruvadatturai, S. Arcot, gives 
the same introduction, but calls the king Rajakesari and Cakravartin. If 
the records are genuine, they must be of the reign of either Parantaka I 
Parakesari, or Parantaka II Rajakesari. But the absence of other 
Cola p rasastis before Rajaraja I, the title Tribhuvana-cakravartin ap- 
lied to the king in two of these records, and the fact that the third is 
found in a temple which has no other inscription of a period earlier 
than that of VIrarajendra, render these records suspicious. They 
furnish no information of historical importance, and may belong to 
some obscure late Cola prince. See ARE. 1924, II 9; 1929, n 26. 

2. Krishna Sastri (S/I. ii Introd. 12) says: ‘Perhaps the years 
quoted in Kannara-Krsna’s Tamil inscriptions must be taken to count 
from a.d. 949.’ On the same page he admits that Krsna died in Saka 
889 or a.d. 967. He does not explain why, after this date records should 
bear his name and his regnal years till about 977. Again, he admits that 
949 was not the year of Ksma’s entry into Tondaimandalam but the 
following year; why, then, should this year have been the starting point 
for the dates in his Tamil records. The highest regnal year in the Tamil 
inscriptions is not 30 as was believed till recently but only 28 (364 of 
1902, 159 of 1921); the date in No. 232 of 1902 (Kilur) is now read as 
20, not (3)0 which was given in ARE. 1903. See SII. vii 859. 

3. See, however p. 150 post on a record of year 15 from Parandur. 

4. See SII. iii, 135, 138. 

^ 5. 444 of 1918 under year 6 of Rajaraja I. 252 of 1936-7 is a direct 

record of Yr. 2 of Mummudi-Cola Gandaraditya. 

6. SII. iii, 111 and 112. 

C. 21 



162 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA I 

7. Krishna Sastri remarks: 'The epithet Alvar is taken to be one 

oi' respect. It may also indicate that he was dead at the time,’ and 
then proceeds, 'If Arikulakesari, Arikesari, Arinjaya or Arindama died 
before the 8th year of Gandaraditya as inferred already, the next king 
must have been a son of Arikulakesari who, as the Anbil plates say, 
was Prince Sundara Cola bom of a Vaidumba princess.’ ( SII . iii, 

Introd. p. 14). But though Arikulakesari may be identified with Arin- 
jaya, there is nothing to show that he predeceased Gandaraditya. We 
know that, in many records of Rajaraja I, his elder sister Kundavai is 
called Alvar during her life-time. Further, seeing that Gandaraditya 
and Sundara Cola who succeeded him were both Rajakesaris. Krishna 
Sastri suggests (ibid. n. 2) that the intervening Parakesari must be 
identified with the infant son of Gandaraditya who, though chosen for 
succession, ‘may have been too young at the time to succeed his father.’ 
Ingenious, but not likely. See also El. xv, p. 53 where Gopinatha Rao 
adopts the same arrangement, cutting out Arinjaya and making Ganda- 
raditya a Parakesari who followed his elder brother Rajaditya Rajakesari. 

8. 587 of 1920. 

9. 83, 84, 86 of 1889 (SII. iii 15-17). 

10. Gopinatha Rao thinks it was Sundra Cola El. xv p. 54; others 
say Gandaraditya, QJMS. xvii p. 195. See also ARE. 1921, II 61. 

11. SII. iii p. 215 n. 4. 

12. Sewell: Forgotten Empire p. 145. 

13. Guruparamparai pp. 105-6, (ed. S. Krishnamachari, 1927). 

14. w. 67 and 68. Contra Kielhom, List p. 115 n . 2 written before 
the Tiruvalangadu plates were discovered. 

15. ARE. 1904 II, 20; 1909 II, 39. 

16. SII. iii Introd. p. 14; and ASI. 1908-9 p. 122: also ARE. 1912 
II 17, more halting in its tone. 

17. ASI. 1908-9 p. 122. 

18. As a matter of fact, the discussion of the subject in ARE. 1912 
II 17 with reference to No. 306 of 1911 (year 7) is very cautious. It is 
said that the title Maduraikonda implies that the king was a son of 
Parantaka. On the other hand it is admitted that G. is nowhere ‘clearly 
stated’ to have been a Rajakesari, and that it is difficult to see how the 
seventeen years of this king can be treated as the period of the rule of 
Gandaraditya when there are only twenty years for three reigns— 
Gandaraditya, Sundara Cola Parantaka II and Aditya II Karikala The 
conclusion is: ‘In any case we may for the present provisionally pre- 
sume that Maduraikopda Rajakesari is identical with Gandaraditya.’ It 
is on the basis of this provisional conclusion that Krishna Sastri ar- 
ranges the inscriptions in SII. iii. part 3. See p 250 No. 114, introduc- 
tion and note 4. 

19. ARE. 1909 II 39. 

20. 139 of 1907: Pd. 82. 

21. 291 of 1908. El. xii pp. 121-6. 

22. SII. iii 115 (246 of 1912). 

23 SII. iii, Introd. p. 14. 



NOTES 


163 


24. 291 of 1908. 

25. One writer ( QJMS . xvii, p. 197) claims that ‘after a close and 
patient study of many inscriptions published, unpublished and not yet 
copied by the Epigraphical department,’ he has come to the conclusion 
that all Raja Rajakesari records (with one Raja) must be assigned to 
Gandaraditya, as Rajaraja to whom such inscriptions are assigned really 
ca’led himself Ko Rajaraja Rajakesari, (with two Raja-s). No. 176 of 
1906 is a record in the seventh year of Raja Rajakesari and mentions 
the fifteenth year of Uttama Cola; see also 298 of 1908. 

26. vv. 67-8 and 28 respectively. 

27. SII. iii. Introd. p. 16. 

28. See ibid. pp. 14 n. 2; 16, n. 1. 

29. For a possible son of Aditya. Karikala-kannan by name, whose 
existence may be inferred from the inscriptions of Rajaraja, see SII. ii. 
p. 460 and n. 2. 

30. ARE. 1921 II 61. 

31. El. vii p. 195. Con. El. iv p. 223 followed by Rangachari in 
NA. 586. 

32. SII. iii (Intr.) p. 15. 

33. SII. iii 180. 

34. SII. ii 186. 

35. SII. iii, 158. 

36. SII. iii 193. 

37. 17 of 1921. 

38. See, however, post ior the Parandur record 

39. El. xxvi pp. 82-4. By his recent researches, late A. S. Rama- 
natha Aiyar has generally confirmed the chronological scheme put 
forward here for the first time. But siill there is some loose thinking 
afoot. Ramanatha Aiyar himself says that because Sundara Cola gets 
the title Pandiyanaic-curarn-irakkiim in a record of his seventh year, 
the conflict with Vira Pandya must have taken place only about aj>. 
946; and then makes this the basis for rejecting 956 for Aditya II’s acces- 
sion and 937 for Vira Pandya’s on the ground: ‘This would yield ihe 
inconsistent results that Aditya killed him (Vira Pandya) in ajd. 957, 
and that his predecessor Sundara Co}a defeated him in aj>. 963’! And 
he is quoted with approval by M. Venkataramayya (EL xxv pp. 36-7; 
xxviii pp. 89-90), who, however, has a glimpse of the greater historical 
probability of the rejected date. Again, V. Venkatasubba Aiyar has 
argued that because one chieftain mentions no overlord in a record 
of 959 and acknowledges Aditya II in another record dated in iiis 
second year, therefore Aditya’s second year must be later than 959, his 
accession date cannot be 956, and he cannot be identical with Parthi- 
vendravarman (El. xxviii p. 269) How easy for men to become the 
slaves of their own abhinivesas' 

40. 75 of 1923. Nos. 62, 63 of 1889 (SII. iv, 291-2) are late copies 
and they are most probably Parakesari records. 

41. 176 of 1907 ; 570, 574 of 1908, (SII. iii 111, 112): 444 of 1918 
(.Rajaraja I, yr. 6). 



164 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA 1 

41a. 252 of 1936-7. 

42. Krishna Sastri assigns 287 of 1911 (SII. iii 113) to G. I rather 
think it is a record of Sundara Cola. See post n. 62. 

42a. ARE. 1936-7, II 22. 362 of 1902. 

43. 200 of 1904. Another queen VIranaraniyar is mentioned in 220 
of 1935-6 of Yr. 40 of Parantaka I, ARE. 1936-7 II 21. 

44. These features of the hymn render it more likely that its 
author was this king rather than the official of Rajaraja, Madhuran- 
takan Gandaradittar, who is found employed in enquiring into the 
affairs of temples and whose name seems to imply that he was the 
son of Madhurantaka Uttama Cola. Contra Venkayya ASI. 1905-6 
p. 173, n. 5. 

45. 540 of 1920. 

46. 587 of 1920. ARE. 1921, II 26. 

47. 162, 172 of 1928. 

48. See ARE. 1928 II 3. 

49. This, if correct, would be an additional objection to Krishna 
Sastri’s reconstruction of the order of succession. 

50. 587 of 1920. 

51. SII. iii 17. 

52. 215 of 1911; the date given as [9] is not clear in the original, 
but it cannot be 9. ARE. 1912 II 16. 

53. El. xxii w. 25, 28. 

54. 302 of 1908. Kanyakumari inscription v. 63. Contra N. L. Rao 
in JOR. xix p. 150. 

55. 116 of 1896, SII. v. 980 (Yr. 27 of Rajaraja I). Text of record 
in SII. v. gives dates (3) -wrong; ARE. 1914 II 15 gives it correctly as 
Yr. 9 of Sundara Co}a; see also El. xii pp. 124 ff. 

56. Ch. 54 w 12-16. 

57. The N.W. part of Ceylon (Geiger). The Vallabha has some- 
times been identified with the Rastrakuta Krsna III (Codrington 
Ceylon Coins p. 50). But the Colas were called ‘Valava’ and the Vessa- 
giri inscription implies that the invaders were Tamils. See Codrington’s 
Short History oj Ceylon pp. 39 and 53. 

58. EZ. i. pp. 29 ff. 

59. Some statements in Chapter VIII of PK, on the chronology and 
the course of the Cola conquest, are seen to need considerable modifi- 
cation. To one point in particular attention may be drawn here. Vira 
Pandya ‘who took the head of the Cola’ bore that title for thirteen 
years. (PK. p. 102). This clearly means that Vira Pandya did not 
lose his life at the hands of Aditya and his confederates. For if we 
accept, for the sake of argument, the latest date suggested for the 
accession of Aditya II, aj>. 965, Vira Pandya must have lost his life in 
a.d. 966, because Aditya’s records of the second year mention the event. 
Thirteen years earlier than this date takes us to a.d. 953 or 954, a date 
which seems to be too soon after the Rastrakuta invasion for a contest 



NOTES 


165 


between the Colas and the Pandyas in the South — a contest which gave 
Vira Pandya the occasion to ’take the head of the Cola.’ If Parthivendra- 
varman and Aditya were identical, then this contest would be pushed 
back to 944-5, an impossible date. 

60. 129 of 1907, Pd. 14 (Text). 

61. 273 of 1903, ARE. 1908 II, 90. 

62. SlI. iii 113; Krishna Sastri ascribes this record to Gandaraditya 
on the ground that Vikramakesari is palaeographically earlier than the 
time of Aditya II to which Venkayya ascribed him. I think Venkayya 
was right. Arguments from palaeography can be hardly conclusive 
when the difference in time is so little as that between Gandaraditya 
and Aditya II. See JOR. vii pp. 1 ff. 

63. K. V. Subramania Aiyar who edits this record (El. xx p. 53) 
assigns it to Aditya I (ibid pp. 47-8) and says that its date corresponds 
to a.d. 883-4. He grants the identity of Varaguna with the queen of 
Par an taka Ilango velar, whom he also identifies with Vikramakesari; 
but does not deal with the problems raised by the Vikramakesari record 
from Kodumbalur. 

64. A record of the sixth year of Parakesari (337 of 1904) from Kudu- 
miyamalai mentions a Varaguna-natU-perumanar, queen of Sembiyan 
Irukkuvelar; from this, the conclusion has been drawn that this was 
another name of Vikramakesari (ARE. 1908 II, 90). But the Varaguna- 
natfi mentioned in this record was the daughter of a Muttaraiyar chief 
(Pd. 45 Text) and different from the Cola princess mentioned above. 
Hence Sembiyan Irukkuvel cannot be the same as Parantaka Ilango- 
velar, if our view that the latter married the Cola princess is correct. 

The suggestion may be made that the Muttaraiya lady was the 
queen of Vikramakesari and that Parantaka Ilangovelar, the husband 
of the Cola princess, was the elder son of Vikramakesari. In this case, 
the 6th year of Parakesari (337 of 1904) must be the 6th year of Paran- 
taka I, which would fall nearly 52 years before the wars with Vira 
Paridya in which Vikramakesari took part. It seems better to treat 
Sembiyan Irukkuvel and his Muttaraiya wife Varaguna as persons not 
represented in the genealogy of the Kodumbalur record. There are 
other names of Irukkuvels, like Madhurantaka Irukkuvel and Mahi- 
malaya Irukkuvel in the Pudukottah inscriptions for which there is no 
room in the Kodumbalur genealogy. Possibly Madhurantaka Irukkuvel 
of Nos. 335 and 336 of 1904 (Pd. 63 and 65), also called Adittan (Accan) 
Vikramakesari, was a contemporary of Aditya I and his son Paran- 
taka I. 

65. See ante n. 62. 

66. See SII. iii p. 288 and n. 5. No. 18 of 1933-4 (Yr. 17) comes 
from Cintamani (Chingleput Dt.); also perhaps 21 of 1934-5 (Rajak. 
17) from Kirappakkam, (same Dt.) 

67. Tiruvalangadu plates vv. 65-66; also 236 of 1902 (Rajaraja I 


68. SII. ii p. 73. 



166 PARANTAKA TO RAJARAJA 1 

6a. Tiruvalangadu v. 57. 

70. 159 of 1895, 11. 127-32. 

71. pp. 102-3, Yappu v. 11. 

72. 577 of 1920 El. xxi p. 165. 

73. vv. 68-9. The expression employed literally means 'set' (astani 
gatavdn)— a play on his name Aditya; a hint of his premature death 
may be seen in ‘his desire to see heaven.’ 

74. Contra K. V. S- Aiyar — Ancient Dekhan p. 243. The difficulties 
regarding the ages of Uttama Cola and his son pointed out by Aiyar 
are not so serious as he makes them out. We may suppose that Gan- 
daraditya died a.d. 957 and that then Uttama was 12; he came to the 
throne when he was, say, 24 in 969, and then had a son aged three; 
this son would be about 23 in 989 when he is first mentioned in the 
inscriptions of Rajaraja’s reign. The omission of his name from the 
Leyden and Tiruvalangadu plates is only to be expected in the condi- 
tions of the case. 

75. Elliot CSI. p. 132, No. 151 p 152 G. ARE. 1904, I 20. Nos 152-4 
are. no doubt, coins of Rajendra I 

76. Codr ington— Ceylon Coins p. 74. 

77. See SII. iii No. 128. After this fine edition of the plates by 
Krishna Sastri, we might well have been spared the belated publica- 
tion with negative plates in 1925 (I A. Vol. 54 pp. 61 if) of a paper con- 
tributed by T. A. Gopinatha Rao and another in 1911. This paper 
begins with the wild statement that the seal of these plates ‘belongs 
to the Pandya king Jatilavarman, one of whose documents is also found 
in the Museum.’ I examined the seal and found it true to the fac -simile 
in El. iii. plate p. 104, No. 3. which again very closely resembles the 
seal of the Tiruvalangadu plates of Rajendra (plate opp. p. 413 in 
SII. iii). 

Krishna Sastri holds that the Parakesarivarman, a record (silatekhai) 
of whose 22nd year is quoted in 11. 28-29, was Vijayalaya (SII. iii 
p. 267 and n. 2), and that ‘the statement in our grant that a stone in- 
scription of his 22nd year did provide for permanent income to a temple 
at Kaccippedu is proof enough to show that though he was the first 
of the new line, Vijayalaya had a peaceful, long and prosperous rule 
like any of his powerful successors.’ This view derives support from 
the express mention of ‘Maduraiyum Ilamum Konda Parakesari’ in 

I. 96, which might naturally lead to the supposition that the Parakesari 
of 11. 28-29 must be a different king There is, however, another mention 
of Parakesari (year 16) in 11. 72-3, which Krishna Sastri takes to be 
a reference to Uttama Cola himself; but it is possible to hold that 

II. 72-98 record one continuous transaction by which, in the 18th year 
of Parantaka I, the Nagarattar of Kaccippedu regulated the expendi- 
ture to be met from endowments made in the sixteenth year of Para- 
kesari (note in particular enru ipparisu in 1. 96). If this view is accep- 
ted, the Parakesari of 1. 72 would be not Uttamma, but Parantaka I, and 
the same may be true of 11. 28-9. Again, Uttama Cola is mentioned by 
name with the Parakesari title in 1. 12; we have only the Parakesari 
title in I. 72. By assigning the latter to Uttama Cola, K. Sastri grants 



NOTES 


167 


that the same king may be mentioned in two different ways in the same 
record. If that is so, it is easier to assume that Parakesari of 11. 28-9 
and 72 is the same as Maduraiyum Ilamum Konda Parakesari of 1. 96, 
than to equate one of them with Vijayalaya and the other with Uttama. 
I wish also to add that Karikala-terri might have got its name as much 
by association with Aditya II Karikala as after 'the ancient Cola king 
Karikala.’ (Krishna Sastri ibid, p. 268). 

78. 165-7 of 1929. 

79. v. 3 of his Devaram on Tiruvisayamangai. 

80. v. 8 ibid. 

81. 164 of 1929 — ARE. 1929 II 29. 

82. 168, 184 of 1929. 

83. 494 of 1925 (Yr. 12). 

84. 165, 488 of 1925. 

85. SII. iii No. 49. ARE. 1904 (paragraph 20): ante n. 74. 

86. 7 of 1905. 

87. The name of the Pandyan princess seems to imply Kannada 
origin for her, though we cannot be sure of this. 



Chapter IX 


RAJARAJA THE GREAT (a.d. 985-1014) . 

Rajakesari Arumolivarman, as he was known in the early 
years of his reign, came to the throne, after 
Accession. a i ong apprenticeship as yuvar&ja, on some 

day in the month following 25 June, a.d. 985. 1 He was 
the son of Parantaka II Sundara Cola by Vanavan-mahadevi, 
and the joyous occasion of his birth is described in particular 
detail in the Tiruvalangadu plates. 2 The star of his nativity 
was Satabhisak, as we learn from the inscriptions recording 
endowments for offerings in temples on his birth-days. 

With the accession of Rajaraja we enter upon a century 
of grandeur and glory for the dynasty of 
A great epoch. ^ Coj as Quite obviously, the personal 
ability of the first Rajaraja, in some respects the greatest of 
all the great Cola rulers of the Viiayalaya line, laid the 
foundation for the splendid achievements of his son and suc- 
cessor Rajendra I, under whom the empire attained its 
greatest extent and carried its arms beyond the seas. The 
thirty years of Rajaraja’s rule constitute the formative period 
in the history of the Cola monarchy. In the organisation of 
the civil service and the army, in art and architecture, in 
religion and literature, we see at work powerful forces newly 
liberated by the progressive imperialism of the time. A 
relatively small state at his accession, that had hardly recover- 
ed from the disasters of the Rastrakuta invasion, the Cola 
kingdom had. by the end of Rajaraja’s rule, grown to be an 
extensive and well-knit empire efficiently organised and 
administered, rich in resources, possessed of a powerful stand- 
ing army, well-tried and equal to the greatest enterprises. 
More wonderful than the work of this great monarch must 
have been his personality. But of him we have no authentic 
description : no eyewitness has rendered to Rajaraja the ser- 
vice which Nuniz and Paes did to Krsna Deva Raya. There 
is not even a well-attested statue, or painting of this king 3 that 
has come down to us. All that we know of his reign, how- 
ever, and that is not little, attests his potent personality and 
the firm grasp of his intellect which allowed nothing to escape 



CAMPAIGNS IN SOUTH 


169 


its vigilance and applied itself with as much vigour to the 
minutest details as to the sublimest ambitions of statecraft. 
The affection he lavished on his sister Kundavai, after whom 
he named one of his daughters, 4 and the privileged position 
accorded to his grand-aunt, Sembiyan-mahadevi, the mother 
of Uttama. Cola, indicate that he was a great and good man 
as well as a far-sighted ruler. 


Very early in his reign 5 Rajaraja assumed the title 
Mummadi C5la-deva, a term whose meaning is not clear. 0 

Almost the first military achievement of his 
Kerala War. reign was the campaign in the Kerala coun- 
try of which the result was summed up in the phrase 
‘Kandalur-salaik-kalaviarutta ' which precedes the name of 
the king in several of his inscriptions from the fourth year 7 
onwards. Though this title appears from the fourth year, no 
inscription of Rajaraja has been found in the Kerala and 
Pandya countries bearing a date earlier than the eighth year. 8 
Some years of fighting were apparently necessary before the 
conquest could be completed and the conquered country be- 
come sufficiently settled for its administration being pro- 
perly organised. The Tiruvalangadu plates giving a detailed 
account of the king’s digvijaya state that 
Pur^ya asamst he began with the conquest of the southern 
direction. 9 This account mentions the cap- 
ture of the Pandya king Amarabhujanga, and then states : 


‘The commandant ( dandanatha ) of this ornament 
of the solar race then conquered Vilinda which had the 
sea for its moat, whose extensive ramparts were shining 
aloft, which was impregnable to other warriors and 
which was the permanent abode of the goddess of 
victory.’ 

We have often found before that the three southern kingdoms 
of Pandya, Kerala and Simhala were allied against the Cola ; 
this alliance was still effective in the time of Rajaraja, and it 
would seem that Rajaraja’s southern campaign was directed 
against the Pandya and the Cera together. The Cera king 
at this time was Bhaskara Ravi Varman Tiruvadi (a.d. 978- 
1036) , whose inscriptions have been recovered from different 
parts of Travancore. 10 

C. 22 



170 


RAJARAJA . THE GREAT 


The Pallavas and Pandyas followed the injunctions of the 
Dharmasastras, and in their copper-plate 
^ The ^ ^ grants, they caused a brief history of their 

ancestors to be engraved before recording 
the occasion for and the details relating to the particular gift. 
But Rajarax-ja was the first Tamil king who conceived the idea 
of formulating in set phrases an official record of the chief 
events of his reign which was to serve as an introduction to 
his stone inscriptions. In this he was followed by almost 
every one of his successors on the Cola throne, and we shall 
see that the prasasti of his son Rajendra I, which is rather 
brief in the early regnal years, grows in length as the reign 
advances and descriptions of fresh events are added on to 
it as they take place ; these official ‘ historical introductions ’ 
in the Cola inscriptions are, in fact, an im- 
^Prasastis of portant aid to the discovery of the parti- 
cular king to whose reign any given record 
belongs. Sometimes the same king used two or more forms 
of such introductions, and Rajaraja I seems himself to have 
employed at least three forms, of which the one beginning 
‘ tirumagat-pola ’ was the most common from the eighth year 
onwards . 11 In this introduction the only reference to the first 
campaign of the reign seems to be the phrase employed about 
Kandalur Salai already quoted. A second form of the intro- 
duction 12 also places the victory at Salai first among the 
achievements of the reign. Yet another, dated in the 
twentieth year , 13 mentions that Rajaraja ‘ destroyed the town 
of Madurai, conquered the haughty kings of Kollam, Kolla- 
desam and Kodungolur and that the kings of the sea waited 
on him.’ 

One question suggests itself naturally in relation to this 
southern campaign of Rajaraja. Did he 

The Southern conquer Madura and the Pandya country 
campaign. „ n J J 

first and march into Kerala by the southern 
passes that led into it from the Tinnevelly district, or was the 
line of his march the other way round ? The Tiruvalangadu 
plates and the last of the introductions cited above seem to 
suggest that the capture of Madura and the subjugation of the 
Pandya king Amarabhujanga preceded the advance on the 
strong fortress of Vilinam and on Salai . 1 1 But the bare men- 



CAPTURE OF UDAGAI 


171 


tion of Kandalur Salai in the earlier records of the reign and 
in the opening lines of the ‘ tirumagalpola ' introduction, and 
the provenance of Rajaraja’s inscriptions which appear in 
South Travancore about two years earlier than in the Tinne- 
velly and Ramnad districts point to the other alternative. 15 It 
is possible that the Tiruvalangadu plates and the later 
inscriptions of Rajaraja mixed up facts relating to several 
distinct campaigns against the southern country. For it is 
clear that Rajaraja sent more than one expedition against the 
Pandya and his ally the Cera. One seems to have been 
directed specially against Kollam. The 
Two invasions. campaign in which Rajaraja claims, in his 
Tanjore inscriptions, 16 to have conquered 
the Cera and the Pandyas in the Malai-nadu (Mountain coun- 
try) was quite obviously different from and later than that 
in which Kandalur and Vilinam were attacked. 

The chief event of this expedition which took place some- 
time before the year a.d. 1008 17 was apparently the storming 
and capture of the strong fortress of Udagai. 18 Malai-nadu or 
Kuda-malai-nadu, the western hill-country, may be identified 
with Coorg, 19 and the fortress of Udagai must be looked for 
in the Western Ghats in that region, or perhaps a little to the 
south. Inscriptions of the fourteenth and sixteenth years, 20 
though they mention the occupation of 
Malai-nadu. Kuda-malai-nadu, do not yet record the 
attack on Udagai. The statement made in the inscriptions 
that Rajaraja deprived the Pandyas of their splendour 
when they were still flourishing in all its glory seems 

to indicate that the capture of this fortress was not 

effected in the first war. The Kalingattupparani 21 in 

its notice of this king’s reign mentions only the con- 
quest of Udagai besides the foundation by him of the 

Sadaiyam festival in the Cera country. In all his three 
ulds, the poet Ottakkuttan says that Rajaraja’s great achieve- 
ment was the crossing of the 1 eighteen forests ’ for the sake 
of his ambassador and setting fire to Udagai. We are unable 
to explain this satisfactorily ; apparently the immediate cause 
of the march against Udagai was an insult offered to the king’s 
ambassador. 



172 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


The Cola general who most distinguished himself in the 
campaigns in the West was perhaps no 
r _ 4- c ^- a general other than the crown prince Rajendra. 22 

He was afterwards made Mahadandanayaka 
of the Vengi and Ganga-mandalas. He had also the title 
Pancavanmaraya. This ‘ tusker of Mummudi-Cola,’ as he is 
called, ‘ seized the Tuluva and Konkana, held Maleya 
(Malabar) , and pushed aside the Cera,’ as well as the Telunga 
and the Rattiga. 23 As chief military officer in the Ganga- 
mandala, he carried out the royal order conferring on Manija 
the village of Malawi (Coorg) and the title Ksatriya- 
sikhamani-kongalva in recognition of his heroism in the 
battle ; perhaps it was fought against the Cangalvas, a petty 
local dynasty. In any case, this was the beginning of the line 
of Kongalvas who ruled a small kingdom for about a century 
as the subordinates of the Colas to whom they owed their 
existence, and then disappeared with the expulsion of the 
Colas from these regions after the rise of the Hoysalas. 24 

Ilam (Ceylon) is included among the conquests of Raja- 
raja from the first in the tirumagal intro- 
Ceylon. duction, 25 (a.d. 993). The king is said to 

have taken the Ilamandalam owned by the fierce Singalas 
and famed in all the eight directions. 26 In his twenty-ninth 
year (a.d. 1014) Rajaraja made a grant of several villages 
in Ceylon for various purposes to the celebrated temple he 
had erected at Tanjore. 27 The Tiruvalangadu plates contain 
the following picturesque account of the invasion of Ceylon. 28 

‘ Rama built, with the aid of the monkeys, a causeway 
across the sea and then slew with great difficulty the 
king of Lanka by means of sharp-edged arrows. But 
Rama was excelled by this (king) whose powerful army 
crossed the ocean by ships and burnt up the king of 
Lanka.’ 

This naval expedition of Rajaraja against Ceylon must have 
taken place in the reign of Mahinda V who came to the throne 
a.d. 981 and was still ruling Ceylon at the time when the 
island was invaded by Rajaraja’s son and successor Rajendra I. 
But the Mahavamsa makes no mention of Rajaraja’s invasion, 
apparently because the annals of Mahinda’s reign became 
confused after the tenth year (a.d. 991) on account of the 



CONQUEST OF CEYLON 


173 


military revolution which led to the ascendancy of Kerala and 
Kannata mercenaries in a large part of his kingdom. 29 As a 
result of the military rising, Mahinda had to take refuge in 
the inaccessible hill country in the south-east of Ceylon called 
Rohana. Rajaraja then found his opportunity and made him- 
self master of Northern Ceylon which became a province 
( mandalavi ) under the name of Mummudi-sola-mandalam. 30 

The Cola invasion had one permanent result. Anuradha- 
pura, the capital of Ceylon for over 1000 
conquest ° f C °' a y ears > was finally destroyed by the armies 
of Rajaraja. Polonnaruwa, fonnerly a 
military outpost of the ancient capital as seen from its alter- 
native name Kandavura Nuyara (the camp-city), now be- 
came the capital under the Colas. While the earlier Tamil 
invaders of Ceylon had aimed at the overlordship only of Raja- 
rattha, the Colas were bent upon the mastery of the whole 
island. This decided the choice of their capital. There is 
practically no trace of Cola rule in Anuradhapura. When 
Sinhalese sovereignty was restored under Vijayabahu I, he 
crowned himself at Anuradhapura, but continued to have 
Polonnaruwa for his capital, as it was more central and render- 
ed easier the task of controlling the turbulent province of 
Rohana. 31 Polonnaruwa was renamed Jananatha-mangalam, 32 
after another title assumed by Rajaraja about the middle of 
his reign. 33 Rajaraja’s inscriptions have been found in 
Ceylon. 34 It is probable that Rajaraja signalised the Cola 
occupation of Ceylon by the construction of 
■ C p- a Tem P les a stone temple of Siva in Polonnaruwa. 

~ C l °' This ‘beautiful little’ Siva Devale, ‘con- 

structed of granite and lime-stone ’ which 1 stands within the 
walled confines of the old city ’ of Polonnaruwa is among the 
few Hindu monuments of Ceylon, which are still in a good 
state of preservation ; and ‘ its architectural form seems at 
once to class it with the Hindu fanes of South India erected 
from the tenth to the twelfth centuries, of which the great 
temple of Tan j ore is the finest and most elaborate exponent.’ 35 
The earliest inscription found in this temple is dated early in 
Rajendra I’s reign. An officer from the Cola country by name 
Tali Kumaran built another temple called Rajarajesvara at 
Mahatittha (Mantota), which was also named Rajarajapura, 
and richly endowed the new temple. 36 



174 


RAJARAJA , THE GREAT 


Turning now to Rajaraja’s conquests in other directions, 
Gangapadi, Nolambapadi and Tadigaipadi 

Other sometimes called Tadigaivali, all of them in 

conquests. _ c . 

the Mysore country became parts or the 

Cola kingdom in Rajaraja’s time. One of the variant forms 
of the introduction to the king’s stone inscriptions implies that 
the conquest of the Mysore country immediately followed the 
victory at Salai, and that it was undertaken before the ex- 
pedition against the Eastern Calukyas into the Vengi coun- 
try. 37 After his victory at Salai, Rajaraja is here said to have 
gained successes at Tattapadi (Tadigaipadi?), Talaikkadu, 
Nolambapadi and Pirudigangar-valanadu. This campaign 
against the Nolambas and the Gangas, first 
Gar >S a mentioned in the eighth and ninth 38 years 

1 1 of the king’s reign, would seem in reality 

to have advanced very far, if not actually ended by the sixth 
year (a.d. 991), as we find an inscription of Cola-narayana, 
obviously a name of Rajaraja I, in the Mysore country dated 
in this year (Saka 913). 39 An official from Kolar in the 
Gangarasayira with a Ganga name made an endowment in 
South Arcot in the seventh year of Rajakesari, perhaps 
Rajaraja I. 10 This conquest was no doubt facilitated by the 
fact that the Colas had never lost their hold on the Kongu 
country or, if they had done so, had very soon recovered it 
when they began to reassert themselves after the troubles 
consequent on the invasion of Krsna III. Rajaraja does not 
claim to have conquered the Kongu area, and he was master 
of it early in his reign. Copper-plates 41 recording a gift of 
land in the fifth year of Rajakesarivarman have been found at 
Tiruccengodu, and these may with tolerable certainty be 
assigned to Rajaraja I, if they do not belong to an earlier 
Rajakesari like Parantaka II. The conquest of Tadigaipadi 
was probably undertaken from the side of Kongu and as part 
of the campaign in Kudamalai-nadu. By the time of this war 
the Nolambas had long ceased to be an independent power 
and become subordinate to the Gangas. In the tenth cen- 
tury the name Nolambapadi still included 42 not only the dis- 
tricts of Tumkur and Citaldurg, but much of the Bangalore, 
Kolar and Bellary districts and even parts of Salem and 
N. Arcot; this is sufficient proof of the place once held by the 
Nolambas in the politics of Southern India. Though they lost 



CALUKYA WAR 


175 


much of their power at the time of Rajaraja’s invasion, they 
did not by any means die out altogether, and in Saka 920 
Gannarasa, the son of Ayyapa, was ruling a portion of Daliga- 
padi as a feudatory of Rajaraja. 43 A certain Nolambadhiraja 
was the general of the Cola monarch in his sixteenth year. 44 
Either the same person or another, Nolambadhiraja Corayya, 
is again mentioned as feudatory of the Cola in Saka 933. 45 
These instances raise a suspicion that the Nolamba subordi- 
nates of the Gangas turned against their Ganga overlords and 
paid off old scores by taking the side of the Colas openly, or 
by assisting them in other ways. The Gangas then were the 
chief enemy against whom was directed the expedition into 
Mysore. This invasion, which started with an attack on 
Tadigaipadi 46 and Talakad after crossing the Kaveri from the 
Kongu country, was a complete success, and made the Colas 
supreme in the entire Ganga country for a period of more 
than one century. The easy success was partly also the re- 
sult of the disappearance of the Rastrakuta power, which had 
taken place about a.d. 973, when Taila II Ahavamalla restored 
the ancient Calukya line to power. By this political revolu- 
tion the Gangas and the Nolambas lost their chief support, as 
there was nothing as yet to bind them to the newly risen 
Calukya power corresponding to the dynastic alliances and 
common enterprises that had brought them close to the 
Rastrakutas. But the Western Calukyas 
W. Calukyas. were by no means indifferent to the advanc- 
ing power of the Colas under Rajaraja, and in an inscription 
dated a.d. 992, Tailapa II claims to have gained a victory 
against the Cola king and captured 150 elephants from him. 47 

Within a few years after 992, Tailapa II died and was 
succeeded by Satyasraya on the Calukya throne. The later 
inscriptions of Rajaraja’s reign state that he fought a success- 
ful war against Satyasraya and captured 
War against some of his treasure, part of which went to 
the enrichment of the great Tanjore tem- 
ple. 48 The W. Calukyas were also hard pressed in the north 
by the hostility of the Paramaras of Malwa and must have 
found it hard to sustain themselves against two powerful ene- 
mies attacking them from opposite directions. The inscrip- 
tions of Rajaraja from about a.d. 1003 49 roundly assert that he 
captured by force Rattapadi, ‘ the seven and a half lakh coun- 



176 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


try.’ This is a violent exaggeration. More trustworthy is the 
poetic statement in the Tiruvalangadu plates 50 that 
Satyasraya, though, true to his origin from Taila (oil), he 
fled the battle-field in order to escape the misery of facing 
the ocean-like army of Rajaraja, still became himself the 
abode of misery (kastasraya) . The Karandai (Tanjore) 
plates devote several verses to the account of Rajaraja’s war 
against Satyasraya. Rajaraja’s elephants are said to have 
wrought havoc on the banks of the Tungabhadra (v. 28). 
Seated on his war horse, he is said, single-handed, to have 
checked the rush of the advancing Calukya army like Siva 
restraining with his Jata the force of Ganga’s descent on earth 
(v. 29). He took the Calukya general Kesava prisoner 
(v. 31) . The next four verses are also descriptive of this 
war, though they add no new facts (32-5). Lastly, a verse 
under the reign of Rajendra I, the son and successor of Raja- 
raja, discloses that Rajaraja had taken a vow to capture 
Manyakheta, the Calukya capital, and that Rajendra fulfilled 
the vow (v. 51). 

An inscription of Satyasraya from Hottur (Dharwar), 
dated Saka 9(2)9 a.d. 1007. states that the 
Ka^fndra Nurmadi Cola Rajendra Vidyadhara, the 

son of Rajaraja Nityavinoda and the orna- 
ment of the Colakula, advanced as far as Donur in the Bija- 
pur district, with an army of 900,000 troops, plundered the 
whole country, killed women, children and Brahmans, caught 
hold of girls and destroyed their caste. The same record pro- 
ceeds further to say that Satyasraya, ‘ the slayer of the Tamil ’ 
(Tigula-mari ) , thereupon forced the Co]a to turn back, cap- 
tured his paraphernalia ( vastu-vahana ) and thus conquered 
the southern quarter. 51 Though the account of wholesale 
slaughter and rape must be discounted as proceeding from a 
hostile source, still this account given by the Calukya inscrip- 
tion of Rajendra’s invasion of Rattapadi rings very true, and 
may be accepted as substantially correct. Though overwhelm- 
ed for a time by the strength and rapidity of the Cola 
onslaught, Satyasraya soon recovered himself, and by hard 
fighting rolled back the tide of invasion. In Rattapadi proper 
there are no traces (as there are in Nulambapadi and Ganga- 
padi) of the occupation of the country by the Colas. 32 



VENGI 


177 


The campaigns in the N. W. that have so far engaged our 
attention resulted in the annexation to the 
Results of the Cola empire of practically all the territory 
that had ever been held by the Gangas 
and the Nolambas in Mysore, and nearly the whole of the 
modern district of Bellary, 53 so that the Tungabhadra became 
the boundary between the two empires. No inscriptions of 
Rajaraja have been found in Bellary so far ; but then there 
are no Calukya inscriptions of the period either. As a rule, 
Cola inscriptions are not found in the remote provinces of 
the empire in as great numbers as in areas nearer home, and 
we cannot on this account entertain doubts about the correct- 
ness of facts clearly attested by contemporary records. That 
Rajaraja had a Mahadandanayaka for the Ganga and Vengi 
mandalas 54 towards the close of his reign is sufficient proof 
of the extent of his empire and of the contiguity of these two 
mandalas. 

Rajaraja's intercession in Vengi affairs was the direct 
and natural result of the political develop- 
”^ ng *' ment of the early years of his reign, rather 

than of any diplomatic design to dissociate the Eastern 
Calukyas from their Western cousins. 55 If Rajaraja and his 
successors found it easier to spread their power along the 
east coast than across the Tungabhadra, this was partly due 
to the different conditions in which the 
Contrasted Eastern and the Western Calukyas found 

Kingdom? ^ Ukya themselves when the Colas entered on their 
imperial career under Rajaraja. After more 
than three centuries of rule in Vengi marked by many wars 
with the Rastrakutas of Western Deccan, the Eastern 
Calukyas had become an old and decrepit race, and their 
kingdom was falling a prey to disputed successions and 
anarchy. The coming of the Colas brought fresh blood into 
the family and became a source of strength to this declining 
dynasty which, sustained for nearly a century by the Colas 
in a position of respected though subordinate alliance, soon 
after, more than repaid the debt by contributing largely to 
the continuance of the Cola empire under Kulottunga I and 
his successors, the Cola-Calukyas, as they are sometimes 
called. The Western Calukyas, on the other hand, had just 
emerged under Taila II, after centuries of subordination to 


C. 23 



178 


RAJARAJA . THE GREAT 


the Rastrakutas, and the restored dynasty was in its full 
vigour. As the Cebrolu inscription of Satyasraya 56 implies, 
they even made an attempt to unite the resources of the 
Eastern Calukyas to their own ; but being subject to attacks 
from the Paramaras in the north and the Colas in the south, 
they failed to do more than just keep their hold over their 
ancestral territory, the Rattapadi seven and a half lakh coun- 
try. They were on the whole less fortunate than their Cola 
contemporaries, and being compelled to wage many wars of 
defence, they found little time or inclination for aggression. 
Difficult as it may be to find a satisfactory scientific explana- 
tion for it. the fact remains, and it receives ample confirma- 
tion from the general course of history, that the chief dynas- 
ties throw up for a time a succession of very able rulers, that 
this succession occurs generally in the earlier part of the 
dynastic history, and that no dynasty flourishes for more than 
a limited number of generations. The relative importance of 
the Western and Eastern Calukyas and the Colas about 
a.d. 1000 forms one of the numerous illustrations of this gene- 
ral rule furnished by the course of Indian history. 

Under Parantaka I the Cola power extended in the north 
up to Nellore. The northern provinces 

Cola expansion were lost after the Rastrakuta invasion and 
in the north. '' ' 

recovered m part under the successors of 

Parantaka I. The northernmost limit reached under them 
was in the neighbourhood of Tiruvorriyur, a few miles north 
of Madras. Rajaraja who aimed at recapturing every province 
that had ever been held by Parantaka I and extend the em- 
pire still further, sent an expedition in the northern direction 
early in his reign. An inscription from Kancipuram, 57 dated 
in the 6th year of Rajakesari and recording a royal gift of a 
large herd of sheep to a Durga temple states that the sheep 
were got when Sitpuli-nadu and Paki-nadu were conquered 
by Paraman Malapadiyar alias Mummadi-solan, the chief of 
Karu-kudi in Tanjavur Kurram. The titles of the commander 
make it clear that the expedition was undertaken in Rajaraja’s 
reign. 

The actual occasion for Rajaraja’s interference in the 
internal affairs of Vengl must have occurred 
War with Vengl. j ater than the expedition just mentioned. 
The presence of Satyasraya for a time in the Vengl kingdom 



AMMA 11 


179 


had, no doubt, something to do with it. There were, however, 
deeper causes accounting alike for the presence of Satyasraya 
in Guntur and for the interest of Rajaraja 
Causes. j n the affairs of Vengi. Despite the 

abundance of Eastern Calukya copper-plates, some of 
them directly bearing on this period, the history of 
the dynasty is by no means settled, and its chrono- 
logy presents many little problems which cannot be con- 
sidered here. The troubles of the Eastern Calukyas ap- 
pear to have begun sometime in the reign of Amma II 
a.d. 945-70 and they were started apparently by the intrigues of 
the ambitious Rastrakuta monarch Krsna III with the younger 
branch of the Eastern Calukyas. 

The complicated events in Vengi in the period 945-99 may 
be briefly summarised as follows from the standpoint of Cola 
history. 58 At Amma II’s accession in 945, his elder half- 
brother Danarnava was superseded ; how this happened we 
do not know ; but this was one source of trouble. Then there 
were the brothers Badapa and Tala II from a younger branch 
of the family which had tasted power and was ready to seize 
the throne again when opportunity' came. The Rastrakuta 
Krsna III was an ambitious conqueror who evidently followed 
the traditional policy of aggrandisement at the expense of 
Vengi, and became the more eager to do so after his successes 
against Cola Parantaka I. The dissensions among the Eastern 
Calukya princes favoured his designs. There is good reason 
to think that Amma II had married a sister of Jata Coda 
Bhima, the ruler of Pedekallu, who rose into great prominence 
towards the end of the period and seems to have exerted him- 
self in the cause of his brother-in-law as he understood it. 

Amma II had a chequered reign though it lasted altogether 
for twenty-five years till 970. At his accession he is said to 
have fought Yuddhamalla II with success ; 39 but Yuddha- 
malla's defeat was avenged by' his sons Badapa and Tala II, 
who with the aid of a party inside Vengi and perhaps of the 
Rastrakuta Krsna as well, drove Amma II into exile and 
seized the throne. The copper plate grants of Badapa and 
Tala which mention Krsna’s aid must be assigned to this 
period ; its exact duration is not easy to determine. But 
Amma returned after a few years from his exile in Kalinga 



RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


with the aid of the Kolanu chief Nrpa Kama whose daughter 
he married, and put an end to Tala’s riile some time before 
955, possibly even killed him in battle as hinted by the Pabhu- 
parru grant of Saktivarman I which says that Amina despatch- 
ed a dayada of his to heaven. 60 But very soon after the 
Vengi kingdom was invaded in force by Krsna III, and Amma 
sought refuge in Kalinga a second time ; it was after the 
eleventh year of his reign (956) that according to the 
Mangallu plates, Amma fled to Kalinga a second time. 61 The 
government of Vengl was now entrusted by Krsna to Danar- 
nava who was also supported by a party hostile to Amma 
within Vengl. But when the Rastrakuta withdrew, Amma 
returned to Vengl and apparently made it up with Danarnava, 
and once more ruled the kingdom for some time. At last 
Danarnava rose once again and having killed Amma in battle, 
took the throne for himself (970) 62 

Danarnava sought to extend his kingdom to the south and 
came into conflict with the Colas who were recovering their 
northern possessions which had been overrun by Krsna III. 
His son Saktivarman is said to have won his spurs as a boy 
in a Tamil battle (dramilahava) j 63 no further details are 
forthcoming. Meanwhile, Amma’s brother-in-law, Bhima the 
son of Jata-Coda and ruler of Pedekallu (Kurnool district), 
was on the move to avenge Amma II’s death. His activities 
could not be clearly made out as the inscription which re- 
cords them is sadly mutilated. 64 As a boy Bhima must have 
been a feudatory of Krsna III and possibly had even to take 
part in his campaigns in VengL But after Krsna ’s death he 
asserted himself and resented the success of Danarnava against 
Amma followed by his conquest and annexation of Pottapi 
to Vengl. The details are not clear, but in the war that fol- 
lowed Bhima killed Danarnava, drove his children into exile, 
and occupied the whole of Vengi. 

The period of twenty-seven years (973-999) between the 
death of Danarnava and the accession of Saktivarman I, his 
son, is described in later charters of the Eastern Calukyas as 
an interregnum 63 and ascribed to a bad stroke of fate. 66 This 
was the period when Jata-Coda Bhima ruled in Vengi ; he 
was not a Calukya and his rule was an unwelcome intrusion, 
a real interregnum from the standpoint of the Calukyas. Dur- 



JATA CODA BHiMA 


181 


ing this period, Bhima met with much sullen opposition from 
the Vaidumbas, the nobles who were loyal to Danarnava’s 
memory, and Kamarnava the Eastern Ganga king of Kalinga 
who was related to Danamava and in whose court Danar- 
nava’s sons found shelter in the first instance. But Bhima 
overcame all opposition after years of fighting and having 
destroyed Kamarnava in 978 and his brother Vinayaditya in 
981, made himself master of Kalinga also. The children of 
Danamava, two sons Saktivarman and Vimaladitya, and 
perhaps their mother also, left Kalinga to find a welcome in 
the Tamil Cola court and settle for a time in Tiruvaiyaru in 
the Tanjore district. 67 After the accession of Rajaraja, their 
presence in the Cola country was turned by that farsighted 
ruler to great advantage in the development of his policy 
against the rising power of the Western Calukyas under 
Taila II and Satyasraya. They became the instruments of Cola 
policy and furnished the excuse for Rajaraja’s interference in 
Vengi. On the other side, it seems possible though as yet 
there is no direct proof, that the Western Calukyas came to 
an understanding with Jata-Coda Bhima. Rajaraja invaded 
Vengi in 999 or a little earlier to restore Saktivarman to the 
throne of Vengi. Though details are lacking in Cola inscrip- 
tions, Saktivarman’s records state that first he killed a great 
warrior Ekavira despatched against him by Bhima, and then 
put to death two other powerful chiefs Baddema and Maha- 
raja, and finally uprooted the ‘ widespread tree of Jata-Coda 
to its very roots ’ i.e. did away with Bhima himself. But the 
struggle was hard and lasted some years. Though Bhima was 
driven out of Vengi and Saktivarman began his rule in 999, 
Bhima returned to the charge, chased Saktivarman as far as 
Kanci, and it was only after another fight in the neighbour- 
hood of that city (1001-2) that Saktivarman could feel fairly 
secure on the throne of Vengi. In any event, it is quite certain 
that Saktivarman owed much to the Cola king’s support, and 
possibly he consented to recognise the overlordship of Raja- 
raja in some form after becoming king of Vengi. We know 
that the exact date of Vimaladitya’s accession in Vengi was 
10 May, a.d. 1011 68 and that his predeces- 
Saktivarman s sor and elder brother Saktivarman ruled for 
restoration. , , „ , . 

twelve years before him. This would give 
a.d. 999 as the date of Saktivarman’s accession and the end of 



182 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


the interregnum. Saktivarman is called in his plates Calukya- 
narayana, a surname evidently modelled on that of Rajaraja, 
Cola-narayana. Thus a study of the affairs of the E. Calukya 
dynasty before Rajaraja began to interest 
By Rajaraja. himself in them makes it plain that, far 
from their being sought out by Rajaraja as valuable political 
allies, they owed their position to that great monarch. By 
the part he played in restoring order and putting an end to 
the long-drawn civil strife in that kingdom, Rajaraja was well 
justified in claiming to have conquered Vengi. This is not 
to say that Vengi became at once an integral part of the Cola 
Empire 69 like the other areas where, as in the Ganga or 
even the Bandya country, the separate political existence of 
the conquered country was deliberately put an end to, and 
the administrative system of the Colas was imposed. If the 
analogy suggested by the term is not pressed too far, the 
political relation in which Vengi stood to the Cola empire 
under Rajaraja is best described as that of a protectorate. 
The alliance between the two ruling families was sealed by 
a dynastic marriage ; Vimaladitya married Rajaraja’s daughter 
Kundava, the younger sister of Rajendra 70 

The fall of Bhima and the subordination of Vengi to Raja- 
raja were bitter pills to Satyasraya. In fact from this time 
Vengi becomes a bone of contention between the Colas and 
the Western Calukyas, and for the next 135 years, with few 
intervals, Vengi becomes a theatre of their hostilities ; the 
Eastern Calukya rulers of the country recede into the back- 
ground. Saktivarman’s inscriptions are silent on the occur- 
rences after his accession. But a Western Calukya inscrip- 
tion 71 from Cebrolu (Guntur district) shows that a Western 
Calukya army under the command of Bayal Nambi invaded 
Vengi, burnt down the forts of Dharanikota and Yanamadala, 
and that the general had established himself at Cebrolu by 
a.d. 1006. What happened subsequently is not apparent ; but 
the date of the record suggests that Satyasraya made an 
effort to displace or subjugate Saktivarman before he could 
establish himself firmly in his kingdom. The invasion of 
Rattapadi by Rajendra that occurred about the same time 
and is so vividly described in the Hottur inscription already 
noticed was perhaps calculated to draw off Satyasraya’s forces 
from Vengi and succeeded in its purpose. 



END OF THE REIGN 


183 


The last of the conquests, mentioned only in the latest 
inscriptions of Rajaraja, is that of the ‘ old 

c °>ique st of islands of the sea numbering 12,000,’ the 
the Maldives. 

Maldives. 72 This naval conquest, of which 
we have no details, is sufficient indication that the navy which, 
as we shall see, Rajendra used so effectively some years later, 
had been organised under his great father who stands in 
many ways in the same relation to Rajendra as Philip of 
Macedon to Alexander the Great. An earlier occasion in 
Rajaraja’s reign in which the navy played 
The Co}a Navy. a p ar (- was the conquest of Ceylon. In this 
increasing realisation of the importance of a good navy, we 
may find a reason for holding that the expedition against 
Kandalur in the early years of Rajaraja's rule was primarily 
intended to sterilise the naval power of the Ceras. 

The Karandai (Tanjore) plates (v. 30) state that Raja- 
raja drove out a Banaraja after a battle and cut off the head 
of a certain Bhogadeva, occurrences of which no adequate 
explanation is now forthcoming. 73 

In the closing years of his reign Rajaraja associated his 
Rajendra made son Rajendra with himself in the official 
yuvaraja a . d . 1012. administration. This formal recognition of 
Rajendra as heir apparent took place some time between 
27 March and 7 July a.d. 1012. 74 Rajendra must have 
been at least twenty-five years of age at the time as he is 
mentioned in Rajaraja’s inscriptions of the fourth year as a 
young prince. 75 Considering the large number of Tanjore 
inscriptions which mark the twenty-ninth year of his father, 
we may conclude that this year a.d. 1014 marked the close 
of Rajaraja’s illustrious reign. 76 

Rajaraja’s great reign is commemorated by the magni- 
ficent Siva temple which he built at Tan- 
tempL^ an ^° re 3 ore - the Rajarajesvara, which stands to 
this day, the finest monument of a splendid 
period of South Indian history and the most beautiful speci- 
men of Tamil architecture at its best. The temple is re- 
markable alike for its stupendous proportions and for the 
simplicity of its design. A rectangular court, 750 feet by 250, 
is divided into two by a partition wall, which carries a low 



184 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


tower of beautiful design ; the inner court is twice as long 
as the outer. The chief shrine occupies the centre of the 
Western half of this inner court and the Vimana, which rises 
over the sanctum to a height of nearly 200 feet on a square 
base of about a hundred feet, dominates the whole structure. 
The boldly moulded basement, the huge monolithic Nandi, 
the simple and tasteful bas-rehefs and the decorative motifs 
on the Vimana and the balustrades, the graceful sculptures 
in the niches on the sides of the Vimana and the fine chiselling 
which marks the entire work, including the lettering of the 
numerous inscriptions, are not equalled by anything known 
in South Indian architecture. Viewed from any angle, the 
effect produced by the whole of this wonderful structure is 
pleasing and impressive. That the stone walls round the 
garbhagrha right under the Vimana in the interior of the tem- 
ple were overlaid with a thin coat of chunam (lime) plaster, 
and painted, is beyond question. When he saw this great 
enterprise of his reign drawing to completion, on the 275th 
day of the 25th year of his reign, Rajaraja solemnly dedicated 
the copper-pot intended for adorning the finial at the top of 
the Vimana. We have no authentic information as to how the 
colossal labour involved in transporting the huge blocks of 
granite over great distances, and the technical problems in- 
volved in raising them to position, were met. The conquered 
countries doubtless paid part of the cost. After its comple- 
tion, the temple in the capital city had close business relations 
with the rest of the country ; year after year villages from 
all parts of the empire were required to supply men and 
material according to a fixed schedule for the various require- 
ments of the temple. Those nearer home took out perpetual 
loans from the numberless money endowments showered on 
the temple by the piety and the generosity of the court and 
its officials, and undertook to contribute regularly the annual 
interest in cash or in some other way previously determined. 
In the minute care and precision with which most of these 
arrangements were completed before Rajaraja’s twenty-ninth 
year we see the hand of a masterful and imaginative ad- 
ministrator. Karuvur Devar, a contemporary hymnist, cele- 
brated the new temple in one of his sacred hymns. Tanjavur, 
it should be noted was not among the numerous sacred spots 
of Saivism consecrated by the hymns of the Devaram Saints, 



A TOLERANT SAIVA 185 

Appar, Sambandar and Sundaramurti. The temple was 
altogether a creation of Rajaraja’s policy. 

The accurate survey and assessment of the country for 

. , . . . purposes of land-revenue, the perfection of 

Administration. , . 

the administrative organisation of the 

country by the creation of a strong and centralised machinery 
corresponding to the staff of secretaries in a modem ad- 
ministration, and the posting of representative officers of the 
central government in suitable localities, the promotion of a 
system of audit and control by which village assemblies and 
other quasi-public corporations were held to account with- 
out their initiative or autonomy being curtailed, the creation 
of a powerful standing army and a considerable navy which 
achieved even greater success under Rajendra than under 
himself, mark out Rajaraja as the greatest among the empire- 
builders of Southern India. No wonder, popular appreciation 
of Rajaraja’s eminence finds expression in a Sanskrit verse 
engraved in a rock face in Tenmahadevimangalam (N. Arcot, 
Polur taluq) within a generation or so after the end of his 
reign ; the verse says that Visnu will be born as Rajaraja, and 
Vakpati (Brhaspati) as his minister Jayanta ; the king would 
survey the world and found a city in his name on the Trisula 
hill, the Navirmalai ruled by Nannan in the Sangam age. 7T 

Himself an ardent follower of Siva, Rajaraja was, like all 
the great statesmen of India, tolerant in 
gious Po 'ey. mat t ers c f religion, and all creeds received 
equal favour at his hands. The decorative sculptures on the 
walls of the Tanjore temple and the construction of some 
Visnu temples recorded in his inscriptions are proof of his 
liberal religious policy. The celebrated Leyden grant records 
how he encouraged the erection of the Cudamani Vihara in 
Negapatam by the Sailendra king, Sri Mara-vijayottunga- 
varman, the lord of Sri Visaya and Kataha across the sea. 
This Vihara, which was building in the twenty-first year of 
Rajaraja, 78 was named after the father of its founder, and the 
Cola monarch, with whose permission the construction was 
undertaken, dedicated to Lord Buddha dwelling in this Vihara 
the village of Anaimangalam, and his son Rajendra confirmed 
the grant after his father’s death and caused it to be engraved 
on copper-plates. That Negapatam was the first port on the 
C. 24 



186 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


mainland touched by vessels from the East bound for South 
India becomes clear from I-tsing’s itineraries . 79 This must 
have been the reason for the foreign king constructing a 
Vihara there. 

If names are the music of history, this noble king greatly 
indulged his taste for this music ; and what 
Titles ' is more, he sought to make these names 

current coin by attaching them to new foundations or substi- 
tuting them for old ones. Besides Rajaraja. Mummudicola. 
Jayangonda and Arumoli, which became part of the names 
of cities (Puram), valanddus and mandalams, the king also 
called himself Colendrasimha, Sivapadasekhara, Ksatriya- 
sikhamani, Jananatha, Nigarili-sola, Rajendrasimha, Cola- 
martanda, Rajasraya, Raja-martanda, Nityavinoda, Pandya- 
kulasani, Keralantaka, Singalantaka, Ravikulamanikya, 
Telingakulakala 80 and so on. Many of these names, together 
with those of other members of the royal family, like Kun- 
davai, Sembiyan-mahadevi and others often distinguished the 
wards ( seris ) in the larger villages and towns of the Cola 
empire . 81 The regiments in the army also bore names form- 
ed out of the surnames of kings and princes. 

Rajaraja had a ntfmber of wives but apparently only a 
few children. The queens mentioned in 
Family. his inscriptions as making gifts to temples 

and in other connections number about fifteen, and though 
we can hardly be sure of it, Dantisakti Vitanki, also called 
Lbka-mahadevi. appears to have occupied the most important 
place among them. With her we find the king in Tiruvisalur 
in the twenty-ninth year of his reign. On this occasion the 
king performed the tulabhdra and his queen Dantisakti the 
hiranyagarbha in the temple at Tiruvisalur . 82 The inscription 
recording this fact is engraved below a sculptured representa- 
tion of the king and the queen in a worshipping posture. 
Some of the gold was used to make some flowers for Ksetra- 
pala in the shrine built by the queen at Tiruvalanjuli . 83 The 
mother of Rajendra, the only son of Rajaraja we know, was 
Vanavan-mahadevi alias Tribhuvana-mahadevi . 84 We know 
that Valla varaiyar Vandyadevar was the husband of Kunda- 
vai, the elder sister of Rajaraja , 85 who is often called in the 
inscriptions Alvar Parantakan Kundavaip-pirattiyar and the 



FAMILY : FEUDATORIES 


187 


daughter of Pon-maligait-tunjina-devar . 86 Kundavai was 
much respected and treated with great affection by her brother. 
Her gifts to the Tanjore temple were recorded, next to the 
king’s own, on the walls of the central shrine, while those of 
the queens and the officers of state found a place only on the 
niches and pillars of the enclosure . 87 Rajaraja must have had 
at least three daughters, because an inscription from Tiru- 
valanjuli mentions besides the younger Kundavai, the queen 
of Calukya-Vimaladitya, a middle daughter of the king called 
Madevadigal 88 Peculiar interest attaches to two memorials 
erected by Rajaraja which show his eagerness to fulfil his 
obligations to his family, and that in a manner productive of 
public good. They are the construction at Tirumukkudal 89 of 
a mandapa called after Sembiyan Mahadevi. the queen of 
Gandaraditya and mother of Uttama Cola, and the founda- 
tion of the Colesvara or Arinjigai-isvara temple at Melpadi . 90 


The history of the reign may be concluded with an ac- 
count of the leading officials and feudatories 

Officials and w ho distinguished themselves in the royal 
feudatories. , , , , 

service. Mention has been made already ot 

the place held by Mahadandanayaka Pancavan Maharaya, 
(probably identical with the crown-prince) the sphere of 
whose command extended over the Ganga and Vengl manda- 
las, and the Nolamba feudatories of the king in the Ganga 
country. Paraman Malapadiyar alias Mummudi-solan was a 
general who conquered the Sitpuli and Paki nadus early in 
this reign. In the Trichinopoly district, the Paluvettaraiyar, 
of uncertain origin but closely allied to the royal family from 
the days when Parantaka I married a Paluvettaraiyar prin- 
cess, were occupying a respected position, and were apparent- 
ly in the enjoyment of full responsibility for the administra- 
tion of a small area around Paluvur. The inscriptions of 
Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Maravan, which clearly 
acknowledge the overlordship of Rajaraja are found in Kila- 
and Melappaluvur from the third year of the reign and show 
him ruling in state. He had for instance officers or nobles 
of the perundaram , like the Cola monarchs and princes them- 
selves . 91 This chieftain built a temple of Tiruttorram-udaiyar 
in Melappaluvur , 92 and adopted the ancient standard prevail- 
ing at Nandipuram for regulating taxation in Paluvur . 93 The 



188 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


latest records mentioning him seem to be dated in the fifteenth 
year of Rajaraja. 94 Madhurantakan Gandaradittan, apparently 
a son of Madhurantaka Uttama Cola, 93 served Rajaraja as an 
important official in the department of temple-affairs, so to 
say. We see him conducting enquiries into the affairs of 
temples in various parts of the country, punishing defaulters 96 
and making proper arrangements for the prevention of neglect 
in subsequent years. He has been wrongly identified with 
Gandaradittar, the author of the Tiruvisaippd , which was in 
reality composed by his grandfather. 97 In the district of 
North Arcot there were the Iladaraya (Lata) chieftains who 
had apparently been ruling the region round Pahcapandava- 
malai continuously from the days of Parantaka I ; in the 
eighth year of Rajaraja, Udaiyar VIrasolar, son of Udaiyar 
Iladarajar Pugalvippavargandan, remitted, at the request of 
his queen, some taxes in favour of a Jain temple. 98 The regal 
titles employed in the inscriptions of these chieftains are 
perhaps an indication of the high favour in which they stood 
with their Cola overlords. In the sixteenth year of the reign 
of Rajaraja, we find mention, in a Tiruvallam inscription, 99 of 
a Tiruvaiyan Sankaradeva who claimed descent from the 
Ganga kings of Kolar and built at Tiruvallam a temple called 
Tiruvaiya-lsvara apparently after his father. The high- 
sounding titles that precede the name of this obscure chieftain 
constitute a clear warning against hasty inferences from such 
titles in regard to the political status of the person employing 
them. Nannamarayar of the Vaidumba family, the son of 
Tukkarai who possessed the Ingallur-nadu in Maharajapadi, 
in the Cuddapah district, gave an endowment at Tiruvallam 
in North Arcot about a.d. 1005. 100 Like the Vaidumbas, the 
Banas, who shared the same fate with them at the hands of 
Parantaka I, seem to have become officers sharing in the 
administration of the country under the Colas. A Bana 
prince, Maravan Narasimhavarman, whose records commence 
with the usual introduction of Rajaraja and then proceed to 
give the traditional titles of the Banas in all their fullness, 
was apparently ruling some part of the South Arcot district 
in the neighbourhood of Jambai towards the close of Raja- 
raja’s reign, as we learn that he excavated a new irrigation 
tank in that locality. 101 The Tanjore inscriptions mention 
Senapati Sri Krsnan Raman of Aman-kudi, 102 who is called 



NOTES 


Rajendrasola Brahmamarayan in the larger Leyden grant , 103 
as the person who built the tiruccurralai, the surrounding 
enclosure and mandapa of the Tanjore temple under the king’s 
orders. Irayiravan Pallavaraiyan alias Mummudi-solaposan 
was another officer of perundaram rank who presented an 
image and some jewels to the Tanjore temple . 104 He was 
doubtless a high official in the secretariat of the revenue de- 
partment as we find him attesting the Leyden grant and an 
important inscription from Ukkal 105 relating to revenue settle- 
ment. Senapati Kuravan Ulagajandan alias Rajaraja Maha- 
rajan who is also mentioned in the Tanjore inscriptions , 106 
apparently got his surname Ulagalandan (one who measured 
the world) after carrying out the revenue survey which 
began in the sixteenth year (a.d. 1001), formed one of the 
most original and important administrative achievements of 
the reign 107 and furnished the basis for the revenue policy for 
many years thereafter, as can be seen from the numerous 
references to the survey in subsequent records. 


1. E.7. ix p. 217. 

2. vv. 61-3. 

3. I am inclined to agree with T. G. Aravamuthan. who rejects the 
Tanjore bronze sometimes taken to be Rajaraja as late and spurious. 
See his Portrait Sculpture in South India p. 36 and fig. 11. ARJS. 1952 
II 12. A sculptured representation of a king (and queen) at Tiruvisalur 
may be of this king. 

4. 633 of 1902. 

5. 453 of 1908 (yr. 3). 

6. See SII. it. Intr. p. 3 and n. 6. The best explanation seems to 
be- ‘the thrice (powerful) Cola.’ 

7. 395 of 1922 is the earliest record so far known mentioning this 
achievement and dated in the 24th day of the fourth year. It is no 
longer true therefore to say that ‘until the 8th year of his reign, aj>. 994. 
he did not undertake any expedition’ (SII. ii Introd. p. 2). What Raja- 
raja’s achievement at Kandalur exactly was has been the subject of 
much discussion. Though saloi and kalam mean respectively ‘a feeding 
house’ and ‘ (eating) plate’, these meanings seem hardly satisfactory in 
the present instance (Contra TAS. ii 2-5). On the other hand salai in 
the sense of ‘roadstead’ is not known in any other context. But, after 
all, salai may only be part of the name of the place; or it may have 
the ordinary meaning of a road. In any case, no other meaning seems 
more likely than the one usually adopted for the whole phrase viz.. 
‘who destroyed the fleet in the roadstead of Kandalur.’ The alternative 



190 


RAJARAJA , THE GREAT 


suggestion that the ‘scale of feeding in the feeding-house of Kandalur 
was regulated by the king' (S. Desikavinayagam Pillai - Kerala Society 
Papers, Series 2 pp. 100 ff.) necessitates a far-fetched explanation of 
the need for the use of force in the transaction, and fails to explain 
why such a thing had to be done over again, for instance, by Raja- 
dhiraja. D. Pillai's objection that the destruction of a fleet would not 
be described as an act of grace aruli as this is done in the usual intro- 
duction, ‘tirumagalpola’ etc., of Rajaraja, is easily met: Rajadhiraja 
caused the Pandya Vira Kerala to be trampled by an elephant, and this 
is described as an act of grace ' kadakkalirran-udaippittaru It.' Perhaps, 
aruttu does not mean ‘destroyed’, but simply ‘overcame,’ cf. Kalingattup- 
parani (verse 370) saying that Vilinam was destroyed and soldi cap- 
tured. It must be admitted, however, that the earliest mention of Kan- 
dalur (TAS. i p. 6, 1. 6) does support D. Pillai’s interpretation. Gopi- 
natha Rao has correctly identified Kandalur with a part of Trivandrum 
now called Valiya Salai. But see TAR. 1920-21 (p. 65) where Kandalur 
near Puvar (Neyyattinkara) is suggested. Salai is sometimes sanskritised 
as jvdld. (T.A.S. ii. p. 4). 

8. The Darsanankoppu record {TAS. i. p. 238) seems to be the 
earliest so far known. 

9. vv 76-79. 

10. TAS. ii pp. 31-2 It must be noted that the period of this king's 
rule has been fixed on the evidence of a single record, the Tirunelli 
plates. 

11. 261 of 1910. Only a few records before the thirteenth year con- 
tain any introduction. 

12. 67 of 1923 (Year 14). 

13. 394 of 1911 ARE. 1912 II 23. 

14. ‘Perhaps Kandalur or Kandalur Salai was near Vilinam .... 
Kandalur Salai which is said to belong to the Cera king in later inscrip- 
tions was probably held by the Pandyas when it was attacked by 
Rajaraja.’ Venkayya, SII, ii. Intr. p. 2. 

15. Darsanankoppu (Yr. 8). Sucindram (Yr. 10), Vijayanarayanam 
(Yr. 10). 

16. Sll. ii 1 paragraphs 34. 51 etc. It is these campaigns to which 
the Tiruvalangadu plates refer in v. 83 as the conquest of Parasurama’s 
country. Contra Venkayya Sll. ii. Intr. p. 4. 

17. SII. ii 1 para. 51. 

18. 236 of 1902 (Yr. 27)— Sll. vii No. 863; also TAS ii. p. 5. 

19. See Adiyarkkunallar on Sil. xi 1. 53. Kielhorn calls it Malabar. 
EL vii -List No. 704. See also EC. iii TN. 122. 

20. SII. iii. 19, 51. 

21. viii v. 24. 

22. EC. iii Sr. 125. 

23. No. 5 of 1895 (Yr. 28), EC. iii Sr. 140; also i. Cg. 46 and pp. 12-13. 

24. A record from Kaleyur (353 of 1901) dated Saka 929 men- 
tions that a Cola general Aprameya defeated some Hoysala leaders. But 



NOTES 


191 

Kielhorn considers this date 'of no value for historical purposes' El. 
iv pp. 67-8. Contra Rice, Mysore and Coorg pp. 86, 144-5. 

25. 261 of 1910. 

26. SII iii 4, 15. 

27. SII. ii 92 paragraphs 12-15. 

28. v. 80. 

29. CV. Ch. lv, v. 4-12. 

30. SII. ii 92 paragraph 12. 

31. Ceylon Journal of Science — G If, 2 pp. 145-7. 

32. ASC. 1906 p. 27. 

33. 132 of 1910 (Year 17). 

34. ASC. 1891 p. 12 Nos. 78-80. The record from Padaviya dated 
in the 27th year cited at SII, ii. Intr. p. 5 must be among these. 

35. ASC. 1906 pp. 17 ff. 

36. 616 of 1912 (SII. iv. 1412). 

37. 67 of 1923. ARE. 1923 II, 27. 

38. 97 of 1921 (Yr. 9 ). See SII. ii. Intr. p. 3 and n. 1, where a 
record of the 8th year from Tiruvadandai is said to mention these con- 
quests: the reference is doubtless to 261 of 1910. 

39. MAR. 1917, p. 42. 

40. 127 of 1919. The official’s name Gangan Ambalavanan Gan- 
daraditta Sola Vilupparaiyan seems to imply that he rose to prominence 
in Uttama Cola’s reign, if not earlier. 

41. SII. iii 213. No. 212 also of Rajakesari and of the 10th year 
mentions Malavaraiyan Sundarasolan as the donor. This name suggests 
the reign of Parantaka II Sundara Cola, and if this is correct, the 
father of the donor must, like Siriyavelar. have met his fate in the 
Ceylonese expedition of that monarch’s time. ARE. 1914 II, 15. 

42. El. x p. 57 and n. 3. 

43. 169 of 1911 (Yr. 13). 

44. EC. x Mb. 208. 

45. ibid. Ct. 118. 

46. The present Krsnarajapet, Nagamangala. Mandya, Seringa- 
patam and Malavalli talukas of the Mysore district,' Fleet, IA xxx 
pp. 109-10. 

47. 36 of 1904; IA. v. p. 17. SII. ix(i) No. 77. Attempts have been 
made to account for the hostility between the Western Calukyas and 
the Colas by the assumption that it was a continuation of the Pallava 
tradition by the Colas, that the Colas were of the Solar race while the 
Calukyas were of the Lunar, and that the former were Saivas while 
the latter were Vaisnavas and patronised Jainism (SII. ii Intr. p. 5 
and n. 4). Such efforts lead nowhere. 

48. SII. ii 1, paragraph 92. Judging by the relative value of the 
presents made to the temple at the conclusion of these campaigns, it 
would seem that the success in the Calukya war was nothing by the 
side of the victories gained elsewhere. 

49. ARE. 1927 ii 11. 97 of 1921 mentions Rattapadi But the date 
[9] is doubtful. 



192 


RAJARAJA, THE GREAT 


50. v. 81. 

51. El. xvi. p. 74. 

52. See the next chapter for further particulars of this war or 
another which followed not long after. 

53. ARE. 1904, para. 17. See, however, the next chapter on Rajen- 
dra’s campaigns for proof that later in this reign part of this territory 
was regained by the Calukyas. 

54. 5 of 1895 (Yr. 28 )—EC. iii Sr. 140. 

55. Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar Gangai-Konda, pp. 541-2. 

56. 145 of 1897 — SII. vi. no. 102. 

57. 79 of 1921. 

58. For details see The Eastern Calukyas of Vengi by Dr. N. Ven- 
kataramanayya Chh. xiv-xviii. 

59. Korumelli pi. IA. xiv, p. 52. 

60. Journal of the Telugu Academy, ii, p. 408. 

61. Agamat Krsnakopat Kalingam, ARE, 1917, II, 24. 

62. Penneru grant (unpublished) cited by Venkataramanayya op. 
cit. p. 183, n. 1. 

63. Journal of the Telugu Academy, ii, p. 409. 

64. 237, 238 of 1931. El. xxi p. 29 where the record is wrongly 
ascribed to Rajaraja I in whose time a single line was added in Tamil 
at thh end to say that Bhima of this record was made captive by 
Rajaraja. 

65. Arajakam in 1. 35 of Saktivarman’s grant; x anayika (1. 40) in 
Ranastapundi grant of Vimaladitya, El, vi. 

66. Daiva-duscestaya (1. 39) — Ranastapundi grant. 

67. SII. v. No. 516 of year 22 of Rajaraja I from Tiruvaiyaru men- 
tions Vambavai, queen of Salukki Vlmayan (Calukya Bhima), a title 
assumed by Danarnava at the time of his coronation. 

68. El., vi, p. 349. 

69. See JAHRS. iii, iv, B. V. Krishna Rao’s History of Rajahmundry 
for an unconvincing attempt to show that Rajaraja had no part in the 
restoration of Saktivarman. K. Rao's identification of Jata-Coda with 
Jatavarman Sundara Cola-Pandya is impossible. 

70. Korumelli plates, IA. xiv, p. 52, 11. 55-65. 

71. 145 of 1897; SII. vi. no. 102. 

72. 'The king of the Maldives assumes the style of king of the 
Twelve Thousand Islands.’ — Renaudot quoting Pyrard — Ancient Accounts. 
Remarks p. 2. Also Toung Pao xvi, p. 388 n. 1. 

73. Cf. JOR, xix pp. 150-1. Was Bhogadeva another name of Jata- 
Coda Bhima? 

74. El. viii, p. 260. 

75 117 A of 1896. 

76. This seems to be the proper explanation of the apparently 
puzzling reference to a gift of the third year of Rajendra in SII. ii, 90. 



NOTES 


193 


77. 50 of 1933-4, ARE. II 13. 

78. 1. 118 of the grant (Tamil part), El. xxii. 

79. Gerini -Researches p. 527. Also ARE. 1899, paragraph 48. 

80. Pd. 91. 

81. Mannar -kovil in the Tinnevelly district had twelve sens so 
named, see 109 of 1905 (El. xi pp. 292-8). Tirukkalittittai in Tanjore had 
the following sens, among others. Arumolidevacceri, Jananathaceri, 
Nittavinodacceri, Rajakesaricceri, Nigarilisolacceri, Alagiyasolacceri, 
Singalantakacceri, Kundavaicceri, 6olakulasundaracceri, Rajamarttan- 
dacceri and Rajarajacceri (292 of 1908 of the ninth year of Rajendra I) . 

82. 42 of 1907. For hiranya-garbha in modem times, see Galletti — 
The Dutch in Malabar p. 110 and n. 

83. 633-C. of 1902 (Rajendra 3). 

84. 117 -A of 1896; 448 of 1918. 

85. SII. ii 2. 

86. 8 of 1919. 

87. SII. ii. Introdn. p. 8. 

88. 633 of 1902 (Yr. 25). 

89. 178 of 1915 (Yr. 28). 

90. SII. iii 15. 

91. 115 of 1895. 

92. 394 of 1924 (Rajak. 4). 

93. 365, 367 of 1924 (Rajak. 10, 16). 

94. 363 of 1924. 

95. Hultzsch SII. iii 49; ante p. 157 and n. 74. A certain Gandaradittan 
Madhurantakan is also mentioned in 356 of 1917 (Yr. 10). 

96. 283 of 1906; 218 of 1921. 

97. The mistake seems to have arisen from the false belief that 
G.’s Tiruvisaippa refers to the Tanjore temple whereas it is on Cidam- 
baram. See T. A. G. Rao — Solavamsa-carittirac-curukkam p. 16 n. 

98. 19 of 1890 (El. iv p. 139). 

99. 11 of 1890 (SII. iii 51). 

100. SII. iii 52. 

101. 84, 86 of 1906. 

102. SII. ii. 31. 

103. 1. 437. 

104. SII. ii. 55. 

105. SII. iii, 9. 

106. SII. ii 95, p. 459. 

107. 624 and 624-A of 1902— SII. viii Nos. 222-3; 44 of 1907 (Yr. 24). 


25 



Chapter X 


RAJENDRA— (a.d. 1012-1044) 


Parakesari-varman Rajendra-coladeva I was declared 
heir apparent and formally associated with 
Accession. his father in the administration of the Em- 

pire in the closing years of his rule. Accordingly he counts 
his regnal years from some date between 27 March and 
7 July, a.d. 1012 1 and we find clear evidence of joint rule 
in the third year of Rajendra. This year is mentioned in 
Rajaraja’s Tan j ore inscriptions of the twenty-ninth year; 2 
Rajaraja is also stated to have made a gift in the third year 
of his son’s rule. 3 The star of Rajendra’s nativity was Ardra. 4 


Rajendra inherited from his father an extensive empire 
comprising the whole of the modern Madras 
Extent and and Andhra and parts of Mysore and the 

of S empfre° n island of Ceylon. The administration had 

been carefully organised and a fairly power- 
ful bureaucracy brought into existence which, while it 
scrupulously respected the ‘ liberties,’ feudal and corporate, 
of the various magnates and associations that studded the 
land, successfully maintained the king’s peace, and enforced 
all civil rights. The army was a strong and tried body of 
men, well able to defend the wide land frontier and to keep 
down any threatened outbreaks in areas ne\Vly subjected 
to the empire, and ready for aggressive warfare abroad. 
The hold on Ceylon and some other islands like the Maldives 
was securely maintained by a powerful naval force which 
also served to protect the considerable overseas trade of the 
empire with the islands of the East Indies and with China. 
During the thirty-three years of his reign, Rajendra turned 
these initial advantages to the best possible use and succeed- 
ed in raising the Co]a empire to the position of the most ex- 
tensive and most respected Hindu state of his time, and one 
which possessed though perhaps only for a time a not in- 
considerable dominion over the Malay peninsula and the 
Eastern Archipelago. The history of Rajendra’s reign is very 



YUVARAJA RAJADHIRAJA 


195 


largely the history of the extensive wars and conquests he 
undertook in the first half of his reign. Like his father, he 
has left behind in his stone inscriptions and in the Tiruvalan- 
gadu and Karandai (Tanjore) copper-plates a trustworthy ac- 
count of the military and naval transactions of his reign which 
receive confirmation at all points at which we have the means 
of controlling it by other evidence. 

The most common form of Rajendra’s Tamil prasasti is 
that which begins tiru manni valara. We 
His prasastis. come across this form as early as the third 
year, though it is more generally employed only from the 
fifth. This introduction progressively increases in length by 
the narration of fresh conquests until the thirteenth year, 
after which date it becomes stereotyped. By tracing its 
growth we are able to fix the internal chronology of the reign 
with a precision not often attained in the annals of Ancient 
India. Another Tamil prasasti known so far from only one 
inscription 5 of the tenth year, gives some particulars about 
Pandyan affairs which are confirmed by the Tiruvalangadu 
plates. In another inscription dated in the twenty-fourth 
year, 6 the Tamil prasasti follows the usual form up to the 
conquest of Takkanaladam, and then copies the prasasti of 
another king ; most probably a mistake occurred in the re- 
engraving and two inscriptions got mixed up. 7 Lastly, the 
account given of Rajendra’s military achievements in the 
Sanskrit part of the Tiruvalangadu plates was written, quite 
obviously, 8 after all conquests were over, and by the side of 
indications gained from the different stages of the Tamil 
prasasti in different years, this Sanskrit account must be held 
to be of decidedly inferior import to the chronology of the 
reign. But the poet Narayana who composed the long 
Sanskrit prasasti is entitled to our admiration not only for his 
high literary quality but for the attention he gives to the 
facts of his patron’s reign which is fuller than is usual with 
court-poets. In fact, his account forms, at several points, a 
valuable supplement to the Tamil prasasti. 

Very early in Rajendra’s reign, he appointed his son 
Rajadhiraja as yuvaraja to assist him in the work of the state. 
Calculations made from Rajadhiraja’s records have led to the 
conclusion that this happened on some day between 15 



RAJENDRA 


March and 3 December a.d. 1018, 9 most probably in the 
early months of the seventh year of Rajendra himself. For 
over twenty-five years from that date, father and son, Para- 
kesari and Rajakesari ruled together and shared the burdens 
of empire. The inscriptions of Rajadhiraja, with the intro- 
duction beginning tingalertaru, give an account of the part 
played by this prince in the campaigns of his father, and 
up to about the twenty-sixth year of Rajadhiraja’s reign, his 
records must be understood to supplement those of Rajendra 
by giving an alternative description of more or less the same 
transactions from the standpoint of Rajadhiraja’s part in 
them. 10 In an inscription of his twenty-sixth year from Tiru- 
malavadi which adopts the shorter form of his introduction, 11 
Rajadhiraja’s umbrella of state is said to have functioned as 
if it were the shadow of the white umbrella of his father 
who conquered with his army the Ganges in the North. 
Ceylon in the South, Mahodai in the West and Kadaram in 
the East. This clear statement that the son ruled in full 
regal state in the life-time of his father, and that for as many 
as twenty-six years, provides the key for 
administrators ^e proper understanding of an important 
aspect of Cola history. Adopted in the first 
instance, possibly, as a device to obviate disputed succession, 
the system of choosing a successor in the life-time of the rul- 
ing king and associating him, after a formal installation, in 
the discharge of important public duties pointed the way, 
under the stress of empire, to a more deliberate and exten- 
sive application of the principle to the administrative arrange- 
ments of the empire. The princes of the blood royal who had 
come of age were appointed to positions of authority in the 
different provinces of the empire, care being taken to give to 
each the position suited to his capacity and talent. The per- 
son chosen as heir apparent was distinguished from the rest 
by a formal installation, and by his higher status ; in the 
case of Rajadhiraja, who was not the eldest son of Rajendra 
and must have been chosen as yuvaraja for his outstanding 
ability, his status is clearly implied by his separate historical 
introductions and by his titles even during his father’s life- 
time. The contemporary Cola-Pandya viceroys, also Cola 
princes, either use no historical introductions in their inscrip- 
tions, or when they do so, adopt that of the ruling sovereign, 



WAR AGAINST SATYASRAYA 


197 


Rajendra. In the early years of his reign Rajendra seems to 
have been assisted only by one such subordinate ruler with 
jurisdiction over the Pandya and the Kerala countries, besides 
the crown prince Rajadhiraja, though it is possible that in 
later years others were similarly recognized elsewhere. It is 
probable that when chosen for such employment, the princes 
underwent an investiture of some sort which, among other 
things, conferred on them the right to wear coronets of their 
own, suited to their relative positions in the state. Rajadhi- 
raja and his successor are said, in their inscriptions, also to 
have continued these arrangements. This wise system initiat- 
ed by Rajendra I, by finding suitable occupation for the ener- 
gies of restless princes of the royal family, doubtless allayed 
their discontent, diminished the chances of palace intrigues 
and revolutions, and at the same time brought new strength 
to the administration of an over-grown empire which was 
called upon to face many difficult problems, domestic and 
foreign. 

We shall now trace the progress of Rajendra's conquests 
as recorded in the sources above men- 
Early conquests, tioned, accepting as our basis the precise 
indications of chronology in the tin i manni valara introduc- 
tion. From this introduction we learn that up to the third 
year of his reign he had conquered Iditurai-nadu, Banavase 
(Vanavasi) encircled by a continuous hedge of forest, Kollip- 
pakkai whose ramparts were surrounded by sulli trees, and 
Mannaikkadakkam whose fortifications were unapproachable. 
Whether this account is a retrospective version of Rajendra’s 
invasion of Rattapadi of A.D. 1003-6 so vividly described in the 
Hottur record of 1007, or recounts a second campaign necessi- 
tated by the recovery of Satyasraya, cannot be decided with 
certainty. In any event, the campaign took place before 
a.d. 1008 because it was directed against Satyasraya himself, 
who was succeeded by Vikramaditya V about that year. 
Iditurai-nadu, Ededore 2000, ‘was a stretch of country 
between the rivers Krsna on the north and Tungabhadra on 
the south, comprising a large part of the present Raichur 
district.’ 12 Kollippakkai was, doubtless, Kulpak, about 45 
miles north-east of Hyderabad, ‘invariably termed Kollipaka 
in the inscriptions,’ 13 and the centre of a 7000 district which 
was later on, at the beginning of the next century, ruled for 



198 


RAJENDRA 


some time by Somesvara III. as viceroy under his father 
Vikramaditya VI. Kulpak was still the centre of a province 
ruled by a governor under the Kakatlyas in the thirteenth 
century. In Mannaikkadakkam with its strong fortifications 
one may easily recognise the Manyakheta which according to 
the Kanyakumari inscription 14 became the sporting ground of 
Rajendra’s forces in battle. Manyakheta (Malkhed) must 
have suffered greatly in this invasion of Rajendra. In the 
closing years of Rastrakuta domination, it had been once 
sacked and plundered by the Paramara ruler of Malwa ; and 
now, forty years later, under the Calukyas, a worse fate over- 
took the unfortunate city. This must have weighed greatly 
with the Calukyas who, soon after, transferred the capital to 
Kalyani or Kalyanapura, 48 miles to the N. E. of Malkhed. 15 
An inscription of Rajendra from the Trichinopoly district, 
dated in his third year, 16 mentions an incident in the fight 
with Satyasraya before Mannaikkadakkam. A certain 
Srutiman Nakkan Candran, a native of Urrattur, was ordered 
directly by the king ( perumul t iruvayal moliya) to attack 
the enemy's elephant and apparently lost his life, and for his 
benefit a gift was made to the temple of Mahadeva in his 
native village of Urrattur. In this campaign, therefore. 
Rajendra crossed the Tungabhadra, carried the war into the 
heart of the Calukya country and attacked their very capital. 
It is not easy to see how these operations across the Tunga- 
bhadra could have been coupled with an attack on Banavase, 
long celebrated as the centre of Kadamba power, and then 
part of the W. Calukya kingdom. Banavase lies much out- 
side, and too far to the west of the line of advance indicated 
by the rest of this campaign ; 17 and yet the language of the 
inscription seems to render it obligatory to treat the whole 
as one campaign, and the names mentioned as the different 
stages, though not in that order, of a single expedition. This 
and the date of the Hottur inscription go far to suggest that 
the data furnished by Rajendra’s inscriptions also belong to 
the war which was waged about a.d. 1004 against Satyasraya 
by Rajaraja, and that in this war the advance of Rajendra 
against the Calukyas started from somewhere in the N.W. of 
Mysore, took a generally north-eastern line along the course 
of the Tungabhadra until the Raichur doab was reached, when 
a more northerly course was struck, and Kulpak and Malkhed 



CONQUEST OF CEYLON 


became the objects of attack. A rnandapa at Tiruvorriyur 
called Mannaikonda-Sola was among the mementos of this 
campaign. 18 

. The conquest of the whole of Ila-mandalam (Ceylon) is 
the next achievement mentioned. As some 
Ceylon War. Q f inscriptions of the fifth year 19 do not 

include this conquest, while others 20 do so, we may be sure 
that the war against Ceylon was undertaken in the fifth year, 
a.d. 1017-18. The Mahavamsa places the completion of the 
Cola conquest of Ceylon in the 36th year of Mahinda V which 
falls also in a.d. 1017 according to the latest scheme of 
Ceylonese chronology established by Geiger. 21 About twelve 
years before this date, Rajaraja, taking advantage of the con- 
fusion in the island kingdom which arose from a military 
revolt against Mahinda V, had brought it under his power 
with the exception of its remoter parts which were still held 
by the Sinhalese. As a result of his expedition Rajendra 
claims to have captured the crown of the kings of Ceylon 22 
the exceedingly beautiful crowns of their queens, the fine 
crown and the garland of Indra which the Pandya had 
previously deposited with them (the kings of Ceylon), and 
the whole Ila-mandalam on the transparent sea. The Karandai 
(Tanjore) plates (vv. 58-9) say that Rajendra conquered the 
king of Ceylon with a fierce army and seized his territory, his 
crown, his queen and her crown, his daughter, all his wealth, 
his transports, and the spotless garland of Indra and crown 
of the Pandya left in his charge; after having lost the battle, 
and being shorn of his queen, son and other belongings, the 
king of Ceylon, out of fear, came and sought the two feet of 
Rajendra as shelter. The Mahavavisa does not mince mat- 
ters and gives a straight account which confirms the claims 
made by Rajendra in his inscriptions : 23 

‘In the six and thirtieth year of the king’s (Mahinda 
V’ s) reign the Colas seized the mahesi, the jewels, the 
diadem that he had inherited, the whole of the (royal) 
ornaments, the priceless diamond bracelet, a gift of the 
gods, the unbreakable sword and the relic of the torn 
strip of cloth. 24 But the Ruler himself, who had fled in 
fear to the jungle, they captured alive, with the pretence 
of making a treaty. Thereupon they sent the Monarch 



200 


RAJENDRA 


and all the treasures which had fallen into their hands 
at once to the Cola Monarch. In the three fraternities 
and in all Lanka (breaking open) the relic chambers, 
(they carried away) many costly images of gold etc., and 
while they violently destroyed here and there all the 
monasteries, like blood-sucking yakkhas, they took all the 
treasures of Lanka for themselves. With Pulatthinagara 
as base, the Colas held sway over Rajarattha as far as the 
locality known as Rakkhapasanakantha. . . . King Mahinda 
dwelt twelve years in the Cola land and entered into 
heaven in the forty-eighth year (from his ascent of the 
throne.) ’ 

Rajendra thus succeeded in getting hold of the Pandyan 
regalia left behind by Rajasimha, which Parantaka I had 
sought and failed to secure. The C5la inscriptions are silent 
on the details of the conquest and draw a veil over the pillage 
of Lanka so vividly chronicled in the Ceylonese annals, 
though one inscription apparently mentions Mahinda’s sub- 
mission to the Cola king after he was transported to the 
mainland. 25 Rajendra’s success was complete, and the whole 
of the island became a Cola province. We have some inscrip- 
tions of Rajendra at Polonnaruwa and in the Colombo museum 
with the tiru manni valara introduction ; 26 but these are in 
a very damaged condition, and valuable only as furnishing 
clear epigraphical confirmation of Rajendra’s conquest and 
rule in Ceylon. Several Hindu temples. Devales devoted to 
Siva and to Visnu, have been discovered in the vicinity of 
Polonnaruwa ; these are built of stone and in the Tamil Cola 
style of architecture, and all of them must have been con- 
structed in this period of Cola rule in the island. The Mahd- 
vamsa adds that twelve years after Rajendra’s invasion, possi- 
bly also after the death of Mahinda V, his son Kassapa who 
had been brought up in secret by the Sinhalese for fear 
of the Colas, became the centre of a national resistance against 
the Tamil power, and that, after a six months’ war in which 
a great number of Damilas were killed by the Sinhalese 
forces, he succeeded in making Rohana once more indepen- 
dent of the Tamil province and ruled it as Vikkamabahu I 
for a period of twelve years (a.d. 1029-41). The events of 
Vikkamabahu’s reign belong to a later stage of Rajendra’s 



WAR IN SOUTH AND WEST 201 

rule and may be reserved for further consideration at the 
proper place. 

In his sixth year, 27 a.d. 1018, Rajendra seized the heirloom 
of the Kerala monarch including the 
Kerala War. crown praised by many and rightfully worn 
by him, and the garland emitting red rays. 28 He also took 
the ‘many ancient islands, whose old, great guard was the 
ocean which makes the conches resound.’ In the next year, 
he captured the crown of pure gold worthy of Tiru (LaksmI) 
that had been deposited in Sandimattivu, in view of its strong 
fortress, by Parasurama who, roused in war, had uprooted 
the kings (of the world) twenty-one times. 29 Some light is 
thrown on these rather, obscure transactions by the account 
of Rajendra’s southern campaign given by the Tiruvalangadu 
plates and by a single stone inscription of the tenth year 30 
which gives an account of Rajendra’s policy in the Pandya 
country, not found in the other stone records of the reign. 
The Tiruvalangadu plates 31 say: 

‘ This famous and heroic king, possessed of a power- 
ful army and bent upon the performance of meritorious 
deeds with heaps of money acquired by his own arm, 
then set his heart upon a digvijaya. 

Accordingly after arranging for the protection (in his 
absence) of his own capital, the unrivalled king Uttama 
Cola first started in the direction marked by Trisanku 
(the south) desirous of conquering the Pandya king. 

The commander (dandanatha) of the ornament 
( tilaka ) to the Solar race (Rajendra) (thereupon) struck 
the Pandyan king who had a great force ; and the Pandya 
abandoned his home in fright and fled for refuge to the 
Malaya mountain, the abode of Agastya. 

Rajaraja’s son, the master of policy, took possession 
of the bright spotless pearls, the seeds of the spotless 
fame of the Pandya kings. 

After establishing there his own son, Sri Cola-Pandya, 
for the protection of the Pandya country, the light of the 
Solar race then proceeded to the conquest of the west. 

Having heard of the ignominy sustained by kings at 
the hands of Bhargava in battle, this proud king, not 


C. 26 



202 


RAJENDRA 


finding him (Bhargava) on the face of the earth, deve- 
loped a desire to conquer the land created by him. 

Who else, other than this supreme lord (Parames- 
vara) can entertain the thought in his mind of subjugat- 
ing (lit. humiliating) that ancient land protected by the 
glory of the ornament of the Bhrgukula and free from 
the inroads of enemies ? 

The fearless Madhurantaka crossed the Sahya 
(mountain) and forthwith set upon the Kerala in great 
force and there ensued a fierce battle which brought ruin 
upon kings. 

After having (thus) conquered the Kerala kings and 
harrowed the land guarded by the austerities of the lord 
of the Bhrgus, the prince returned to his capital, the 
abode of prosperity.’ 

It may be doubted if by this campaign Rajendra added 
any new territory to his dominions. The Pandya and Kerala 
countries had been conquered by Rajaraja very early in his 
reign, and ‘ the many ancient islands ’ towards its end. These 
islands were the Maldives ; the obscure 

No new Sandimattivu of legendary fame is ao- 

conquests. ,, , , . , , . 

parently to be sought also among the islands 

of the Arabian sea. The effective hold retained by Rajaraja 
on his southern conquests becomes clear from his numerous 
records in the Pandya country and from an inscription of the 
third year of Rajendra 32 mentioning an endowment in Tiruvi- 
salur by the queen of a Pandya king called Srivalluvar. While 
the Tamil prasasti of Rajendra mentions some new achieve- 
ments of the king in Ceylon and Kerala, the most considerable 
among them being the seizure of the regalia of the different 
kingdoms of the south, it has nothing to say on Pandyan affairs. 
The vague statements of the Tiruvalangadu plates that the 
Pandyan king fled to the Agastya hills and that Rajendra took 
his pearls are too conventional to be accepted literally; a stone 
inscription of the tenth year , 33 however, confirms the state- 
ment of the copper-plates that the king established his own 
son in Madura as his viceroy with the title 
V t iC M r °dura PP ° inted Cola-Pandya and also states that Rajendra 
built a palace in Madura ‘by whose weight 
the earth became unsteady.’ The same inscription implies 



COLA-PANDYA VICEROYS 


203 


that Rajendra repeated his father’s performance at Kandalur- 
salai. This Pandyan viceroy, who was soon after placed in 
charge of the Kerala country as well, was Jatavarman Sun- 
dara Cola-Pandya to whose time belong the largest number 
of the Cola-Pandya inscriptions so far known. 

An inscription 34 of Rajendra informs us that in his twenty- 
fourth regnal year the emperor made a 
Date of grant of land to the temple built at Man- 

appointment. narkovil (Tinnevelly) by the Cera king 

Rajasimha and called Rajendra-Solavinnagar, and that this 
grant was to take effect from the fifteenth year of Jatavarman 
Sundara Cola-Pandya. Assuming that the fifteenth year of 
the viceroy fell either in the twenty-fourth year of the em- 
peror or possibly a little earlier, Jatavarman Sundara Cola- 
Pandya must have been appointed viceroy about the sixth or 
seventh year of Rajendra, a date which fits in with the indi- 
cations furnished by the Tiruvalangadu plates taken along 
with the Tamil prasasti. The Mannarkovil inscription is also 
valuable in other respects. It shows that the viceroys enjoyed 
almost regal status and were allowed officially to issue orders 
dated in their own years of office. It also indicates the close 
contact maintained between the headquarters of the empire, 
— Rajendra was residing in his palace at Kancipuram when 
this gift was made, — and the viceregal courts. Lastly, the 
jurisdiction of the Cola-Pandya viceroy over the Cera country 
is clearly seen in the Cera king building a temple in the Pand- 
ya country and naming it after the Cola emperor. From his 
inscriptions we see that Jatavarman Sundara Cola-Pan $y a 
ruled as viceroy for at least twenty-three years, up to about 
a.d. 1040. One of the latest 35 of these inscriptions opens with 
the prasasti of Rajendra himself, (tint manni valara ) . Another 
states that Sucindram in Nanjinad (South Travancore) came 
to be called Sundara-sola-caturvedimangalam after the vice- 
roy. 36 One curious fact not easy to explain is the record of a 
grant at K5ttar (near Nagercoil) in south Travancore by an 
Eastern Calukya prince who called himself Sarvalokasraya 
Sri Visnuvardhana Maharaja alias Calukya Vijayaditya Vik- 
kiyanna. The inscription is dated in the 11th year of Sundara 
Cola-Pandya 37 i.e.. about a.d. 1029. Kottar was a strong fort- 
ress of strategic importance in those days and the Colas main- 
tained a strong garrison there: it is quite possible that an 



204 


RAJENDRA 


Eastern Calukya prince who held an important place in the 
army lived in Kottar for some years. But his identity is un- 
certain in the extreme. 

In the years a.d. 1021 and 1022, Rajendra resumed the war 
against the Western Calukya power. Jaya- 
Calukya War. s imha , who had succeeded his brother Vik- 
ramaditya V about a.d. 1016, was displaying unwonted energy 
in recovering territory lost to the Colas in previous wars. 
The Belagamve inscription of 1019 describes him as defeating 
the Colas and the Ceras, 38 and this is borne out by the pre- 
sence of his inscriptions about this time in Bellary and the 
N. W. of Mysore. 39 Rajendra’s war against Jayasimha is 
described in his Tamil prasasti in the following terms: 

‘(He captured) the seven and a hah lakhs of Rat- 
tapadi (which was) strong by nature, and vast quantities 
of treasure, together with the inestimable reputation of 
Jayasimha who, out of fear and to his great disrepute, 
turned his back at Musangi and hid himself.’ 40 
The assertion that the whole of Rattapadi fell into the hands 
of Rajendra is, of course, a gross exaggeration. In fact, in the 
Cola inscriptions of this period, this is no more than a con- 
ventional way of recording some temporary advantage gained 
in the field against the Calukyas. The rest of the statements 
in the prasasti seem to be true. There was an engagement 
at Musangi or Muyangi, as it is spelt variously in the inscrip- 
tions, and Jayasimha certainly did not get the best of it. 
Musangi has been identified with Uccangidrug in the Bellary 
district; but more likely it was Maski. 41 To a description of 
this campaign the Tiruvalangadu plates devote a considerable 
number of well-turned verses in the best Kavya style, and 
though there are ten such verses, 42 we learn on the whole 
less about the actual occurrences in the war from these than 
from the few lines of the Tamil prasasti translated above. The 
king started from Kanclpuram on his march against the Ratta 
country, there was fierce battle between the forces of the 
Cola king and those of Jayasimha, the latter fled to the forests 
and Rajendra returned to his capital with much booty. Typi- 
cal of the turns of thought of the composer and suggestive of 
the date of composition is the verse: 43 

‘It may be no wonder that the fire of his anger burst 
into a flame as it came into contact with the descendant 



WAR IN VENGI 


205 


of Taila. This however, is strange that, having crossed 
the waters of all the oceans, it (the fire of his anger) 
consumed the enemy fuel (dvisadindhana) 

Despite his defeat at Musangi, and the consequent boast of 
Rajendra that he captured Rattapadi, Jayasimha was success- 
ful in retaining his hold on his territory up to the Tungabhadra. 
if not beyond. The Miraj grant dated in a.d. 1024 shows that 
Jayasimha was then in possession of Ededore 2000 and affirms 
that he had regained it after driving out the strong Cola, lord 
of the five Dravidas. 44 As a rule the Cola-Calukya wars in this 
period were waged on two fronts — the western front in which 
Manyakheta and Kalyani were the objectives of the Colas 
and the Tungabhadra the natural frontier between the two 
powers, and the eastern front which centred round Vengi the 
possession of which was coveted by both the parties. Of the 
occurrences in the east during the war we derive little direct 
information from the Tamil p rasasti of Rajendra I which omits 
them and details only the expedition to the Ganges as the 
next great event of the reign; but to understand this expedi- 
tion in its proper setting we must consider the affairs of Vengi. 

There Vimaladitya who had succeeded his 
Vengi affairs and brother fSaktivarman I died or retired in 
the Eastern Front jg^g. j a y as i m ha availed himself of the 
opportunity to obstruct the accession of Rajaraja (Narendra). 
the son of Vimaladitya by Kundavai, by supporting his step- 
brother Visnuvardhana Vijayaditya VII. Rajaraja could not 
celebrate his coronation and appealed for help to his maternal 
uncle Rajendra I. A number of short but interesting inscrip- 
tions in Kannada and Tamil from Kottaslvaram (Anantapur 
district) 45 give us the clue to what happened- One of these is 
dated in the tenth year of Rajendra. They mention a Coin 
general Araiyan Rajarajan alias Vikrama-Cola Coliya-varai- 
yan who by his exploits in the Calukya and Vengi wars earn- 
ed such high titles as Nalmadi Bhima, Colana-cakra, Saman- 
tabharanam, Virabhusanam, Edirttavarkalan (Tam. death to 
opponents) or Ahitarottalivan (Kan.), and Jayasingakula- 
kala. There is a Tamil verse among these records stating that 
he fought with Kalingas, Oddas and Telungas. Another un- 
dated inscription 46 records the flight of the Vengi king when 
he heard of the advance of this general ordered by the Cola 
monarch. The king who fled must have been Vijayaditya, and 



206 


RAJENDRA 


this flight must have taken place roughly about the same time 
as the battle of Maski. The rulers of Kalinga and Odda appear 
also to have joined Jayasimha II and his protege Vijayaditya, 
and the Cola commander had to deal with them also. And 
the expedition undertaken for their chastisement naturally 
developed into the celebrated march to the Ganges and the 
fetching of the holy waters to the new capital that Rajendra 
was building. This is clearly implied by a verse in the Cha- 
rala plates of Virarajendra 47 

We may now turn to the second phase of the campaign — 
the march of the army through Kalinga and Odda to the 
Ganges, and the advance of Rajendra himself to the Godavari 
and beyond to protect the rear of the Ganges expeditionary 
force which was threatened by the sullen rulers of Kalinga and 
Odda who were acting under instructions from Calukya Jaya- 
simha II . 48 

In the words of the Tiruvalangadu plates : 49 

‘The light of the Solar race (Rajendra), mocking 
Bhaglratha who by the force of his austerities caused the 
descent of the Ganga, set out to sanctify his own land 
with the waters of that stream brought (thither) by the 
strength of his arm .’ 50 

Judging from its duration, this campaign which lasted less 
than two years , 51 in which so many kingdoms of the north 
are stated to have felt the strength of Rajendra’s troops, could 
hardly have been more than a hurried raid across a vast 
stretch of country. And the Tiruvalangadu plates state expli- 
citly that the expedition was led by one of the king’s generals 
and that Rajendra met him on his return somewhere on the 
banks of the Godavari . 52 The events of the campaign as nar- 
rated in the same source may be summed up as follows: After 
crossing many streams by making the elephants in his army 
serve as bridges across them, the commander of Vikrama 
Cola’s 53 forces first fell upon the strong army of Indraratha 
and took possession of the territory of that ornament to the 
Lunar race of kings; then he captured the vast treasures of 
Ranasura and entered the land of Dharmapala and subdued 
him also; thereby, he reached the Ganges and caused the 
water of the river to be brought by the conquered kings to 
his sovereign lord Madhurantaka, whom he met on the banks 



FETCHING THE GANGES 


207 


of the Godavari after conquering MahJpala and taking away 
his fame together with many precious jewels. Then the valo- 
rous Rajendra struck the evil-minded Otta king and his 
younger brother and forced from him a tribute of rutting 
elephants . 54 Thereupon, after himself killing an elephant that 
charged him while he was seated on the back of another, the 
king returned to his own splendid capital. 

The Tamil prasasti records the same transactions, almost 
in the same order, but with much more detail, as follows : 35 

(He seized) Sakkarakkottam, whose warriors were 
brave; Madura-mandalam destroyed in a trice , 56 the pros- 
perous city of Na-manaik-konam with its dense groves . 57 
Pancap-palli whose, warriors (bore) cruel bows , 58 Masuni- 
desa with its green fields 59 ; a large heap of family-trea- 
sures together with many (other) treasures (which he 
carried away), after having captured Indraratha of the 
ancient race of the moon, together with (his) family, in 
a fight which took place (at) Adinagar , 60 (a city) whose 
great fame knew no decline 61 ; Odda-visaya which was 
difficult of approach on account of its dense forest de- 
fence 62 ; the good Kosalai-nadu, where Brahmins assem- 
bled; Tandabutti, in whose gardens bees abounded, (land 
which he acquired) after having destroyed Dharmapila 
(in) a hot battle: Takkanaladam, whose fame reached 
(all) directions, (and which he occupied) after having 
forcibly attacked Ranasura; Vangala-desa, where the rain 
water never stopped, (and from which) Govindacandra 
fled, having descended (from his) male elephant; elephants 
of rare strength, women and treasure, (which he seized) 
after having been pleased to put to flight in a hot battle- 
field the strong Mahipala 63 by the sound of a conch from 
the deep sea; Uttiraladam (on the shore of) the expan- 
sive ocean (producing) pearls; and the Ganga whose 
waters bearing fragrant flowers 64 dashed against the 
bathing places (tirtha).’ 

The facts that Sakkarakkottam was the first place taken 
by Rajendra’s army in the course of this 
Position of Vengi. cani p a jg n anc j that the king met his victo- 
rious general on the banks of the Godavari on his way back 
at the end of the campaign imply that the Vengi kingdom had 



RAJENDRA 


come back to the same relation of close subordinate alliance 
with the Cola empire which it had held in Rajaraja’s time. 65 

Sakkarakkottam has been identified with Cakrakotya 
which finds mention in a Nagavamsi copper- 
kotfam arak " plate grant from Bastar dated a.d. 1065, and 
its modem representative is probably Citra- 
kuta or Citrakota, 8 miles from Rajapura where the copper- 
plates were found. Rajapura, the capital of Bastar, is itself 
22 miles north-west of Jagadalpur, on the bank of the Indra- 
vati river. 66 Sakkarakkottam and the places that follow up to 
Masuni-desam have thus to be sought in the territory conti- 
guous to the Vengl kingdom to the north-west of it. Masuni- 
desam literally means the land of the snakes; the kings of the 
Chindaka family represented by the Rajapura plates, called 
themselves Naga-vamso-dbhava (born of the Cobra race) , and 
Bhogavati-pura-varesvara (lord of Bhogavatl, the best of 
cities) ; in a later stone inscription of Saka 1140, one of them 
is called Sri-bhu j agavara-bhusana-mahar a j ulu 67 the maha- 
raja who was the ornament of the race of the best of serpents. 
It is perfectly reasonable to suppose that by Masuni-desam is 
meant the land ruled by these kings. On this assumption, 
Maduraimandalam, Namanaikkonam and PancappaUi must be 
sought in the same region and held to be parts of Masuni- 
desam. It may be noted that Cakrakota is itself called a 
mandala 68 like Madurai-mandalam, and that the donor of the 
Rajapura plates is called Madhurantaka. 

Of Indraratha of the lunar race, whose defeat at Adi- 
nagar led to the surrender of the Odda 
Indrarat a. (Orissa) country and the (southern) Kosala, 
nothing can be added to Kielborn’s suggestion 69 that he might 
be the same as the opponent of Bhoja of Dhara mentioned in 
the Udaipur inscription. 70 The Tamil ins- 
Dandabhukti. cr j p tion says that after the capture of Kosa- 
lai-nadu, the Cola general attacked and overthrew in order 
Dharmapala of Dandabhukti, Ranasura of southern Lada and 
Govindacandra of Vangaja before he fought with Mahipala of 
Uttara-lada and reached the Ganges. The Tiruvalangadu 
plates, on the other hand, state that the attack on Ranasura 
preceded that on Dharmapala, and that the overthrow of 
Dharmapala led the Cola general to the banks of the Ganges. 



NATURE OF THE EXPEDITION 


209 


They also imply that the conquest of Mahipala was achieved 
on the return march. Obviously, both these accounts cannot 
be true, and as a choice has to be made, the Tamil p rasasti 
which was recorded almost immediately after the campaign 
must be accepted as the more authentic. On this basis, ‘most 
probably Dandabhukti was the march-land between Orissa 
and Bengal ’ 71 and its ruler Dharmapala, of whom we know 
nothing more than his name, may have been a relative of 
Mahipala, the powerful Pala ruler of Bengal at the time. 
The language of the Tamil inscription appears to suggest , 72 
what seems likely even otherwise, that Mahipala had a sort 
of supremacy over the other chiefs named in this context and 
that the overthrow of Dharmapala, Ranasura 73 and Govinda- 
candra led to the final struggle with Mahipala. Lada (Radha) 
was the ancient name of a part of Bengal, which was bounded 
on the north by the Ganges, the divisions of Bengal across the 
river being known as Mithila and Var§ndra . 74 The conquest 
of Vangala apparently deflected the course of the Cola army 
a little to the east, and for the rest of it, its march was due 
north from the land of Southern Kosala . 75 

There is nothing incredible in this record of an audacious 
raid into the northern countries ordered by 

The campaign Rajendra and carried out so thoroughly by 
historical. , , , _ , , , . „ 

his dandawtha. It is possible that small suc- 
cesses were magnified into great victories and that any 
reverses sustained were glozed over; it is likely that the state- 
ment of the Tiruvalangadu plates 76 that the water of the 
Ganges was carried to Rajendra by the defeated kings of the 
north at the bidding of the Cola general is a boast without 
foundation. But of the substantial correctness of the story in 
its essentials we can entertain no doubt whatever. Partly on 
account of his imperfect knowledge of the political geography 
of the period, and more on account of the embellishments 
introduced into the story by his own imagination, Venkayya 
greatly underrated the veracity of the ins- 

Its nature. eriptions of Rajendra, and held that the ex- 

pedition was nothing more than a pilgrimage to the Ganges . 77 
Though the fetching of the water of the Ganges was perhaps 
present from the beginning as the object of the expedition , 78 
the motive behind it was undoubtedly an exhibition of the 
power of the Co]a empire and a demonstration of its strength 


C. 27 



210 


rajendra 


to the rulers of Northern India. Such digvijayas were under- 
taken by all powerful monarchs in India and were enjoined 
upon them by the political code of the country. The aim of 
the expedition was then not merely getting down the water 
of the Ganges to the Cola capital, but doing so after estab- 
lishing a right of way, so to say, across territories outside the 
empire by a strong show of force. This becomes clear from 
the statement that at the end of the expedition Rajendra 
erected a ‘liquid pillar of victory’ (ganga-jalamayam jayastam- 
bham) in his capital with the waters of the Ganges in the 
form of the tank Colaganga. 79 ‘The invasion 
Effects of the great southern conqueror Rajendra 

Cola I,’ says R. D. Banerji, ‘seems to have left some perma- 
nent marks in Bengal .... Some obscui-e Karnata chief seems 
to have followed Rajendra Cola I and settled in western 
Bengal . . . From him was descended Samantasena, who is 
generally taken to be the founder of the Sena dynasty.’ 80 The 
Karnatas of Mithila probably had a similar origin. A com- 
mentary, of uncertain date, to the Siddhdntasdrdvali of Trilo- 
cana Sivacarya mentions the fact that Rajendra imported 
Saivas from the banks of the Ganges into his own kingdom 
and established them in Kanclpura and in the Cola country. 81 

After he met his victorious general on his return from 
the Ganges on the banks of the Godavari and after punishing 
the kings of Kalinga and Odda for their hostile demonstration, 
Rajendra enabled his nephew Rajaraja Narendra to perform 
his long-delayed coronation (16 August, 1922), and perhaps 
also gave him his daughter Ammanga in marriage at the same 
time. But Rajaraja was seldom free from trouble during his 
long reign of forty-one years. He had to flee the country more 
than once; his half-brother Vijayaditya, though vanquished 
in fight, never gave up his designs upon the throne and was 
unceasing in his efforts to bring about his downfall with the 
aid of the Western Calukyas. Vijayaditya succeeded in driv- 
ing Rajaraja out and crowning himself king of Vengl on 27 
June, a.d. 1031 82 under the title Visnuvardhana-Vijayaditya. 
It was probably on this occasion that Cavanarasa, the 
W. Calukya general, invaded VengT in force, captured the 
Vijayavada fort and occupied most of the country. 83 Raja- 
raja once more appealed for Cola help, and the sequel seems to 
be revealed by the undated Kalidindi plates of Rajaraja Naren- 



OVERSEAS CAMPAIGN 


211 


dra. 84 Rajendra sent a powerful Cola army under the Brah- 
man general Rajaraja Brahma Maharaja and two other officers 
Uttama Cola Miladudaiyan and Uttama Cola-Colakon; in the 
hotly contested battle of Kalidindi in the neighbourhood of 
Vengi all the three Cola commanders laid down their lives, 
and later Rajaraja built memorial temples dedicated to each 
of them. But the mission of the Cola army seems to have been 
successfully accomplished, and we see Rajaraja established on 
his throne about a.d. 1035. 85 But this was by no means the 
end of Rajaraja’s troubles. Towards the end of Rajendra’s 
reign, about 1042, a new ruler, Somesvara I, of Kalyani renew- 
ed the aggression, and Rajaraja once again appealed to his Cola 
uncle and father-in-law; Rajendra, too old to undertake the 
task himself, sent his son Rajadhiraja I to deal with the new 
situation of Vengi; and once more there was a Cola-Calukya 
war on two fronts. But before we turn to the details of this 
struggle with Somesvara, other events must receive attention. 

Rajendra’s overseas expedition against Kadaram is men- 
tioned for the first time in his inscriptions 

The Kadaram Q f the fourteenth year. 86 While the Tiru- 
campaign. , , . 

valangadu plates dismiss this achievement 
in a half verse which merely records that the king conquered 
Kataha with his powerful troops that had crossed the ocean 87 
the Tamil prasasti gives a detailed narrative of the expedition 
and its course in the following words: 88 

‘ (Who) having despatched many ships in the midst 
of the rolling sea and having caught Sangrama-vijayot- 
tunga-varman, the king of Kadaram, together with the 
elephants in his glorious army 89 (took) the large heap of 
treasures, which (that king) had rightfully accumulated; 
(captured) with noise the (arch called) Vidyadhara- 
torana at the “war-gate” of his extensive city; 90 Sri Vija- 
ya 91 with the “jewelled wicket-gate” 92 adorned with great 
splendour and the “gate of large jewels”: Pannai with 
water in its bathing ghats; the ancient Malaiyur with the 
strong mountain for its rampart; 93 Mayirudingam. surroun- 
ded by the deep sea (as) by a moat; Ilangasoka (i.e.. Lan- 
kasoka) undaunted (in) fierce battles; Mapappalam hav- 
ing abundant (deep) water as defence; Mevilimbangam 
having fine walls as defence; Valaippanduru having Vilap- 
panduru (?) M ; Talaittakkolam praised by great men 



21 ' 


RAJENDRA 







NEW LIGHT 


213 


(versed in) the sciences; Madamalmgam, firm in great 
and fierce battles; Ilamuridesam, whose fierce strength 
rose in war; 90 Manakkavaram, in whose extensive flower 
gardens honey was collecting; 96 and Kadaram, of fierce 
strength, which was protected by the deep sea.’ 97 

No clearer measure can be required of the progress made 
in our knowledge of South Indian history 
it ^elucidation than the difference between what was known 
of this expedition before and what we make 
of it now. The text of Rajendra’s inscription was recovered 
and published in 1891 98 by Hultzsch. The larger Leyden 
grant had been known already for some years, and Hultzsch 
recognised at once in Sangrama-vijayottunga-varman of Rajen- 
dra’s inscription, a successor of Mara-vijayottunga-varman of 
Kataha or Kadaram of the Leyden grant. But his search for 
this place extended no further than the southern districts of 
the Madras Presidency, and strangely enough, as it now ap- 
pears, he overlooked the facts that Rajendra’s expedition was 
a naval war and that the Pandya country had been conquered 
and subjected to the Co]a sway several years before the date 
of this expedition; and he identified Kadaram with the ‘head- 
quarters of a talluqa of the Ramnad zamindari in the Madura 
district.’ 99 Even as late as 1903, though a great advance had 
been made by him from his original position, Hultzsch was 
still far from the mark when he said: 100 ‘Of the numerous 
places which are mentioned in connection with this expedition, 
Mr. Venkayya has identified two, viz., Nakkavaram and Pap- 
pajam. The former is the Tamil name of the Nicobar islands, 101 
and according to the Mahavamsa (lxxvi, 63) Papphala was a 
port in Ramanna, i.e, the Talaing country of Burma. Hence 
Kadaram will have to be looked for in farther India.’ For 
some years thereafter, Rajendra’s expedition was held to have 
been directed against the kingdom of Pegu, and the archaeo- 
logists of Burma even announced their discovery of two octa- 
gonal granite pillars near Pegu, which were identified by them 
‘with the Jayastambha or pillars of victory set up by Rajendra 
Cola who overran Pegu in a.d. 1025-27.’ 102 It was only in 1918 
that Coedes brought together in his cogent and lucid paper 
Le Royaume de Sri Vi jay a 103 evidence accumulated along 
various lines by several years of study on the part of many 
scholars, discussed fully the identification of the places men- 



214 


RAJENDRA 


tioned in connection with Rajendra's campaign, and laid the 
basis for an intelligible account of it. The Archaeological 
Department of Burma, though at first inclined to be rather 
critical of Coedes’ scheme, 104 later acknowledged its sub- 
stantial accuracy by removing the celebrated granite pillars 
from the list of the protected monuments of Burma. 105 

One fact to which Hultzsch himself drew pointed atten- 
tion has sometimes escaped the notice of 

Unity oi the later authors who have discussed this cam- 
campaign. 

paign. It xs that the inscription cleai-ly im- 
plies that all the places named were taken from the king of 
Kadaram and in the course of a single campaign. In the 
words of Coedes: 106 ‘The text says in effect that Rajendra 
Cola, I, after having vanquished the king of Kadaram, seized 
his treasures, then a certain number of countries and lastly 
Kadaram. It is a question, then, of one and the same cam- 
paign, and it is a priori infinitely probable that the different 
countries enumerated must have been either vassal states of 
the king of Kadaram, or even simply the different towns or 
provinces of his kingdom.’ Once this is recognised, the identi- 
fication of the different places mentioned would be rendered 
easier by that of Kadaram and Sri Vijaya, the two places 
ruled by the same king in the reign of Rajaraja, and con- 
quered by Rajendra from Sangramavijayottunga-varman. 

‘ Now, the annals of the Song (dynasty of China) men- 
tion, in 1003 and 1008, two embassies from 
on^Sarffo tsi" 315 country of San-fo-tsi, the first sent by 

the king Sseu-li-tchoulo-wou-ni-fo-ma- 
tiao-houa and the second by the king Sseu-li-ma-lo-pi. It is 
not necessary to be a sinologue to recognise in the first name 
a magnificent transcription of SrI-Culamani-varmadeva, and 
in the second the transcription of the first syllables of £ri-M&ra~ 
vi jayottunga-varman’ 107 (Coedes). As these two monarchs 
are exactly those mentioned in the larger Leyden grant, we 
may conclude that the kings of the San-fo-tsi of the Chinese 
annals were the rulers of Kadaram and Sri Vijaya. San-fo-tsi 
was first used by the Chinese writers of the Song period fox 
the place called Che-li-fo-che or Fo-che in 
Called Fo-che the earlier literature of China; all Chinese 
writers have identified this name with 
Palembang, on the eastern coast of Sumatra. And Coedes 



CONQUEST OF SRI VIJAYA 


215 


has shown good reason for restoring the name San-fo-tsi, Che- 
li-fo-che, into Sri Vijaya, rather than the usual but meaning- 
less form Sribhoja . 108 It thus becomes clear 
sn Vijaja. that Sri Vijaya, which is the first among the 

places taken by Rajendra from the king of Kadaram, is the 
name of the kingdom of Palembang in Sumatra. The great 
part played by this kingdom from about the eighth to the 
thirteenth century a.d.. in the affairs of the Malay peninsula 
and Archipelago, and the relations of Southern India with 
this important kingdom still await full elucidation. The epi- 
graphs of Rajendra’s reign which narrate his invasion of 
Kadaram and Sri Vijaya furnish much welcome information 
on the affairs of the kingdom at the beginning of the eleventh 
century. Writing towards the close of the twelfth century 
a.d. or the beginning of the thirteenth , 109 Chau Ju-kua gives 
a list of fifteen chou (provinces or towns) over which the rule 
of San-fo-tsi extended ; 110 and as Coedes has observed, there is 
a partial coincidence between this list and that of Rajendra’s 
inscriptions . 111 The identification of Kadaram presents more 
difficulty; this may be discussed after we have dealt with the 
other places. 


In the prasasti of Rajendra the name mentioned after Sri 
Vijaya is Pannai which has been identified 
with Pani or Panei on the east coast of 
Ancient Malaiyur was a principality ‘at the 
southern end of the Malay peninsula, and 
precisely on the northern shore of the Old 
Singapore Strait where, besides the Malayu river, time-worn 
traditions of a Malaya country and people confront the en- 
quirer .’ 113 As for Mayirudingam which 
had the deep sea for its moat, this place is 
quite obviously the same as Ji-lo-ting mentioned by Chau Ju- 
kua among the dependencies of Sri Vijaya. The same author 
also states that Ji-lo-ting and Kia-lo-hi ‘are of the same kind’ 
as Tan-ma-ling . 114 Coedes has proved by decisive epigraphi- 
cal evidence that Kia-lo-hi is the same place as Grahi at Jaiya 
and that consequently Ji-lo-ting (Yi-ru-dingam) which form- 
ed one of the northern dependencies of Sri Vijaya must be 
sought somewhere in the region of Jaiya towards the centre 


Pannai. 

Sumatra . 112 

Malaiyur. 


Mayirudingam. 



216 


RAJENDRA 


of the Malay peninsula. 115 Ilangasokam has been very pro- 
perly identified with Ling-ya-sseu-kia of 
Ilangasokam. Chau Ju-kua’s list of dependencies, and its 
locality was to the south of the state of Kedah in the Malay 
peninsula. 116 Mapappalam, as was shown by Venkayya, is 
mentioned in the Mahavamsa 117 under the 
Mapappalam. name Papphalama, 118 as the place where the 
Tamil general Adicca landed when he was sent on an expedi- 
tion against Ramannadesa by Parakramabahu I of Ceylon 
about a.d. 1165. From this Venkayya concluded that Mapap- 
palam must be a place in the Talaing country of Lower Burma, 
and he has been followed by other writers who have pro- 
ceeded to make other identifications on this basis. 119 In fact 
it seems at first sight that this mention of Pappalam in an 
expedition against Ramannadesa violently contradicts the 
assumption that all the places captui'ed by Rajendra were de- 
pendent on Palembang and within easy reach of it. Coedes how- 
ever, draws attention to the fact that the long list of the grievan- 
ces which Parakrambahu had against the ruler of Ramanha 
ends with his capture by force of a Sinhalese princess whom 
the ruler of Lanka had sent to the Kambhoja country; 120 and 
suggests that ‘as it is infinitely probable that the messengers 
going from Ceylon to Kambh5ja passed by the isthmus of Kra, 
it is in this region that the abduction (of the princess) must 
have been committed, and consequently, the authority of the 
king of Pagan might have extended so far.’ 121 In the begin- 
ning of the eleventh century, however, the suzerainty of 
Palembang extended up to the Bay of Bandon, and there is 
no difficulty therefore in assuming that Mapappalam was a 
locality in the region of the isthmus of Kra. though its exact 
identity cannot now be made out. In any event, the presence, 
among the conquests of Rajendra Cola I, of a locality which 
became part of Pegu in the 12th century, is not sufficient to 
invalidate the identification of these conquests with the vassal 
states of Palembang. Mevilimbangam and Valaippanduru 122 
do not lend themselves to any identifica- 
Talaittakkolam. ^ion p rese nt. Talaittakkolam, most pro- 
bably the same place as Takkola of the Milmda-Pcinha and 
Takkola of Ptolemy, is localised by Gerini in the modern Takua- 
pa district south of the isthmus of Kra and identified with its 
chief town, also called Takuapa. 122 Others are inclined to lo- 



DEPENDENCIES OF SRI VIJAYA 


217 


Ma-Damalingam 


cate it somewhat higher up, in the isthmus itself; in any case, 
there is general agreement that it is a place on the West Coast 
of the Malay peninsula. Ma-Damalingam, firm in battle, can 
easily be recognised in the name Tan-maling 
which figures in Chau Ju-kua’s list of the 
dependencies of San-fo-tsi. The same authority says : 124 Ling- 
ya-sseu-kia (Ilangasokam) ‘can be reached from Tan-ma- 
ling by sailing six days and nights; there is also an overland 
route (between the two countries).’ Gerini identifies Tan- 
ma-ling with Temiling or Tembeling at the mouth of the Kwan- 
tan river in Pahang, on the East coast of the Malay penin- 
sula ; 125 on this identification the learned translators of Chau 
Ju-kua observe: ‘As our author states that a land route 

existed between Tan-ma-ling and Ling-ya-ssi-kia, which we 
have good reason to believe was about Kedah on the West 
coast of the peninsula, it seems safe to conclude that Tan-ma- 
ling cannot have been very far from where Gerini has located 
it.’ Blagden points out as against this view, that six days 
would be rather a short time for sailing between Kedah and 
Kwantan considering the weak monsoon of the straits of 
Malacca; Coedes overcomes the difficulty by supposing that 
the country of Tamralinga or Lankasuka or perhaps both 
occupied the peninsula in all its width and faced the gulf of 
Siam as well as the Straits . 126 Ilamuridesam 
is quite obviously the country in the northern 
part of the island of Sumatra, known to Arab geographers 
under the name Lamuri, called Lambri by Marco Polo, and 
figuring as Lan-wou-li in Chau Ju-kua’s enumeration of the 
subject states of San-fo-tsi. Manakkavaram, 
Nakkavaram it is equa ll y dear, applies to the Nicobars. 
This discussion of the place names mentioned in the campaign 
against the king of Kadaram distinctly points to the conclu- 
sion that the campaign of Rajendra was directed against the 
Sumatran Empire of Sri Vijaya and its dependencies in the 
Malay peninsula and Archipelago. 


Ilamuridesam. 


We have, however, still to explain why the king ruling 
over the empire is called the king of Kada- 
Kadaram. ra m gn( j to ] oca t e it. This is a place which 

is mentioned under the name of Kataha in Sanskrit literature 
and epigraphy , 127 and of Kadaram or Kidaram in the Kalin- 
gattupparani besides the Leyden grant (Tamil part) and 
C 28 



218 


RAJENDRA 


Rajendra’s inscriptions. The Kdlingattupparani clearly states 
that Kadaram was laved by the waves of the ocean . 128 The 
word Kalagam in the Pattinappalai, according to the com- 
mentator Naccinarkkiniyar, designates the country known as 
Kadaram , 129 an interpretation which has the sanction of old 
lexicons like the Pingalam. From these references to Kadaram 
especially the one in the Pattinappalai, we may conclude that 
it was an important port on the ocean route along which the 
trade between India and the East passed. “Now there is a 
country,’ says Coedes , 130 “known to the Chinese of which 
the name seems to correspond very well with Kataha, that is, 
Kie-tch'a where I-tsing stayed on two occasions.’ The same 
place is called in later Chinese works Kie-t’o. These different 
names represent phonetically and geographically the modern 
Kedah, on the west coast of the Malay peninsula. Ancient 
Kedah would appear to have been more to the south than 
modern Kedah which as has been shown above was occupied 
by Lankasuka. At any rate, a study of I-tsing’s itineraries 
proves to us that Kie-tch’a was the last stage in Malay before 
the pilgrim started to cross the Bay of Bengal on 
his outward voyage, and, inversely, the first place 
he touched after crossing the Bay on his return 
from India. In this fact is perhaps to be found the 
explanation for the Colas calling the ruler of Sri Vijaya the 
king of Kadaram. For if, as seems most probable, Kadaram 
was at the time a dependency of Sri Vijaya, and if it was also 
the first place which the Tamils touched in their passage into 
that kingdom, nothing could be more natural for them than 
to describe the ruler of the country as the king of Kadaram. 
And this port was then from a commercial point of view enjoy- 
ing the same importance which the port of Penang is gaining 
in the same region to-day . 131 

Why was this expedition against the king of Kadaram 
The nature of undertaken and what were its effects ? As 

the expedition. we can get no direct answer to these ques- 

tions from contemporary records, we have to depend on the 
probabilities suggested by the known and relevant facts. The 
view that the overseas invasion was a continuation of the 
war for the complete subjugation of Kalingam 132 obtains no 
support from the records of Rajendra's reign. That the Cola 
empire of South India was in constant communication with 



NATURE OF THE EXPEDITION 


219 


the islands of the Archipelago and with China in this period 
is very clear. The construction of the Cudamam-vihara in 
Negapatam by Mara-vijayottunga-varman of the Sailendra 
dynasty of Sri Vijaya could not have been an isolated under- 
taking all by itself, but one of the normal results of a grow- 
ing intercourse between the Eastern islands and South India 
for purposes of trade. As in ancient times, this trade was 
part of a flourishing maritime commerce between the coun- 
tries of the Western world and China, m which Arabs, Indians 
and the people of the Malay peninsula and Archipelago acted 
as intermediaries. At the end of the tenth century a.d . 133 the 
Chinese government awoke to the value of the foreign 
trade which was just then reviving after a long interruption 
owing to the troubles which broke out in China in the latter 
part of ninth century, and with the object of increasing this 
trade ‘a mission was sent abroad by the Emperor with 
credentials under the imperial seal and provisions of gold and 
piece-goods to induce “the foreign traders of the South Sea 
and those who went to foreign lands beyond the sea to trade” 
to come to China.’ It must have been in response to such 
friendly invitations that the kings of Sri Vijaya sent the 
embassies of the years 1003 and 1008 to which we have al- 
ready made reference. The annals of the Song dynasty record 
that the first mission to China from Chu-lien (Cola) reached 
that country in a.d. 1015 and state that the king of their country 
was Lo-ts’a-lo-ts’a (Rajaraja) . 134 Another embassy from Shi-lo- 
lo-cha Yin-to-lo-chu-lo (Sri Raja Indra Cola) reached China 
in 1033, and a third in 1077 from Kuldttunga-Cola-Deva. The 
commercial intercourse between southern India and China 
was therefore continuous and extensive. Writing in the latter 
half of the twelfth century, Cou-ku-fei states of San-fo-ts’i 
(Sri Vijaya) : 133 ‘It is the most important port-of-call on the 
sea-routes of the foreigners, from the countries of Sho-po 
(Java) on the east and from the countries of the Ta-shi 
(Arabs) and Ku-lin (Quilon) on the west ; they all pass 
through it on their way to China.' 

At the date of Rajendra’s expedition (e. a.d. 1025) there- 
fore. well over a quarter of a century must have elapsed from 
the renewal of active trade with the East consequent on the 
Increased energy of the Cola empire under Rajaraja and the 
improved conditions in China, and knowledge about the 



220 


RAJENDRA 


Malay country and Archipelago must have been common in 
the Cola country. The larger Leyden grant, by stating 136 
that after his father’s death Rajendra confirmed in perpetuity 
the original grant of Anaimangalam to the Cudamani-vihara 
in Negapatam, clearly implies that in the beginning of Rajen- 
dra’s reign the relations of the Cola kingdom with Kadaram 
and Sri Vijaya continued to be friendly. We have no means 
of deciding the exact cause of a quarrel, if there was one. 
We have to assume either some attempt on the part of 
Sri Vijaya to throw obstacles in the way of the Cola trade 
with the East, or more probably, a simple desix’e on the part 
of Rajendra to extend his digvijaya to the countries across 
the sea so well-known to his subjects at home, and thereby 
add lustre to his crown. Whatever the actual cause of the 
expedition, it is difficult to believe that, even if all the facts 
narrated in the inscriptions of Rajendra are accepted as 
literally true, the campaign led to any more permanent result 
than a vague acknowledgement of the suzerainty of the in- 
vader on the part of the ruler of Sri Vijaya. We shall see 
later that one of the successors of Rajendra, Viraraj§ndra I, 
claims to have conquered Kadaram and restored it to its 
ruler who supplicated for it before the conqueror. In any 
case, there is no evidence to show that the Colas made any 
attempt to rule these lands as provinces of their empire. 137 
At best they might have received a periodical tribute. The 
fragmentary Tamil inscription in Sumatra dated a.d. 1088 138 
proves only the presence of Tamil merchants in the island, a 
fact even otherwise well-established. 

The Karandai (Tanjore) plates (v. 48) state that the 
king of Kambhoja solicited the friendship of Rajendra by send- 
ing him for the protection of his royalty ( atmalaksmim ) the 
victorious war-chariot with which he had overcome in battles 
the hostile armies -of his own enemies. This is clearly another 
reference to the overseas contacts of the Cola empire at this 
time. Kambuja (Kambhoja) is the name of the kingdom of 
Angkor in Indo-China ruled at the time by the illustrious 
king Suryavarman I (1002-50). This fact now known for 
the first time furnishes proof that the friendly relations 
between Kambuja and the Cola kingdom, already well attest- 
ed for the reign of Kulottunga I, began much earlier than 
Kulottunga’s reign. 



LATER YEARS 


221 


By a tacit assumption, the rest of Rajendra’s reign, which 

_ . . lasted for about twenty years after the 

Remaining years . . A „ j- i i 

of Rajendra’s campaign against Kadaram, has been treat - 

reign - ed by modern writers as an era of un- 

broken peace . 139 A careful study of the inscriptions of his 
sons, especially of Rajadhiraja I, shows, however, that the em- 
pire did not enjoy such unbroken peace and that there was 
much fighting in different parts of it carried 
p^Notf^altogether on by bis sons. It is conceivable that after 
the digvijaya of his early years was com- 
pleted and his greatness in war proclaimed to the world 
beyond per ad venture, the emperor refrained in his later years 
from taking the field in person, allowing his sons every 
chance of winning distinction and glory for themselves. 

In any case, the records of Rajadhiraja dated before his 
twenty-seventh year fall clearly within the reign of Rajendra I. 
and a study of Rajendra’s reign will not be complete without 
an account of the transactions recorded in these inscriptions. 

Rebellions in the Pandya and Kerala kingdoms called foi 
severe action, and the extensive campaign 
Rebellion in the undertaken by Rajadhiraja for the suppres- 
sion of these risings is described in the fol- 
lowing terms : 140 

" Among the three allied kings of the South 
(Pandyas 141 ) (he) cut off on a battle-field the beautiful 
head of Manabharanan, (which was adorned with) large 
jewels (and) which was inseparable from the golden 
crown ; seized in battle Vira-Keralan whose ankle-rings 
were wide, and was pleased to get him trampled by his 
furious elephant Attivaraiia; and drove to the ancient 
Mullaiyur, Sundara Pandyan of endless great fame, who 
lost in a hot battle the royal white parasol, the branches 
(of hairs) of the white yak, and the throne, and who ran 
away, — his crown dropping down, (his) hair dishevelled 
and (his) feet tired. (He) sent the undaunted king of 
Venadu to the country of heaven and destroyed in anger 
the Senior (chief) of Iramakudam . 142 While the strong 
Villavan (Cera) , in his terror 143 hid himself m the jungle, 
(the Cola) put on a fresh (garland of) Vaiiji flower , 144 



222 


RAJENDRA 


and forthwith destroyed the ships at Kandalursalai on 
the never-decreasing ocean. 

The exact date of this invasion of the Pandya and Kerala 
countries is unknown. As there are no Pandyan inscriptions 
of this period, we have only the story as given by the victors, 
and lack the means of checking it from independent sources. 
Strangely enough, none of the numerous Cola-Pandya inscrip- 
tions of the period throws any light on these transactions. 
Sundara Pandya was perhaps the chief of the whole confede- 
racy which organised the rebellion . 145 

One version of Rajadhiraja's prasasti ( imgaler ) men- 
tions. as an introduction to the war with the three Pandyas, 
a conflict with and subjugation of a certain Vikramanarana 
who had opposed the prince’s father (tadai viun vanda ) ; the 
conflict lasted for about ten days and at its end Rajadhiraja 
is said to have assumed the title Bhupendra-Coja . 146 From 
the context one might be led to think that Vikramanarana 
was a southern prince: but the account of the second war 
against the Calukyas given later in the same prasasti shows 
that he was a Calukya commandei and was for some reason 
known as Cakravarti Vikramanarana . 147 

In the course of the southern expedition, on his way from 
the Pandya country to Kandalur, Rajadhiraja is said to have 
attacked the king of Venad whom he ‘sent to heaven,' and 
broken the strength of the king of the Kupakas. a local chief- 
tain of south Travancore . 118 

At the time of this expedition, the country of Kerala was 
in the same political condition in which it was found centuries 
afterwards by the Portuguese and the Dutch. It was cut up 
into a number of petty principalities which, with their endless 
feuds and alliances, more or less formed a world apart. Irama- 
kudam (Tamil). Rama-ghata (Skt.) was 
a a in_-. one 0 f the principalities which centred 
round Mt. D'Eli. the Miisaka hill or Eli-malai (rat-hill), and 
ruled over by the Musaka kings whose annals form the sub- 
ject-matter of the Kavya called Miisakavamsam , 149 Accord- 
ing to the legend recorded in this work, a certain Ksatriya 
prince, bom and brought up in secret after Parasurama’s great 
war on the Ksatriyas, was produced before Parasurama, when 
in the course of a sacrifice performed by him in Mount Eli, 



WAR IN CEYLON 


223 


he was on the look out for a Ksatriya for performing 
a rite which was an essential part of the sacrifice and 
had to be performed only by a Ksatriya. This prince was after- 
wards made king of the Musaka country by Parasurama who 
crowned him after an abhiseka with pots ( ghata , kudam ) of 
water; hence the name of the family, Rama-ghata, or Irama- 
kudam in Tamil. A Vatteluttu record 150 of the eleventh cen- 
tury in the neighbourhood of Eli-malai is dated in the fifty- 
ninth regnal year of a Musaka king, Kandan Karivarman alias 
Rama kuda Muvar Tiruvadi; the inscription also mentions 
Rajendra-sola-samaiya-senapati. Most probably this Muvar 
Tiruvadi was the ruler against whom Rajadhiraja’s expedition 
was directed. 

The presence of the traditional rulers of the Pandya and 
Kerala countries long after the Cola conquest 
Mildness of Cola 0 f t hese areas, and the capacity they retain- 
lmpenahsm. , 

ed for making trouble for their suzerain in 

the face of powerful viceroys, deserve attention as proof of 
the comparatively mild character of Cola imperialism which 
was in conformity with the precepts of the arthasastras on the 
policy that a conqueror should adopt towards conquered 
countries. 

In some of the early inscriptions 131 of Rajadhiraja, he is 

said to have invaded Ceylon after the vic- 

Ceylon. f 0 ry at Kanda]ur-salai and to have behead- 

ed ‘the king of Lanka, the Vallava (wearing) a garland; and 
the lord of Kannakucci (Kanauj)'. It is quite possible that 
this campaign of Rajadhiraja was conducted in his father’s 
life-time, and was described with greater elaboration in his 
later records . 132 But as the dates of the two records of Raja- 
dhiraja cited at the beginning of this paragraph 153 are not 
beyond cavil, and as one other record of Rajadhiraja 154 defi- 
nitely of his twenty-seventh year, does not mention the Ceylon 
war, it seems best to reserve discussion of this campaign till 
the reign of Rajadhiraja. We shall see. however, that accord- 
ing to the chronology of the Mahavamsa, some of the inci- 
dents of Rajadhiraja’s Ceylon wai, at least those connected 
with the Sinhalese king Vikramabahu I, must have taken 
place before the death of Rajendra Cola I. The war itself 
dragged on into the reign of Rajadhiraja and even his brother 
Rajendra II apparently took some part in its closing stages. 



224 


RAJENDRA 


Another war had to be waged against the Western Caluk- 
yas by Rajadhiraja as we have seen, and of 
Calukya this war we have several detailed accounts 

Ahavamalla. i n his inscriptions which supplement one 

another and give a fair idea of the course of the campaign. 
This war, which was directed against Ahavamalla, must have 
occurred sometime after a.d. 1042, the last known date for 
Jayasimha II, 155 and consequently in the last years of Rajen- 
dra’s reign. We have seen that after the battle of Musangi 
(c. a.d. 1021) , Jayasimha II made himself master of the Raichur 
doab and reached the Tungabhadra. In the remaining twenty 
years or so of his reign, he seems to have been left alone by 
Rajendra who was engaged in other directions. Some in- 
scriptions in the Bellary district 156 show that Jayasimha II 
even crossed the Tungabhadra in the period and annexed 
parts of the Bellary district to his dominions after displacing 
the Cola control over the tract. One of his vassals, Jagade- 
kamalla Udayaditya Nolamba Pallava Perumanadi, claims in 
a.d. 1033 to have ruled the Nolamba-vadi 32000 among other 
districts; 157 this seems to be an exaggeration, if it is not a 
mere repetition of a traditional title of the Nolambas. But 
after the long interval during which the Calukyas were left 
free to pursue their plans, and after the accession of Trailoky- 
malla Ahavamalla Somesvara I who renewed the aggression 
in Vengi, the Co]a monarch might have felt the need for a 
fresh assertion of his supremacy. Somesvara had to face a 
fresh Cola invasion led by Rajadhiraja for the relief of Vengi. 
Cola inscription-: state that, in the war that followed, the Cola 
forces 158 overwhelmed the Calukya army in the battle of 
Dannada (Dhanyakataka) and killed its leaders Gandappay- 
ya and Gangadhara together with a large number of elephants; 
that the celebrated warriors Vikki and Vijayaditya were forced 
to retreat like cowards along with Sangamayya; and that a 
vast amount of treasure, horses and elephants fell into the 
hands of the Colas, who set fire to the city of Kollippakkai. 
Vikki and Vijayaditya were no doubt respectively the son of 
Somesvara, who afterwards became Vikramaditya VI, and 
Visnuvardhana-Vijayaditya. If these claims in the Cola in- 
scriptions are true, Rajaraja must have been greatly relieved 
and found himself once more undisputed master of his king- 
dom of Vengi. But the success of the Colas does not appear 
to have been so complete, and the Western Calukyas seem to 



LAST YEARS 


225 


have held their own after offering stout resistance at Kollip- 
pakkai. Several records attest Somesvara’s rule over Vengl 
in this period. Sobhanarasa, a feudatory of Somesvara, styles 
himself Vengi-puravaresvara in 1044 , and this title is con- 
tinued by others after him. An unpublished inscription dated 
1047 preserved in the Hyderabad museum states that Somes- 
vara pulverised in battle the kings of Vengl and Kalinga. But 
it is doubtful if the whole of Vengl changed hands, because 
Rajaraja has an inscription dated 1047 at Draksarama 159 re- 
cording an endowment to the Bhrmesvara temple. In fact it 
would seem that very soon Rajaraja had to give up his de- 
pendence on Cola support, and reach an understanding with 
Somesvara. Accordingly we find Narayana Bhatta, one of 
the pradhanis of Somesvara resident in Rajaraja’s court and 
getting a grant of a village (Nandampundi) for assisting Nan- 
nayya Bhatta in composing the Andhra Bhdrata ( 1051 - 2 ) , and 
Narayana’s daughter Kuppama makes a gift to the Bhlmesvara 
temple of Draksarama in 1055 - 6 . We shall see later that C5la 
inscriptions affirm that the immediate successors of Rajendra 
neglected their hereditary interest in the Vengl kingdom. 160 

The closing years of Rajendra’s reign formed the most 
splendid period of the history of the Colas 
of < Ri S j§n S dra e i rS t ^ ie Vijayalaya line. The extent of the 

empire was at its widest and its military and 
naval prestige stood at its highest. There remained the neces- 
sity, ever present in military empires, of carrying out punitive 
expeditions to suppress outbreaks and keep the conquered 
territories under control. The emperor was ably assisted by 
his talented sons and other members of his family, and the 
tasks of imperial administration were thus put in commission. 
Large undertakings, like the Pandya war against Sundara 
Pandva and his confreres, or the Calukya war against Ahava- 
malla, were carried out in these years by the heir-apparent 
Rajadhiraja, while a host of feudatories looked after minor 
affairs like the war of Coreya in the Nambihalli region of the 
Mysore country in which ‘cows were carried off and women’s 
girdles were unloosed.’ 161 Among such feudatories a few 
naturally stand out more prominently than the rest in the re- 
cords of the reign and of these a brief account may be given 
here. 

C. 29 



226 


RAJENDRA 


That even the Pandyas normally accepted such a position 
of subordination and reconciled themselves to 
Feudatories. j s s hown by the queen of the Pandya King 
Srivallabha making gifts to the Tiruvisalur temple early in the 
reign, possibly when Rajaraja was still alive. 162 A part of the 
modern North Arcot district lying round about Brahmadesam 
was under the jurisdiction of Vallavaraiyar Vandyadevar, the 
chief of the Samantas as he is called and husband of Raiaraia’s 
elder sister Kundavai. Two other wives of this person are 
mentioned, Indaladevi 163 and Mandaragauravanar Kundade- 
viyar 184 who. despite the second part of her name, appears to 
have been different from Parantakan Kundavai Pirattiyar. the 
Cola princess said to have been residing in the palace at Pal.ai- 
yaru in the fourth and fifth years of the reign. 165 A ndda 
came to be called Vallavaraivar-nadu after this chief of the 
Samantas and part of it lay in the modern Salem district. 166 
A certain Yadava Bhima, also called Uttama Cola Miladudai- 
yar, was in charge of a part of the hilly tracts in the modern 
South Arcot district in the fourth year. 167 Seven or eight 
years later, we find a Gangaikonda Cola-miladudeiyar. pos- 
sibly in charge of the same division, but only mentioned in the 
inscriptions as making an endowment for a lamp to be main- 
tained in the temple at Kalahasti. 168 Dandanayakan Narakkan 
Krsnan Raman who built the enclosure to the Taniore temple 
under the orders of Raiaraia continued to serve Rajendra 1 
almost till the end of his reign as he is mentioned as late as 
1044. 169 His son Maravan Arumoli, also called Uttamasol? 
Brahma-marayan was also a sennnati who assisted Rajendra 
about 1033 in building a temple for the Pidarl of Kolar. 170 It 
may be observed that of the two names of this sendpati, the 
first was the personal name implying his social rank in the 
nobility (marayam) and the fact that his father called him 
after the ruling sovereign at the time of his birth: the second 
was the official title of the man in his public career in the 
king’s service in the army. A Nimbaladevi. the wife of cer- 
tain Indaladeva of Talaigrama in Virata-desa. the country 
round Hangal. made a grant to the temple of Tiruvorrivur 
about 1042. 171 We cannot be sure that Indaladeva was an official 
or a feudatory of the king, as he might have been a merchant, 
who, like several others of his profession in those days, might 
have travelled great distances. In anv event. Rajendra’s claim 
to have conquered the Mworo country and parts of Rattapadi 



GANGAI KONDA-COLAPURAM 


227 


is largely substantiated by such instances. Lastly, there were 
the Cangalvas and the Kongalvas of Mysore and Coorg. We 
have traced the rise of Kongalvas into prominence under 
Rajaraja who, in appreciation of the heroism of Manija, con- 
ferred on him the title Ksatriyasikhamani Kongalva and an 
estate at Malambi (Coorg). The Cangalva territory, Canga- 
nad, lay in the Arkalgud taluq of Mysore and the Yelusavira 
country in Northern Coorg. Both the Cangalvas and the 
Kongalvas had Cola prenomens from this time, evidently be- 
cause the Colas imposed their names on the provinces they 
conquered and on the rulers who accepted a vassal position 
in the empire . 172 In the course of a few years, however, the 
Kongalvas began to claim that they were themselves actually 
descended from the Colas and joined the ranks of the numerous 
Telugu and Kannada local dynasties that traced their descent, 
in a mythical manner, from Karikala and the Sun. through 
Jatacola. 

Like his father, Rajendra bore a number of fine birudas. 

Noteworthy among them are, Mudigonda- 
ulrhX ''^' Cola 173 and Pandita-Cola ; 174 he is also once 

called Virarajendra ; 175 but above all these in the estimation 
of the king himself was the title Gangai- 
The new Capital. k^da-Cola, a name signalised by being at- 
tached to the new capital founded by the king and sometimes 
called Gangapurl in Sanskrit . 176 In the ruins of this celebrated 
city the earliest inscription that can now be traced seems to 
be one of Rajakesarivarman Vxrarajendradeva . 177 The large 
irrigation tank to the north of the city, the Cola-gangam of the 
Tiruvalangadu plates, has long gone out of use, its extensive 
bed overgrown with thick jungle . 178 Among the records of 
the reign of Rajendra I himself, the new capital is mentioned 
rarely, and apparently not earlier than the seventeenth regnal 
year . 179 This city has often been confused with Mudigonda- 
solapuram, and the suggestion has been made that this was 
the earlier name of what later came to be called Gangaikonda- 
solapuram . 180 There is no support for the suggestion in the 
epigraphy of the reign. On the other hand, Mudigonda-sola- 
puram is clearly stated to be the alternative name of Palai- 
yaru , 181 now a small village on the banks of the Mudigondan. 
within easy reach of KumbakSnam; Palaiyaru possesses an 
ancient Siva temple of remarkable construction in the late 



228 


RAJENDRA 


Cola style which contains, however, no inscription; and there 
remain no traces of the palaces at Palaiyaru in which Kunda- 
vai 182 and Rajendra 183 are said to have lived in the early years 
of the reign. 

In several inscriptions of his reign and of the reigns of 
his successors, Rajendra is described briefly as the conqueror 
of Purvadesam, Gangai and Kadaram; this must be taken 
to be a summary statement of his most distant conquests, and 
on this assumption Purvadesam is best understood to be, not 
the Vengi country as was suggested by Venkayya, 184 but 
Purvarastra, the country to the east of the Maikal range, 185 
roughly corresponding to the Southern Kosala country. 

The following are the queens of Rajendra who figure in 
the inscriptions: Tribhuvana or Vana- 

Queens. van-Mahadeviyar, 186 Mukkokkilan, 187 Pan- 

cavan-Madeviyar 188 and Vlra-madevi who apparently perform- 
ed sati at the king’s death. 189 Of his sons we shall see that 
three followed him on the Cola throne in succession, Rajadhi- 
raja, Rajendra and Virarajendra, and we cannot decide if 
any of these was identical with the Cola-Pandya Viceroy, Jata- 
varman Sundara Cola-Pandya. Other sons are known also. 
A daughter of Rajendra, Arumoli-nangaiyar or Piranar, made 
a present of a costly umbrella of pearls to the temple at Tiru- 
malavadi early in the reign of her brother Rajadhiraja. 190 
Another daughter was the well-known Ammangadevi, the 
queen of the Eastern Calukya Rajaraja I and mother of Kulot- 
tunga, the first Cola-Calukya monarch. The latest regnal 
year mentioned in Rajendra’s inscriptions is 33 191 and this 
accords well with the fact that his death is recorded in an 
inscription of Rajadhiraja dated in his twenty-sixth 192 year. 
Rajendra’s death occurred, therefore, some time in a.d. 1044. 



Note A 


ON MAHIPALA 

Dr. S. K. Aiyangar has discussed the Ganges campaign at 
some length in his essay on Gangaikonda-Cola and I must ex- 
plain why I am unable to accept some of his conclusions. Our 
differences are partly due to the different estimates we have 
of the value of the Tiruvalangadu plates (op. cit. p. 554) . I 
agree with Mr. R. D. Banerji that ‘the order in which the 
names of the countries are mentioned (in Rajendra’s Tamil 
inscriptions) prevents us from supposing that Bihar is’ 
Dandabhukti. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says: ‘As the name it- 

self indicates, Bihar must have been on the frontier of some 
important empire or kingdom, which on that side required 
protection against a powerful enemy’; I do not see how. Nor 
is any tangible evidence brought forward by him in support 
of his position (p. 558) that Magadha was ruled by the Rastra- 
kutas at the end of the ninth century and the beginning of 
the tenth till it was wrested from them by the Pala opponent 
of Rajendra, Mahipala, who installed Dharmapala viceroy over 
his new conquest. Banerji has satisfactorily explained the 
western expansion of the Pala kingdom in the early years of 
Mahipala by the condition of the Gurjara kingdom after the 
invasion of Mahmud of Ghazni. (Pdlas of Bengal p. 70) . 

Banerji seems to me to be clearly wrong in quoting the 
evidence of the Candakausikam of Ksemisvara who probably 
lived in the tenth century a.d. at Kanyakubja under king 
Mahipala, the Gurjara ruler, (Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature 
p. 366 ; Keith, Sanskrit Drama p. 239 and n.) against the Tiru- 
malai rock inscription of Rajendra, and in discovering a defeat 
of Rajendra in Mahlpala’s defeat of the Karnatas mentioned 
in the drama. Cf. S. K. Aiyangar, op. cit. pp. 559-62. 

Taking his stand on the order in which the events are 
narrated in verses 116-24 of the Tiruvalangadu plates, Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar distinguishes a Mahipala of Otta (N. Orissa) from 
the famous Pala king of Bengal, and holds that ‘Rajendra’s 
general did not come into direct contact with Mahipala of 
Bengal at all.' (p. 565). He says that the Tamil records 



230 


RAJENDRA 


‘properly understood' support the same position To prow 1 
this, he relies on the edition of Rajendra’s Tamil inscriptions 
in Epigraphia Carnatica and finds that No. 84 of Channa- 
pattana (Bangalore Dt.) ‘gives apparently the correct read- 
ing': Todu-kadar-Sangamotta-Mahipalanai ; this he trans- 
lates into : ‘ Otta-Mahlpala of Sagnama (Sangama ?) which 

touches the sea.’ He adds: ‘the first three words in full in 
Tamil would be Todu-kadar-changamam which means the 
river mouth which touches the sea’ (pp. 564-5). Ignoring 
Ihe tautology of such a phrase for a moment, one should like 
to know how Sangamam followed by Otta becomes Sanga- 
motta instead of ‘ Sangamavotta ’ as it should be. I have al- 
readjr pointed out that the Tanjore inscription (SII. ii No. 20 
1 71 reads distinctly : v Todu-kalar-cangu-vodadal-mayi- 

palanai’ which Hultzsch somewhat arbitrarily changed into: 

‘ Todu-kalarcanguvottal ' (EL ix p. 232 n. 6). The real reading 
doubtless is that of the Tanjore inscription ; and its correct 
meaning is that the strong Mahipala was captured by some 
means. Though we know nothing of the means, there is little 
room for doubt that, as Kielhorn suggested years ago, the 
‘ strong Mahipala ’ must be the same as the Pala ruler of 
Bengal. It seems that Dr. S. K. Aiyangar has. unconsciously, 
gone too far in reacting against Mr. Banerji’s claim, based on 
a misquotation from the Capdakausikam, that Mahipala of 
Bengal defeated Rajendra, or at least successfully stopped 
his crossing the Ganges. But the alibi sought to be established 
on behalf of the Cola general appears to rest on very flimsy 
grounds. I must, however, note that a single inscription from 
Tirukdyilur (128 of 1900) gives the reading ‘ Sangod-Otta- 
Mahlpalanai.’ This solitary instance out of over a hundred 
inscriptions I have consulted cannot, I think, be regarded as 
anything but a mistake of the engraver. 

Of verses 116-24 of the Tiruvalangadu plates, I think the 
first four complete the account of the campaign undertaken 
by the general in quest of the Ganges including the overthrow 
of Mahipala (119). The rest are devoted to a narration of 
other achievements of Rajendra. Verses 120 and 121 state 
that the king personally undertook a campaign against the 
Otta— note particularly that there is no mention of Mahipala 
here — and his younger brother, before his return to the capi- 
tal (122). In this campaign the king killed or defeated 



PLACE OF KALINGA 231 

( vinihatya ) the Otta and his brother and collected a tribute of 
elephants ; the Mahendragiri stone inscription (396 of 1896) 
states that Vimaladitya, the Kulutesvara, was defeated by 
Rajendra and compelled to give up a number of his elephants 
to the conqueror. Both the references appear to be to the 
same campaign ; but it is not easy to decide whether the cam- 
paign took place in Rajaraja’s life-time and has been mention- 
ed here out of its proper place or whether it occurred some- 
time about the tenth year of Rajendra and is, for some reason, 
omitted in the Tamil prasasti. I am inclined on the whole to 
the latter hypothesis. It must be noticed also that verse 122 
states that the king returned to his capital before he under- 
took the campaign against Kataha (verse 123); Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar reverses the order in his summary (p. 564) and holds 
that the expedition against Kadaram started from * the coast 
region of Kalingam ’ (p. 566) . He adds that all Rajendra’s 
records uniformly state that, having reached the mouth of the 
Ganges and subjugated Orissa, the overseas expedition set sail 
from there ; in saying this he overlooks the fact that we have 
to distinguish the different campaigns of Rajendra's reign 
by the stages through which we can trace the growth of the 
tiru manni valara introduction ; records of the 12th year stop 
with the conquest of the Ganges, and the overseas expedition 
does not find mention before the year 14 ; and it cannot be 
a mere accident that at each of these stages the Tiruvalangadu 
plates state that the king returned to his capital. On Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar’s method of interpretation, we shall have also to ad- 
mit that Rajendra started against Ceylon from Malkhed, an 
obviously impossible assumption. 

In the Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 
(1928 Vol. xiv pp. 512-20) R. D. Banerji examines the opi- 
nions of Dr. S. K. Aiyangar on Rajendra’s Ganges campaign. 
On the location of Dandabhukti and the difficulty of postulat- 
ing the existence, as Dr. S. K. Aiyangar does, of a body of 
Karnatas holding a military fief in Bihar, I find myself in 
agreement with Banerji. He seems to me to be justified also 
in his view that the composer of the Tiruvalangadu plates 
‘had very hazy notions of the position of these places in the 
map of India,’ and that ‘Prof. Aiyangar, who relies entirely 
on the Tiruvalangadu plates in preference to the Tirumalai 
rock inscription, has been clearly non-plussed.’ He clinches 



232 RAJENDRA 

his arguments about the route of the Cola army by saying: 
‘An army approaching Bengal and Bihar from the South 
must follow the natural line of communication through Orissa, 
Midnapur, Hoogly and Howrah to reach Vanga and Uttara 
Radha, and this is exactly the route described in the Tiru- 
malai rock inscription.’ Banerji’s statement, however, that 
the Cola army followed the coast line from near the Chilka 
lake and debouched into the interior only once when it went 
mto Kosala, clearly overlooks the data on the earlier stages 
of the campaign furnished by the Tirumalai rock inscription. 
He also observes that Govindacandra of the Candra dynasty 
of Eastern Bengal ‘had most probably become a vassal of 
Mahipala I and therefore a flanking movement may have been 
expected of him,’ and this was possibly the reason why he had 
to be dealt with before Mahipala was attacked. This state- 
ment from one so well-versed in Pala history is valuable as 
affording support to our position on the general relation 
between Ranasura, Dharmapala and Govindacandra on the 
one side, and Mahipala on the other. It also constitutes a 
virtual abandonment by Banerji of the interpretation he had 
put on the Tirumalai rock inscription in his monograph on 
the Palas of Bengal that it depicts Bengal as cut up into a 
number of independent small states, a view that has been 
cited and commented on in the preceding chapter. 

As against S. K. Aiyangar, whom he does not hesitate to 
accuse of betraying ‘the spirit of a partisan and not that of 
a critical historian,’ Banerji seeks to buttress his position in 
regard to the Candakausikam by arguments which do not 
stand critical examination, and which make it easy, for any- 
one so minded, to bring with more reason against Banerji 
himself the charge of uncritical partisanship. Banerji surmises 
that Prof. Aiyangar has forgotten the existence of the Cambay 
plates of Govinda IV. And the history furnished by these 
plates is summed up by Banerji with more rhetoric than 
fidelity in the following terms: ‘Very shortly afterwards 
(i.e. after the accession of Mahipala I) the Gurjara-Patlhara 
empire was shattered by the onslaught of the great Rastrakuta 
conqueror Indra III. In fact this young prince dealt the death- 
blow to Gurjara-Partlhara supremacy in India. He invaded 
Malva, captured Ujjain, crossed the Jumna near Kalpi, 
devastated Kanauj and compelled Mahipala to flee before his 



MAHIPALA OF KANAUJ 


233 


general, the Calukya chief, Narasimha, to Allahabad. Mahi- 
pala I returned to Kanauj after the retirement of the Rastra- 
kuta army to find that the provinces were fast becoming 
independent under the feudatories and governors. No Mahi- 
pala of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty ever defeated any 
Karnataka army or chief and therefore it is cruel of Professor 
Aiyangar to postulate the production of the drama Canda- 
kausikam before this unfortunate king.’ 

Now. the Cambay plates of Govinda have been edited by 
Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar who had no preconceived notions 
about either Rajendra or Mahlpala of Bengal to uphold, and 
it is interesting to see how he makes out the relations between 
Indra III and Mahlpala I, the Pratihara king, as revealed by 
these plates and other contemporary inscriptions. In a 
succinct and full discussion of the historical significance of 
verse 19 of these plates, 193 he points out: ‘But the complete 

devastation of Mahodaya, which Indra III is spoken of as hav- 
ing brought about, is merely poetical. For the poet’s object 
appears to be to introduce a play on the words Mahodaya and 
Kusasthala. * * * This is also seen from the consideration that, 
as a matter of fact, for long after the event recorded in this 
verse took place, Kanauj continued to be the capital of several 
princes, ruling over northern India. What Indra III actually 
did beyond attacking Mahodaya or Kanauj, cannot be inferred 
from the verse itself. But we can ascertain it with the help 
of other inscriptions.’ After a careful examination of other 
inscriptions, which is too long to be reproduced here, 
Prof. Bhandarkar reaches the conclusion that though Indra 
succeeded for a time in depriving Mahlpala of his kingdom, 
he was soon restored to the throne by the combined efforts of 
Dharmapala of the Pala dynasty of Bengal and the Chandella 
king Harsadeva. Here, then, it seems we have all the elements 
needed to satisfy the requirements of the verse in the prologue 
to the CandakatLsikam which ascribes to Mahipala, by a 
natural exaggeration, the repulse of the Karnatas from Kanauj 
brought about by his allies. In fact by recalling the story of 
Kautilya’s expulsion of the Nandas for the sake of Candra- 
gupta, the verse in the Candakausikam implies what was an 
essential feature in the restoration of Mahipala, viz., the large 
place taken by diplomacy and foreign invasion in bringing 
about the restoration. 

C. 30 



234 


RAJENDRA 


The history furnished by the Cambay plates and other 
records of the time seems therefore to establish conclusively 
that the Candakausikam was enacted before the Gurjara- 
Pratihara Mahlpala I, nearly a century before the time of the 
Pala Mahlpala to whose reign Mr. R. D. Banerji would assign 
the play. See also Sten Konow, Indische Drama p. 87, and 
JOR. vi pp. 191 ff. 


Note B 

GANGAIKONDA-CoLA-PURAM 

The following interesting account of this place appeared 
in a local publication of 1855 which is not easily accessible now. 
It was reproduced once in the IA. iv p. 274, and may well find 
a place here. 

‘ It may also be mentioned that in the Udaiyarpalaiyam 
taluka there is an embankment 16 miles long, running north 
and south, provided with several substantial sluices and of 
great strength, which in former times must have formed one 
of the largest reservoirs in India. This large tank or lake 
was filled partly by a channel from the Kolerun river, up- 
wards of 60 miles in length, which enters it at its southern 
end, and partly by a smaller channel from the Vellar, which 
entered it on the north. Traces of both these channels still 
remain. The tank has been ruined and useless for very many 
years, and its bed is now almost wholly overgrown with high 
and thick jungle. It is said traditionally that its ruin was 
wilful, and the act of an invading army. Near the southern 
extremity of the band there is a village, now surrounded by 
jungle, called Gangakundapuram. Immediately in its vicinity 
is a pagoda of a very large size and costly workmanship ; and 
close by, surrounded by jungle, are some remains of ancient 
buildings, now much resembling the mounds or heaps which 
indicate the site of ancient Babylon, but in which the village 
elders point out the various parts of an extensive and magni- 
ficent palace. When this palace was in existence, Ganga- 
kundapuram was the wealthy and flourishing capital of a 
monarchy, and the great tank spread fertility over miles and 
miles of what is now trackless forest. It has often been pro- 



NOTES 


235 


jected to restore that magnificent work, but the scheme has 
remained in abeyance for want of engineer officers. At some 
future time it may be successfully prosecuted, but till then 
this most fertile tract must remain a jungle, and the few 
inhabitants will still point with pride to the ancient bcmd as 
a monument of the grand and gigantic enterprise of their 
ancient sovereigns, and compare it contemptuously with the 
undertakings of their present rulers. Speaking of the noble 
temple of Gangakundapuram, it must not be omitted that when 
the lower Kolerun anikat was built, the structure was dis- 
mantled of a large part of the splendid granite sculptures which 
adorned it, and the enclosing wall was almost wholly destroy- 
ed in order to obtain materials for the work. The poor people 
did their utmost to prevent this destruction and spoliation of 
a venerated edifice by the servants of a government that could 
show no title to it ; but of course without success ; they were 
only punished for contempt. A promise was made indeed, that 
a wall of brick should be built in place of the stone wall that 
was pulled down ; but unhappily it must be recorded that this 
promise has never been redeemed. ’ 


1. EI. viii p. 260. 

2. See ante p. 183 and n. 76. 

3. 196 of 1917. 

4. 271 of 1927 (Yr. 7). 

5. 363 of 1917. 

6. 118 of 1888 (SII. iv No. 223). 

7. See 117 of 1888, SII. iv. No. 222. 

8. ARE. 1906 11 13. This is true also of the Sanskrit part of the 
Karandai (Tanjore) plates. 

9. EI. ix p. 218. 

10. Hultzsch observed: ‘Rajadhiraja appears to have been co -regent 
of his predecessor (Rajendra Cola I) and cannot have exercised inde- 
pendent royal functions before the death of the other. It is in perfect 
accordance with this conclusion that his inscriptions which have been 
discovered so far are all dated in the later years of his reign viz., bet- 
ween the 26th and 32nd years.’ SII. iii. p. 52. When Hultzsch said this, 
172 of 1894 (Tirukkalukkunram) of the 26th year was the earliest record 
available. Since then, the tingaler introduction has been reported as 
found in 484 of 1925 (Year 10) and 392 of 1921 (Year 18). but on 
examining the impressions of these records, I have found that they are 
both dated in the thirty-sixth year. It is possible, however, that some 
records (with earlier regnal years) which, though containing no p rasastis, 



236 RAJENDRA 

give imperial titles to Rajadhiraja e.g., Tribhuvanacakravartin (241 of 
1927) and Cakravartigal (124 of 1922), really belong to Rajadhiraja I. 
See also 244, 245 of 1929. 

11. 75 of 1895 11. 2-4. ( S1I . v. 633). These lines seem to have been 
taken to mean no more than that Rajadhiraja inherited his kingdom 
from his father — ARE. 1913 II 26. 

12. Fleet, El. xii pp. 295-6. 

13. Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeological Society, 1916, pp. 
14 ff. See also 1A. xliv pp. 213-5. 

14. v. 70. 

15. Fleet ascribes this to Somesvara I, Bom. Gaz. I, ii pp. 427, 440: 
EL xiii pp. 180-2. The transfer may have occurred earlier. 

16. 515 of 1912. 

17. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar apparently finds no difficulty here. He says: 
'Having mastered possession of this debatable frontier of all South 
Indian history (Raichur doab), he proceeded northwards into the south- 
ernmost districts of the Rastrakuta country,’ (italics mine-Gangaikonda 
Cola p. 544). It is possible that more than one army took the field at 
the same time. 

18. 103 of 1912. 

19. 50 of 1897; 439 of 1907. 

20. 4 of 1890: 257 of 1903, 585 of 1906 from Embadi (also fifth year) 
carries the conquests further up to Sandimattivu. But as the inscrip- 
tion mentions the 25th year of the reign, it was engraved much later 
and is to be accepted with caution. 

21. CV. ii p. xiii. 

22. Hultzsch (S/I. iii p. 28) translates: ‘the crown of the king of 
Jlam (who was as tempestuous as) the sea in fighting.’ But in the 
phrase: ' poru-kadal-Ilattarasar-tamudiyum,’ porukadal is an attribute, 
not of ‘arasar,’ but of Tlam'. See El. ix p. 233. The plurals in ‘arasar’ 
and ‘avar deviyar’ are meant to show that the hereditary crown is in- 
tended. See extract from the CV. which follows. 

23. CV. Ch. 55 vv. 16 ff. The three preceeding verses talk of a horse- 
dealer informing the Cola king of the confusion in the island and 
bringing about the invasion: this part of the story perhaps applies to 
Rajaraja’s invasion which is not otherwise noticed by the CV. 

24. Chinnapattikadhatuka which Geiger thinks might have been a 
Buddha relic, highly prized, among the regalia of the Sinhalese kings. 
Wijesimha translates: ‘and the Sacred foreheadband.’ 

25. 642 of 1909 (yr. 7). 

26. 595, 618 of 1912 (SII. iv 1389; 1414). 

27. 22 of 1895; 211 of 1911. 

28. Eripadai means ‘victorious army’; Sengadir-malai may be taken 
more literally as above instead of being understood as meaning the 
sun. Contra Hultzsch El. ix p. 233. 

29. 29 of 1897 (.SII. ii 82); 74 of 1907 (yr. 8). 



NOTES 


237 


30. 363 of 1917. 

31. vv. 89-97. 

32. 46 of 1907. 

33. 363 of 1917. 

34. 112 of 1905. 

35. 617 of 1916 . 

36. T AS. iv pp. 134-5. 

37. 44 of 1896. 

38. Fleet DKD. 436. 

39. Rangachari -Bellary 279. 471; EC. vii Sk. 220, 307. 

40. Hultzsch translates — 'payangodu palimiga’ into ‘out of fear and 
full of vengeance.’ (El. ix p. 233). Pali means ‘vengeance’ in some 
contexts; but here it has surely another meaning: ‘disrepute.’ The idea 
is that by his flight he lost his reputation as king or warrior. The phrase 
‘navanidikkulap-perumaligalum’ is not clear. Hultzsch understands this 
independently of the Rattapadi campaign, and translates: 'the principal 
great mountains (which contained) the nine treasures (of Kubera).’ 
This flawless literal rendering is not intelligible, and Hultzsch has not 
explained what he understands by it. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar is inclined, 
on the other hand, to see a place name of unknown identity in Navani- 
dhi-kula, like Namanaikkonam, Pancappalli and Masuni-desa. (Sewell- 
Historical Inscriptions p. 65, n). But unlike konam, palli and desa. an 
ending in kula seems most unlikely for a place name. I think the whole 
expression is a rhetorical way of stating that much treasure fell into 
the hands of Rajendra. ‘Kulap-peru-malaigal’ suggest, by recalling the 
‘Kulaparvatas’ of legend, the vastness of the treasure; and ‘navanidhi,’ 
though usually employed of the insignia of Kubera, is introduced here 
to suggest the variety of the treasures of the Calukya monarch, cf. kula- 
dhanam-akhilam yasasca muktva bhtryam avalambt/a palayanam cakara 
(v, 105) of the same context in the Tiruvalangadu plates. 

41. SII ii p. 94-5. n. 4. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar thinks Maski more likely 
and so does Hultzsch, Asoka Inscrr. pp. xxvi. 

42. 99-108. 

43. v. 101, SII. iii p. 423. cf. Karandai v. 62. 

44. IA viii 18; Fleet DKD. 436; El. xii pp. 295-6. Krishna Sastri’s 
translation of verse 103 of the Tiruvalangadu plates is wrong in imply- 
ing that the Rattaraja lost his life in the war; parikhandita means ‘de- 
feated,’ not ‘cut to pieces.’ 

45. 23 of 1917; the others are 24, 30 and 31 of the same collection. 

46. 751 of 1917. 

47. V. 71 El. xxv p. 261. See Eastern Calukyas, pp. 221-2 n. 2 for 
a clarification of the verse. 

48. In the Tiruvalangadu plates Jayasimha is described as ‘the very 
abode of Kali’ ( svayam kalerdsrayam SII. iii p. 399 v. 100) and the 
king of Odda is distinctly described as carrying out the orders of Kali- 
raja (ibid v. 120 p. 400) ; see also Eastern Calukyas, pp. 223-4. 

49. v. 109. Cf. Karandai v. 64 saying that the Ganges water was 
brought upon the heads of kings residing on its banks. Also Charala 
pi. v. 71. 



238 


RAJENDRA 


50. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar is fond of the notion that the scholarly 
Rajendra, Pandita-Cola as he was, had his imagination fired by a study 
of the Cera Senguttuvan’s exploits as narrated in the Silappadikaram. 
( Gangai-konda-Cola p. 548). We may wonder whether Rajendra was 
such a Quixote! The poet Narayana has made another guess (utpreksa) , 
not less plausible, of Rajendra’s motive. And we have no record of the 
table-talk of Rajendra or of his reminiscences. But is there anything 
calling for an explanation? The ideal of ancient Indian monarchy was 
utthana and vrjigisd; the power of a king was held to be in proportion 
to the extent of territory conquered and the number of victorious raids 
led by him into foreign territory. 

51. 476 of 1911 (year 11) mentions it; records of the tenth year do 
not. The detailed account first appears in the twelfth year SII. i, 68; 
467 of 1908. 

52. w. 110, 118. 

53. Note this surname of Rajendra. 

54. The two Mahendragiri inscriptions of Rajendra Cola (Skt.) and 
Rajendra-sola-pallavaraiyan (Tamil) — nos. 396 and 397 of 1896 — SII. 
v. nos. 1351 and 1352 — are usually referred to this war of Rajendra I 
against Kalinga and O^da. ASI. 1911-2, pp. 171-2; T AS. iii pp. 119-20. 
Dr. Venkataramanayya’s objection to this ( Eastern Calukyas, p. 225 n. 
1) does not seem to be well-founded. 

55. See El. ix p. 233. The notes below explain the variations in my 
tendering. 

56. Hultzsch has: ‘whose forts (bore) banners which (touched) 
the clouds,’ which has no support from the text. 

57. The translation here is based on the reading in 176 of 1923: 
‘liamidai valanagar Ndmwnaikkdnamum.’ 

58. Another form has ‘venjina vtrar’ for ‘venjilai-i nrar.’ 

59. Read: ‘ pasadaip-palana - masuni-desam’ (SII. ii 20 1. 5 and p. 
108) for ‘pahidaip-pala-nan-nuisiini-desam’ (Hultzsch) of the Tiru- 
malai rock; or translate ‘Masuni-desa celebrated for fruits (amidst) 
green foliage.’ 

60. Read: ‘Adi-nagar-vaiyir-candira’ etc., where vaiyin is the 

locative case ending, not to be read ‘nagaravaiyil’ as has been done. 

61. This seems better for ‘ayarvil van-kirtti Adinagar’, than ‘which 
was famous for unceasing abundance’ (Hultzsch), perhaps reading sirtti 
for klrtti.. 

62. ‘Milai is a synonym for kdvarkadu’; Manimekalai, xxviii, 1. 25. 

63. Read — ‘ todu-kalar-cangu-vodadal Mayipalanai’ (Tanjore SU 
ii 20 plate). Hultzsch’s talk of ‘ear-rings, slippers and bracelets’ of 
Mahipala is entirely out of place. Often also ‘todu-kadar-cangod-adal 
Mahipalari (478 of 1902), where ‘sangu’ may mean conch (sankha). 

64. ‘Verimalar' for 'veri-manaV in some copies. 

65. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar suggests that this campaign started from 
Kulpak, the northern limit of Rajendra's earlier campaigns, or ‘from 
somewhere not far off,’ ( Gangai~konda-Cola p. 549). There is no evi- 



NOTES 


239 


dence, however, to show that at any time Rajendra became master of 
the W. Calukya territory in the present Hyderabad state so as to organise 
and despatch a large army from there on a campaign of aggressive war- 
fare into foreign territory. And the Tiruvalangadu plates are explicit, 
as Dr. Aiyangar has himself noticed (ibid. p. 547), that the expedition 
started from the Cola capital. 

66. El. ix pp. 178-9. 

67. ibid., p. 163. 

68. ibid., p. 180, 1. 29. 

69. El. vii, List p. 120 n. 3. 

70. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says that ‘Sadinagar of Tamil, hitherto read 
Adinagar, Jajnagar of the Muhammadan historians.’ is no other than 
Yayatinagar, identified with Binka by Hiralal and said to have been 
founded by one of the early Kesari kings of Orissa. (Gangai-kovda- 
Cola p. 550) . But he does not say how he gets his new reading Sadina- 
gar. The Tirumalai rock inscription clearly has ‘vavJcirtti-yddinagar’ 
(El. ix p. 232, plate 1. 8) and the Tanjore record equally clearly ‘vankirtti 
Adinagar’ (SII. ii plate 3, 1. 5, end); ‘vankirttiy-yadinagar’ is often 
found (77, 78, 78 A of 1895) and 'vankirtti- Ayadingar’ in 171 of 1894 — 
all of years 16 and 17. One may doubt also whether the rather colour- 
less ‘pusurar ser’ applied to Kosalai-nadu is susceptible of bearing the 
interpretation put on it by Dr. Aiyangar who sees in it some of the 
consequences of the invasions of Mahmud of Ghazni (ibid). 

71. R. D. Banerji- Palas of Bengal p. 71. 

72. Contra R. D. Banerji: ‘The Tirumalai inscription of Rajendra 
Cola I shows that the ancient Gauda and Vanga had become divided into 
a large number of small kingdoms’ (ibid. p. 69). 

73. A Laksmlsura was samast-atavika-samanta-cakra-cudamani in 
the reign of Ramapala, (ibid. p. 72). 

74. ibid. pp. 72-73; cf Prabodha-candrodaya, Act ii, where we have: 
nunamayam daksinarddha-pradesa-ddgato-bhavisyati; and Gaudam 
rdstram-anuttamam nirupamd tatrapi Radhapuri. 

75. See note A at the end of the chapter. 

76. vv. 117, 119. 

77. ASI. 1911-12 pp. 173-4. Venkayya makes a gratuitous assump- 
tion that the water of the Ganges was taken at Allahabad, and identifies 
Lada with Berar. He says: ‘As we cannot imagine that all Northern 
India was conquered by Rajendra Cola’s general in about a year, the 
only reasonable alternative seems to be that a few previously chosen 
tracts of country were actually invaded and if the inhabitants offered 
any resistance, a regular war was gone through. The names of the 
remaining territorial divisions with their rulers were ascertained and 
included in the list of kings overcome. . . . The exact course which these 
roving pilgrims followed in Northern India cannot be easily traced at 
present’ (p. 174). 

78. v. 109 of the Tiruvalangadu plates. 

79. i bid v. 124. 

80. Palas of Bengal pp. 73, 99. 



240 


RAJENDRA 


81. Verse 111, end of Anantasambhu’s gloss (Madras Mss. Library). 
In two verses introduced by the glossator with the words ‘atra purva- 
katha-prasangah,’ Rajendra is said to have himself gone to bathe in the 
Ganges. Krishna Sastri wrongly ascribes these statemente to the Sid- 
dhantasaravali itself and suggests that the work was composed in Rajen- 
dra's time and under his patronage. SII. iii introduction p. 22. 

82. Pamulavaka plates — JAHRS, ii, p. 287 1. 63. 

83. El. xvi, p. 77. 

84. Bharati, xx, p. 439; Eastern Calukyas, pp. 241-4. 

85. 482 -K of 1893 (SII. v. no. 82) , and Eastern Calukyas, p. 229, n. 1. 

86. 213 of 1911. I am not sure of the correctness of the date in a 
record from Malur of the 13th year (EC. ix cp. 84) which also gives the 
full introduction. There is a fragment dated in the 11th year from 
Kuruburu (Mysore) mentioning the conquest of Kadaram (EC. x ct. 47). 
But the date is obviously too early; perhaps an instance of a gift of the 
11th year recorded some years later. 

87. v. 123, Cf. Karandai v. 62. 

88. SII. ii p. 109. The notes that follow explain my differences with 
Hultzsch. 

89. The conjecture ‘vakiyam’ (p. 107 n. 5) does not help. The 
reading in other records ‘ vdgaiyam ' is quite good, ‘vdgaV victory, ‘am’ 
is expletive. Porukadal, 'fighting ocean is a common expression for 
‘army’. ‘ Kumbakkari ' means ‘elephant with the kumba, the globular 
front.’ 

90. Hultzsch has: 'extensive city of the enemy.’ The Tanjore text 
'drttavanahanagar’ can hardly give his meaning. I take it to be 'arttu + 
avan + ahanagar’. The tempting suggestion of Coedes that this and 
the following phrases may be attributes of Srivisaya (BEFEO, xviii 
No. 6 p. 5 n. 1) has been partly accepted by me. 

91. See El. ix p. 231. 

92. ‘ Pudavam ‘ is a small gate-way’ in a larger door, a wicket. 

93. This translation seems more literal than ‘(with) a fort situated 
on a high hill’ for ‘van-malai-ureyil.’ 

94. Possessing (both), cultivated land (?) and jungle’ Hultzsch. 
Though ‘turn' means ‘low jungle,’ the meaning of the whole phrase is 
by no means clear. 

95. 'Was subdued by a vehement (attack)’, Hultzsch. The text is 
'kalamudir- kadundiral' which means that the fierce strength ( kadun - 
diral) increased (inudir) in fighting or war (kaldm). 

96. ‘Whose flower gardens (resembled) the girdle (of the nymph) 
of the southern region,’ Hultzsch. Though I am not sure how this 
curious translation was reached by Hultzsch, I suspect that he took the 
phrase ‘tenakkavarpolil’ to be composed of 'ten + nakkan + var + polil’, 
and even so the translation is forced. In truth it is ten + nakka -J- var 
-t-polil, the terms meaning respectively ‘honey’, ‘laughing’ ‘long’ and 
flower-garden.’ 

97. ' Todu-kadal’ is rendered by Hultzsch into ‘the neighbouring 
sea.’ But ‘todu’ in the sense of touch’ is a late form; and ‘ todu-kadal' 



NOTES 241 

is a classic phrase containing an allusion to the story of the sea being 
dug out by the sons of Sagara; ‘todu’ means ‘to dig.’ 

98. SII., ii, 20. 

99. ibid, p. 106. 

100. SII., ii, p. 195. 

101. This had been noted in Hobson-Jobson, BEFEO, xviii, 6. p. 
6. n. 5. 

102. ARB. 1908, paragraph 25. 

103. BEFEO, xviii No. 6. The extensive Researches (1909) of 
Gerini (Asiatic Society Monographs vol. 1), also deserves grateful ac- 
knowledgement from all students of the historical geography of Eastern 
Asia. 

104. ARB. 1919, paragraphs, 46-47. 

105. i bid., 1922, paragraph, 14. 

106. op. c it. p. 5. 

107. The Chinese habit of abridging foreign names, especially when 
they are long, is well-known. 

108. Op. cit. pp. 23-4. See also Ferrand, L’Empire Sumatranais de 
Sri Vijaya JA. 1922, pp. 163 ff. 

109. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua p. 35; Coedes, op. cit. p. 13. 

110. pp. 60-2. 

111. Op. cit. p. 25. 

112. Gerini, Researches p. 513. 

113. Ibid., pp. 533-4. Coedes (p. 9) leaves the question undecided 
whether Malaiyur was on the Eastern or Western Coast of Sumatra or 
in the South of the Malay peninsula, and observes that, in any case, it 
must have been a state near Palembang which, according to I-tsing, 
annexed Malayu between a.d. 672 and 705. (also Gerini pp. 530-1) . 

114. Chau Ju-kua p. 67. 

115. Coedes op. cit. pp. 10-11; 33-6. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says; ‘Mayi- 
rudingam may be Besinga (ftsi Srnga), the modern Rangoon’ (op. c it. 
p. 576). Contra. Gerini — pp. 76-7. We cannot, of course, go so far 
afield for finding Mayirudingam. 

116. Coedes, op. cit. pp. 11-13. 

117. Geiger, CV. ch. 76, v. 63. 

118. ARE. 1898-9 paragraph 47; ARB. 1909-10, p. 14, paragraph 40. 

119. Eg. Kadaram with (Sri) -khettara, ancient Prome (Kanakasa- 
bhai); Madamalingam with Martaban (Smith); cf. Coedes op. cit. p. 6. 

120. Geiger, CV (ii p. 67) ch. 76 v. 35. 

121. Coedes, pp. 14-5. The argument has been advanced (ARB. 
1919 paragraph 47) that Pappalam and Kusumi, the two ports mentioned 
in the Mahdvamsa account of the Ceylonese expedition against Raman- 
fiadesa must both be identified together; and that as Kusumi is clearly 
Bassien, the former must be either Dagan or Rangoon, the neighbouring 
port. This argument clearly underrates the express statement in the 
Mahdvamsa that the fleet was scattered by a storm and that different 

C. 31 



242 


RAJENDRA 


parts of it drifted to different ports (Ch. 76 vv. 56, 59, 63), which need 
not have been adjacent. 

122. Mevilimbangam is sought in Perak by Rouffaer, and in Kar- 
maranga (Kalasapura) by Levi pre- Aryan and pre-Dravidian (Bagchi) 
pp. 110-2. The former also identifies Valaippanduru with Panduranga 
in Campa. Krom observes: 'All these conjectures depend on our 
opinions, not on sufficient grounds.’ See Krom Hindoe-Javansche- 
Geschiedenis pp. 251-2. 

123. Coedes, p. 15; Researches p. 93, Sylvain Levi Ptolemi, le Nid- 
desa et la Brhatkatha, Etudes Asiatiques ii. 

124. Chau Ju-kua p. 68. 

125. Ibid., pp. 67-8 n. 1. JRAS. 1905 p. 498. 

126. Op. cit, pp. 16-18. The name Tamralinga which Coedes ob- 
tains from a Sanskrit inscription from Jaiya (ibid., p. 32) is near 
enough to Tan-ma-ling and Tamai ingam, or Tamalingam, and there 
should be no difficulty in accepting the view that all the three forms 
are variants of the same name. Coedes’ suggestion that the Tamil name 
might be read ‘Tamaralingam’ (p. 17) is therefore unnecessary; it is 
inadmissible as ‘Madamalingam’ (or Madamalingam) alliterates with 
the first half of the line ‘titamavalvinai’ in the Tamil inscriptions, and the 
sound ‘ra’ is, by the rules of Tamil prosody, quite impossible in the 
second half of the line; but tidamar val-vinai ma Damarlingam is a 
possible reading of the Tamil line, according to Desikavinayakam Pillai. 

127. Tawney’s Kathasaritsagara, i 87, 92, 552; ii 44, 598 where 
Kataha is called an island; and the Leyden grant. Also Karandai v. 62. 

128. w. 138. 189. 

129. Pattuppattu p. 550 (3rd Edn.). Skt. Kataha and Tamil Kada- 
ram are, as pointed out by Coedes (op. cit. p. 20; also Ferrand, JA. 1922 
pp. 5-1), semantically related, and mean ‘a copper cauldron’; Tam. 
Kadaram has also the sense of ‘brown colour bordering on the black’ , 
and Kalagam the sense of ‘blackness.’ Apparently this synonymity has 
induced Naccinarkkiniyar and the lexicographers to gloss Kalagam by 
Kadaram. Kadaram and Kidaram are evidently different readings of 
the same toponym: they have, however, no phonetic connection with 
Kataha or with Kalagam 

130. op. cit. pp. 20-2 

131. Ferrand says that Kadaram. Kataha and Kalagam cannot rep- 
resent Kedah on the W. coast of the Malay peninsula (JA. 1922 p. 51) . 
‘Geographically,’ he says, ‘Kadaram and Kidaram are situated in 
Sumatra according to Tamil texts,’ and he cites the authority of the 
Pandya inscriptions 588 of 1916 and 356 of 1906 as summed up in the 
epigraphical reports. These texts by no means imply anything more 
than that the king of Savakam was also the king of Kadaram in the 
thirteenth as in the eleventh century. The political position of Sri 
Vijaya and Kadaram in relation to Jaiya in the thirteenth century has 
been dealt with by Coedes in Bijdragen Tot de Tool Land etc. Deel 
83 (1927) pp. 459 ff. in the paper A propos de la chute Du Royaume de 
Sri Vijaya,’ where he reiterates his view that Kadaram is Kedah. 



NOTES 


243 


Though Ferrand was inclined in 1922 (.7 A. p. 51) to locate Kadaram in 
the south of Sumatra or on its east coast, it must be mentioned that 
he left the question open as he himself felt the weakness of the texts 
he relied on. Gerini’s brief discussion (at p. 833 of his Researches ) on 
which Dr. S. K. Aiyangar bases his identification of Kadaram with Kerti 
on the N. E. coast of Sumatra ( Gangaikonda Cola pp. 568 ff.) has now 
been superseded. 

132. S. K. Aiyangar, op. c it. pp. 566; 571. 

133. Hirth and Rockhill-Chau Ju-kua pp. 18-9. 

134. Gerini -Researches p. 609 n. 2 unduly abridges the length of 
Rajaraja’s reign to 985-1002 and imagines difficulties which do not exist. 
Even if Rajaraja’s reign did not extend beyond the 29th year (1014). 
the embassy to China may have left in his life-time and reached China 
in the succeeding year after some delay en route in the Malay region. 
See also Chau Ju-kua p. 100. 

135. Cited Chau Ju-kua p. 63. 

136. ASS1. iv. p. 208 11. 86-88. El. xxii. 

137. cf. Coedes, op. cit. p. 8. 

138. ARE. 1892 p. 12. 

139. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar Ancient India p. 108; Gangatkonda Cola: 
S1I. iii. Intr. p. 21. 

140. SII. iii p. 56. I have altered Hultzsch’s translation at some 
points. 

141. Though ‘tennavar may mean Pandyas it seems possible that 
here it means only ‘kings of the south,' an alliance between Ceylon 
(Manabharana) (SII. iii 29, 1. 13), Kerala and Pandya being meant. 

142. This event is omitted in some records e.g.. 6 of 1890. Hultzsch 
translates differently; but see ARE. 1930 II. 46. 

143. Lit ‘was attacked by pains in the bowels.’ 

144. The symbol of an aggressive invasion. 

145. PK. p. 113. 

146. 221 of 1894— SII. v. No. 520 11. 15-19. 

147. ibid. 11. 75-6. I accept Dr. Venkataramanayya's suggestion 
( Journal of the Madras University, xvi, p. 6) that this incident was 
introduced into the prasasti after the second Calukya war. 

148. 75 of 1895, ARE. 1913 II 26. 

149. TAS. ii 87 ff.; JRAS. 1922 pp. 161 ff. 

150. 523 of 1930. 

151. 172 of 1894; 92 of 1892. 

152. SII. iii. 28. 

153. 92 of 1892-date lost; 172 of 1894 dated (2)6. the first figure 
being doubtful. 

154. 54 of 1893. 

155 Fleet DKD. p. 436. 

156. Rangachary-Bellarv 185, 229, 285. 

157. 253 of 1918. 

158. Hultzsch says that the Cola forces were led by a commander 



244 


RAJENDRA 


named Kevudan; this is due to his failure to split correctly the words 
ahjarku, evil, tan. See e.g. 54 of 1893 and 6 of 1890. 

159. 183 of 1893 (SII. iv. No. 1008); other references in Eastern 
Calukyas. 

160. Eastern Calukyas, p. 237; 185 of 1893, SII. iv. No. 1010. 

161. EC. x Sp. 14. 

162. 46 of 1907. 

163. 191 of 1915. 

164. 243 of 1915. 

165. 350 of 1907; 639 of 1909. 

166. 157 of 1915. 

167 . 20 of 1905. 

168. 291 of 1904. 

169. 217 of 1911. 

170. 480 of 1911, (EC. x Kl. 109-a). 

171. 138 of 1912. 

172. EC. i, Intr. 12-13; v Intr. vii. 

173. A name which is applied to many places and buildings in the 
period, and to a branch of the Kaveri to our own day. The Tambraparni 
is called Mudigondasolap-peraru in Cola records from Sermadevi. 

174. ARE. 1901, i. 12; Sll, iii, 127. 

175. 61 of 1914. 

176. El. xv. p. 49 n. 3 where Gopinatha Rao quotes an interesting 
reference from the Idu possibly reminiscent of this foundation. 

177. 82 of 1892. 

178. A nineteenth century description of the site is quoted in 
Note B at the end of this Chapter. 

179. 61 of 1914; 203 of 1925; 510 of 1926. The curious composite 
record 118 of 1888 dated in the 24th year of Rajakesari Rajendra men- 
tions Gangapuri. 

180. SII. iii. Index s. v. Mudigonda-sdlapuram; also S. K. Aiyan- 
gar — South India and her Muhammadan Invaders, p. 44, n. 2. 

181. 271 of 1927. 

182. 639 of 1909. 

183. Tiruvalangadu plates 11. 6-7 (Tamil part), 463 of 1908 (Yr. 3). 

184. ASI. 1911-12 p. 172 n. 1. 

185. Fleet Gupta Inscriptions p. 192 n. 1; El. ix. p. 283. 

186. 624 of 1920. 

187. 73 of 1921. 

188. 464 of 1918. 

189. 260 of 1915. 

190. 71 of 1920. 

191. 79 of 1909. 

192. 260 of 1915. 

193. El. vii, pp. 30—33. 


Chapter XI 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 
(A.D. 1044-70). 

Under Rajaraja I, the real founder of the Cola empire, 
and his talented son Rajendra I, the usual 
Rij^ndra^I ^ line of conquest, which was from North to 

South, had been reversed, and the victorious 
tiger-banner carried far into the North. Rajendra’s sons, 
three of whom succeeded their father, one after another, on 
the Cola throne, inherited an extensive empire, and on the 
whole, ably maintained its extent and prestige during their 
reigns. There was much hard, and occasionally fierce fighting, 
particularly against the Calukyas across the Tungabhadra 
frontier, and the first of these three kings died on a battle- 
field in which the second was crowned immediately after his 
steadiness and valour had converted an almost certain defeat 
into a brilliant victory. There was trouble also from the south, 
the Pandya and Kerala being always in league with the Cey- 
lonese rulers, and waiting to take the fullest advantage of 
the difficulties that beset their suzerains elsewhere. Towards 
the end of this period, these troubles, together with others of 
a dynastic and possibly religious nature, brought about a poli- 
tical revolution which proved the salvation of the empire for 
well over a century thereafter. As will be shewn later, the 
exact circumstances under which the Calukya-Coja, Rajendra, 
came to occupy the imperial Cola throne are not easily de- 
termined; but there can be no two opinions on the consequen- 
ces to the Cola power of this turn of events. By introducing 
a fresh, and possibly more vigorous, yet closely related stock 
of kings to the rule of the empire, and by amalgamating, at a 
critical time the resources of the Eastern Calukya kingdom 
with the Cola, it ensured a continuous and active life for the 
empire of Rajaraja at a time when his descendants in the 
main line were overwhelmed in desperate conflicts of which 
they saw no end. 

The Kanyakumari inscription 1 of Virarajendra states ex- 
pressly that Rajadhiraja was the eldest of the 

Order of three sons of Rajendra who succeeded him 

succession. 

in order; this statement is confirmed by the 



246 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


inscriptions of the three reigns taken together; one record of 
the thirty-fifth year 2 of Rajadhiraja mentions the significant 
name tambit-tuTmiccdla-imlanddu which recalls distinctly the 
prasasti of Rajendra II beginning tirumagal maruviya. This 
prasasti gives a succinct account of how Rajendra co-operated 
with his elder brother Rajadhiraja in the prolonged Calukya 
war of the reign. VIrarajendra was doubtless identical with 
VIra-Cola, 3 the younger brother of Rajendradeva on whom he 
conferred the title Karikala Cola; in fact the W. Calukya in- 
scriptions call him generally Vira. An inscription of VIrara- 
jendra from the Ramnad district 4 refers to his father ( ayyar ) 
who conquered Gangai, Purvadesam and Kadaram. From a 
study of the dates of the inscriptions, it is seen that there is a 
large measure of overlapping among the reigns, a feature 
which should cause no surprise after the 
Overlapping conjoint rule for over twenty-five years of 
Rajadhiraja with his father. The latest 
regnal year of Rajadhiraja mentioned in his records is the 
thirty-sixth, 5 falling in a.d. 1053-4. The approximate date of 
the accession of Rajendra II has been fixed from his inscrip- 
tions as May 28, a.d. 1052.® Likewise, the highest regnal 
year of Rajendra II is twelve, taking his rule up to a.d. 1064. 
Virarajendra’s accession, however, took place sometime in 
a.d. 1062-3 7 which is counted in his records 
Rajamahendra. as ^ year 8 Rajakesari Rajamahendra- 
deva, whose inscriptions do not carry his reign beyond the 
third year, must be found a place before the accession of Vira- 
rajendra-deva. His brief prasastis tell us little beyond the 
fact that he upheld the code laid down by Manu for the ad- 
ministration of the land; but even this statement is not al- 
together valueless as it is closely corroborated by the Kalin- 
gattupparani 9 which says just the same thing even more forcib- 
ly, without mentioning any other fact, about a king whom it 
places between the sovereign who crowned himself on the 
field of Koppam (Rajendra II) and the victor of Kudal-sanga- 
mam (VIrarajendra). Further confirmation of the position 
assigned to Rajamahendra is found in a single inscription of 
his stating that the king ‘by a war-elephant caused Ahavamalla 
to turn his back (on the bank of) the winding river.’ 10 It seems 
possible that Rajamahendra was the son of Rajendra II men- 
tioned in an inscription of the ninth year of that king 11 under 



CHRONOLOGY 


247 


the name Rajendra, and that when, soon after, he was chosen 
heir-apparent he assumed the title Rajamahendra to distin- 
guish himself from his father Rajendra-deva and his grand- 
father Rajendra-Cola-deva. Here again, the succession of two 
Rajakesaris, Rajamahendra and Virarajendra, must be ex- 
plained as due to one of them having died as heir-apparent 
without ever ruling in his own right, and that the other was 
chosen to fill his place. 12 This period is brought to a close by 
the short and troubled reign of Parakesari Adhirajendra, one 
of whose records dated in his third year 13 mentions the eighth 
year of Virarajendra. The succession and chronology of the 
period may, therefore, be summed up as follows: 


(1) Rajadhiraja I Rajakesari 

(2) Rajendra II Parakesari younger 

brother of (1) 

Rajamahendra Rajakesari son of 
(2) died as crown-prince 

(3) Virarajendra Rajakesari 

(younger brother of 1 and 2) 

(4) Adhirajendra Parakesari son 

of 3 (?) 


a.d. 1018-1054 
a.d. 1052-1064 
a.d. 1060-1063 
A.D. 1063-1069 
a.d. 1067 1 8-1070 


Rajadhiraja’s prasastis are usually found in two forms, 
one of them rather short, commencing 
p ,S^ a ’ s tingdler-pera-valar, which records only the 
earlier achievements of the king and seems 
to have been stereotyped about the twenty-sixth year of his 
rule and repeated in that form in some of his later records. 
The longer form tingaler-taru has many variations and in 
fact it is seen to have gone through several editions, so to say, 
some giving more details of transactions only briefly men- 
tioned in others. 14 A few of the inscriptions of the later years 
mention fresh transactions not found in the earlier records; 15 
others simply repeat the older forms without making them 
up-to-date. Further, there is a prasasti beginning tirukkodi- 
yodn tyagakkodi giving no new information and confirming 
some of the details of the Calukyan war found in other records. 

That Rajadhiraja assumed the title Vijayarajendra after 
his triumphant entry into Kalyanapura has 
inscriptkms btful already been mentioned. There are. how- 
ever, two records of Parakesari Vijaya- 



248 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


rajendra which at first sight seem to present a baffling prob- 
lem. 16 In one of them, a Kolar record 17 of the thirty-fifth year, 
we must necessarily assume that Parakesari is a mistake for 
Rajakesari: for the high regnal year and the identity of the 
short prasasti in this record with that of Rajadhiraja begin- 
ning Virapancliyan talaiyum , the last variety of the prasastis 
found in Rajadhiraja’s records, leave no room for any alter- 
native. The other record from Pedda-Tippasamudram 18 falls 
into the reign of Rajendra II, the younger brother and suc- 
cessor of Rajadhiraja, as it is dated in Saka 981, or a.d. 1057-8, 
and as we have no clear proof of Rajadhiraja having reigned 
beyond his 36th year, which would be a.d. 1054-5. Rajen- 
dra II was a Parak§sari, and though this record appears to be 
unique in giving him the Vijayarajendra title, it may be his. 
It should, however, be noticed that a Rajadhiraja inscription, 
doubtfully dated in the 38th year, from Tiruvorriyur, 19 just 
renders it possible that this record is also his. The battle of 
Koppam, in which Rajadhiraja lost his life, took place accord- 
ing to Fleet ‘shortly before the 20th January, a.d. 1060,’ as a 
record dated in Saka 981 (expired) mentions that Somesvara 
had then returned from ‘a conquest of the southern countries 
and of the Cola.’ 20 Therefore, the Pedda-Tippasamudram 
record of Saka 981 may also be, after all, another instance of a 
Rajadhiraja record giving him the Parakesari title by a mis- 
take. In any case we have no reason to assume that there 
was an alteration in the official title of the king from Raja- 
kesari to Parakesari, 21 as there are many other records of the 
35th and 36th years with the former title. 

The Ceylon war of Rajadhiraja briefly mentioned in the 
c i last chapter may now be considered in more 

detail. Some of the earlier inscriptions 22 of 
Rajadhiraja briefly record that the king of Lanka, the garland- 
ed Vallava, and the king of the Kannakucciyar (people of 
Kanauj) , suffered decapitation at the hands of Rajendra. The 
more detailed account of the occurrences as found in some of 
the later records 23 is as follows: — 


‘With a single unequalled army (he) took the crown 
of Vikramabahu, the king of the people 
criptions. °f Lanka on the tempestuous ocean; 

the crown of large jewels, (belonging 
to) the lord of Lanka, Vikrama-Pandyan, who, having 



CEYLON WAR 


249 


lost the whole of the southern Tamil country out of fear 
of himself (Rajadhiraja) 24 had entered Ilam (surrounded 
by) the seven oceans; the beautiful golden crown of the 
king of Simhala, Vira-Salameghan, who, believing that 
llam (surrounded by) the ocean was superior to the 
beautiful Kannakucci (Kanyakubja) which belonged to 
him, had entered (the island) with his relatives and 
(those of) his countrymen who were willing (to go with 
him), 25 and had put on the brilliant crown; who, having 
been defeated on the battle-field and having lost his black 
elephant, had fled ignominiously; and who, when (the 
Cola king) seized his elder sister along with (his) wife 26 
and cut off the nose of (his) mother, had returned in 
order to remove the disgrace (caused) thereby, and, 
having fought hard with the sword, had withered 27 in a 
hot battle; and the extremely brilliant crown of large 
jewels, (belonging to) 6rl Vallavan (Sri Vallabha) 
Madanarajan, who had come of the family of Kannaran 
(Krsna) and had become the proud king of flam.’ 28 
The Mahavamsa shows clearly that the years following 
the deportation of Mahinda V by Rajendra 

In the an d the annexation of ‘the whole of Ila- 

Mahavamsa. 

mandalam to the Cola empire a.d. 1017 
were filled with risings on the part of the Sinhalese subjects 
against the new Cola rulers followed by reprisals on their part. 
The independent testimony of the Ceylonese chronicle not 
only confirms the account of Rajadhiraja’s records in its essen- 
tial features, but furnishes much welcome assistance in fixing 
the chronology of events which, though spread over several 
years and apparently connected with more than one cam- 
paign, seem to have been grouped together to form a conve- 
nient section in the prasasti of Rajadhiraja. The Mahavamsa 
affirms 29 that the first outbreak of the opposition to the Cola 
rule in Ceylon occurred about twelve years after the capture 
of Mahinda V, when the Cola wanted to gain control of Mahin- 
da’s son Kassapa, and that this revolt centred round Kassapa; 
Kassapa and his confederates succeeded in maintaining a con- 
test for six months with the Cola forces said 
Six months to have been 95,000 strong; they ‘killed a 

vfkkamabahu great number of Damilas’ and compelled 

the rest to retire and take up ‘their abode 

C. 32 



250 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


as before in Pulatthinagara.’ Thereupon, Kassapa began to 
rule the south-eastern portion of the island of Ceylon, the 
division known as Rohana, under the title of Vikkamabahu. 30 
This war of six months preceding the accession of Vikkama- 
bahu took place about a.d. 1029, in the reign of Rajendra I; 
but there is nothing to show that Rajadhiraja actually took 
part in it, though he might have done so. 

The Cola inscriptions affirm that Vikkamabahu lost his 
life in the Cola war, 31 and that his diadem 
His death. fell into the hands of Rajadhiraja; the 

Mahavamsa, however, says that he suddenly died of a disease 
in the twelfth year of his reign a.d. 1041 in the midst of exten- 
sive preparations for a Cola war. It is possible that the Cola 
panegyric is more boastful than true, though his crown may 
have been among the booty of the Colas. 32 Despite Rajendra’s 
success against Mahinda V, therefore, the whole of Ceylon 
was held by the Colas only for a short while, a period of about 
a decade, after which the province of Rohana asserted its inde- 
pendence. and kept up a perpetual war against the Cdla pro- 
vince. In Rajadhiraja’s reign this struggle became very acute 
as every ruler that came after Vikkamabahu was actuated by 
the desire to expel the Damilas from Ceylon. Neglecting the 
eight days’ rule of Kitti (a.d. 1041) 33 the ‘mighty Mahalana- 
kitti’ who became king of Rohana, ‘was vanquished in his 
third year (a.d. 1044) in battle against the Colas, and with 
his own hand he cut his throat and so died a sudden death. 34 
Thereupon the Damilas took the chief treasures, such as the 
diadem and the like and sent them to the Monarch of the 
Cola land.’ It is not easy to identify Mahalanakitti with any 
of the four Sinhalese rulers mentioned by name in the Cola 
inscription quoted above. Vikkamapandu (a.d. 1044-47) was 
according to the Mahavamsa 35 the only son of Mahalanakitti, 
who, having left his country through fear and lived for a time 
in the Dulu country, returned to Rohana when he heard of 
the fate of his father, and was killed, after a short rule, in a 
fight with Jagatipala. The Cola inscription, on the contrary, 
implies that he was a Pandya prince who had once ruled over 
the southern Tamil country, and was compelled by Rajadhi- 
raja himself to abandon Southern India and seek his fortune 
in Ceylon, where he became king. As the Pandyan and Cey- 
lonese dynasties were at this time in close political and dynas- 



RESISTANCE IN CEYLON 


251 


tic alliance with each other and with the Keralas, and were 
united in their common opposition to Cola ascendancy, 36 we 
have perhaps to assume that the two accounts supplement 
each other. Vikrama Pandya had apparently a Sinhalese 
father and a Pandya mother : his early career in the Pandya 
country is represented, not quite accurately, by the Maha- 
vamsa, as a sojourn in the Dulu country, or possibly, this 
sojourn in the Dulu land was an interlude between the Pan- 
dyan and the Ceylonese phases of his career. Whatever that 
may be, there is no doubt that the Cola inscriptions and the 
Mahavamsa speak of one and the same prince here, and that 
while the Ceylonese account of the manner of his death is not 
contradicted by the Cola records, it is quite possible that his 
diadem also fell into the hands of the Colas as is claimed by 
them. Of Jagatlpala (a.d. 1047-51), the Mahavamsa says 37 
that he was ‘a sovereign’s son’ from Ayodhya, and that after 
coming to Ceylon he ‘slew Vikkamapandu in battle and ruled 
as a mighty man in Rohana for four years. Him also the Colas 
slew in battle and sent the Mahesi with her daughter and all 
the valuable property to the Cola kingdom.’ If we overlook 
the discrepancy about the place of origin, Kanyakubja accord- 
ing to the Cola records and Ayodhya according to the Mahd- 
vamsa, there is a striking similarity in the fortunes of Jagatl- 
pala of the chronicle and Vira-Salameghan of the inscriptions, 
and it may be concluded that we have here only one prince 
mentioned under two different names in our sources. 38 But 
this conclusion is not unassailable; the death of Vira-Salame- 
ghan is mentioned in an inscription dated towards the end of 
a.d- 1046; 39 the most critical study of the Mahavamsa has led 
to the conclusion that Jagatlpala began to rule in a.d. 1047 
and went on till four years later. So that, after all, the differ- 
ences in the names and the places of origin of these two princes 
may mean that they were two different persons who had little 
in common with each other besides having attained some cele- 
brity in Ceylon as opponents of the Cola regime and met very 
similar fates at the hands of their antagonists. How these 
adventurers from Northern India came to Ceylon in search of 
a career is not easy to explain satisfactorily at present. Sri 
Vallabha Madanaraja, the fourth and last of the princes men- 
tioned in the Cola inscriptions, has been identified with king 
Parakkama of the Mahavamsa who was slain in fight with the 
Colas. 40 This identification is also to be accepted with caution. 



252 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Madanaraja was a Vallabha (of the line of Kannara) by des- 
cent; Parakkama, on the contrary, was the son of the Pandu 
king, i.e., Vikkamapandu. Moreover, the death of Parakkama 
occurred about a.d. 1053, nearly seven years after the date of 
Ra jadhira j a’s inscription (a.d. 1046) in which Madanaraja is 
mentioned. 41 

This comparison of the epigraphical account of the Cey- 
lonese war in the records of Rajadhiraja 
Summary. with the events as chronicled in the Mdha- 

vamsa thus points to the need for caution in working the two 
accounts into a continuous story of the relations between the 
Cola empire and that part of Ceylon which was maintaining 
a vigorous struggle for its independence against great odds. 
Only two of the kings in the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja can 
be recognised in the Mdhavamsa viz., Vikramabahu and Vik- 
rama-Pandya. Vira-Salamegha and Sri Vallabha Madanaraja 
are known only to the Cola inscriptions, but apparently are 
not mentioned in the Mdhavamsa. On the contrary, Jagatipala 
and Parakkama of the Mdhavamsa, who figured in the later 
stages of the war of independence and laid down their lives 
in that war, do not find a place in the Cola inscriptions. 42 The 
inscriptions of Rajadhiraja’s successor Rajendra II show that 
he too had a hand in the suppression of the Ceylonese risings. 
Records of his fourth year, 43 a.d. 1055, state that ‘he despatch- 
ed an army to Ceylon, where the king Vira-Salamegha was 
decapitated and the two sons of the Ceylon king Manabharana 
were taken prisoners.’ Later records of Rajendradeva men- 
tion only Vira-Salamegha. 44 Rajendradeva’s claim is proved 
by the presence of an inscription of his reign at Sangili-Kana- 
darava in Ceylon. 45 Despite Vira-Salamegha being called 
‘King of the Kalingas of the strong army,’ 46 there is no reason 
to distinguish him from the ‘Kannakiicciyarkavalan’ of the 
Rajadhiraja inscriptions. Surviving the disgrace inflicted on 
the members of his family, his sister and mother and wife, by 
the forces of Rajadhiraja, and the defeat in the ‘hot battle’ 
that followed thereafter when he sought to avenge the dis- 
grace, this unfortunate prince apparently fell a victim to 
another Cola inroad possibly led by Rajendradeva some years 
later. 47 The identity of Manabharana, the king of the Ceylon- 
ese, whose two sons were captured by Rajendra, is not easy 
to make out, though the suggestion may be offered that he 



COLA RULE IN CEYLON 


253 


was no other than the king who joined the confederacy of 
three southern kings whose opposition to Cola rule in the 
Pandya country was suppressed by Rajadhiraja in the life- 
time of his father, in one of his early campaigns. 48 It may be 
observed that Indian coins found in Ceylon 
Cola coins and include issues of Rajadhiraja and Rajen- 
Ceylon ti0nS ^ dra, 49 and that Cola inscriptions found in 
Ceylon, though not numerous or well pre- 
served, carry us right to the end of the period covered in this 
chapter. 50 We may, therefore, conclude that the bulk of the 
island of Ceylon constituted an administrative division of the 
Cola empire, while the south-western part of the island, called 
Rohana in the Mahavamsa, kept up an incessant warfare for 
the restoration of Sinhalese independence. Prince Kitti who 
assumed the title Vijayabahu in a.d. 1058 was the leader of 
this effort. The Mahavamsa and the inscriptions of Virarajen- 


Repressive 

policy. 


dra give some account of it. 51 Like all con- 
querors, the Colas were only exasperated 
by the most natural desire of the Sinhalese 


to be rid of them, and seem often to have adopted savage 
methods of repression such as transportation, decapitation and 
mutilation, even against the women of the royal family of 
Ceylon. After the accession of Kulottunga to the Cola throne 


, , in a.d. 1070, Vijayabahu I succeeded at last 

And its failure. , . , . . , . 

where so many of his predecessors had 

failed and restored the independence of Ceylon; a detailed 
account of the steps leading to the success of Vijayabahu be- 
longs to the reign of Kulottunga. 


A second war against Somesvara was undertaken by 
Rajadhiraja between a.d. 1044 and 1046. 

Second war The Manimangalam inscription 52 of 3 

cfjukyas. December, a.d. 1046 gives a short account 

of this campaign stating that the Cola king 
defeated in battle several subordinate chieftains 53 of the 
Calukya forces, and destroyed the palace of the Calukyas in 
the town of Kampili. Other inscriptions, of which the earliest 
is dated in the thirtieth year of Rajadhiraja, furnish some ad- 
ditional information about what followed the destruction of 
the palace at Kampili. 54 Another engagement, said to be the 
third of its kind, followed at Pundur, described as a kadaka- 
nuinagar or cantonment city, on the left bank of the Krsna 



254 THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

river, in which several Telugu chieftains including the broth- 
ers of Telinga Viccaya, his mother and son, vassals of Sbmes- 
vara, were made prisoners of war together with numberless 
women; thereupon, the city of Pundur was sacked by the Cola 
army and razed to the ground, its site being ploughed with 
asses and sowed with vardtikai, a kind of coarse millet; finally, 
the large palace at Mannandippai was consigned to the flames, 
and a pillar of victory erected, bearing the emblem of the tiger. 
These occurrences, no doubt considerably exaggerated in the 
partial report of the Cola records, must have taken place be- 
fore a.d. 1048. 

Other records of the same period 55 give more details of 
this campaign. They mention the hot battle at ‘Pundi with the 
swelling waters’ in which Viccaya 56 fled in fear, abandoning 
his father and mother to the mercies of the Cola army; when 
Ahavamalla, in his fear, sent messengers (for opening nego- 
tiations), they were rudely handled by the Cola and were 
forced to carry on their persons inscriptions proclaiming the 
flight of Ahavamalla in fear; then, followed by his forces, the 
Cola took his herd of elephants for bathing them in the three 
bathing ghats (turai) — Siruturai. Perundurai and Daiva- 
bhimakasi, and engraved the emblem of the fierce tiger on 
hills marked by the boar sign of the enemy, and planted the 
pillar of victory; 57 he played games 58 with the kings who pros- 
trated themselves at his feet, and raised aloft the banner of 
charity with that of the tiger distributing among the needy 
the ancient treasures captured from the enemy; he then de- 
feated several leaders of enemy forces such as the Nulamba, 
Kalidasa, Camunda, Kommaya and Villavaraja, beheaded the 
Gurjara king, sparing only those who sought his protection 
and restoring to them their diadems and their positions. At 
this point some records 59 introduce particulars not found in 
others. Though the gaps in the text are an obstacle to their 
full understanding, their trend is quite clear and they record 
the manner in which the messengers of Ahavamalla were 
rough handled. Two persons who accompanied a Perkadai, 
a high Calukya official, were made the media of a studied and 
barbarous insult to the Calukyas— one of them being com- 
pelled to wear a woman’s dress and the other having his head 
shaven so as to show five tufts; then they were named ‘the 
miserable Ahavamalli and Ahavamalla’ and sent adrift along 



SACK OF KALYANAPURA 255 

with the Perkadai. The ancient city of Kalyanapuram was 
sacked soon afterwards, and its royal palace razed to the 
ground after its guards had been overpowered. And Rajadhi- 
raja assumed in that city the title of Vijayarajendra and per- 
formed a virabhiseka; this is confirmed by another inscription 
of a later date in Rajadhiraja’s reign with a unique prasasti 
beginning tirukkodiyodu , 60 This record lays stress on the 
victory against Ahavamalla followed by the virabhiseka and 
the assumption of the Vijayarajendra title. Again, at Dara- 
suram in the Tanjore district can be seen even to-day a fine 
image of a dvdrapalaka very different in the style of its work- 
manship from similar Cola images, and bearing the inscription: 

1. Svasti Sri Udaiyar Sri Vijayar&jendra-Devar 

2. Kalyanapuravi Erittu Koduvanda Tuvarapdlakar 

i.e. The door-keeper brought by Udaiyar Sri Vijayarajendra- 
deva after burning Kalyanapuram. 61 

There is, however, no mention in Somesvara’s inscriptions 
either of this campaign of Rajadhiraja or of the later war 
which, as we shall see, led to his death on the battle field of 
^ ^ Koppam, 62 and for all the vaunted successes 

of the Colas, the Calukyas seem to have re- 
tained their power unbroken. The provenance of the inscrip- 
tions of Som§svara, of which several are dated records, shows 
that the extent of the Calukyan empire on the side of the Tunga- 
bhadra continued undiminished. From the Hadagalli taluq of 
the Bellary district comes an inscription 63 of Trailokyamalla- 
deva (Somesvara I) dated (Saka 968) early in a.d. 1047 record- 
ing a gift by the chieftain Kalidasa, whose name figures also 
among the Telugu princelings 64 repulsed by the Cola troops 
in one of the numerous fights of the time. Two other records 65 
from the same region are dated in the next year, Saka 969, of 
which one records a gift of land to a Visnu temple by Maha- 
mandalesvara Gandaradityarasa, ‘lord of Mahismatlpura,’ 
ruling the Sindavadi 1000, Bennevuru 12 and Nuruganda as a 
vassal of Somesvara. This chieftain may perhaps be identified 
with Kandar-dinakaran of the Cola inscriptions. 66 Even if 
we do not accept the rhapsodies of Bilhana over Somesvara’s 
conquest of Kanci or Vikramaditya’s digvijaya , we must as- 
sume that the repeated incursions of the Colas into Calukyan 
territory, however annoying to the king and detrimental to the 



256 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


happiness of his feudatories and subjects, resulted in no per- 
manent loss of territory. On the other hand, the bulk of the 
fighting is on Calukyan territory, and in the course of the wars 
many large cities seem to have suffered considerable damage 
from the destructive fury of the invader. The aim of the Colas 
was apparently to reduce the Calukyas to political subjection 
such as that of the Pandya, Kerala and Vengl kingdoms in this 
period. In this endeavour they failed totally. It would seem 
moreover that Somesvara succeeded in extending his influence, 
at least temporarily, over Vengl. His Mulgund inscription 67 
dated a.d. 1053 speaks of one of his sons, Somesvara-deva, 
ruling over Belvola 300 and Puligere 300, as bearing the title 
Venglpura-varesvara. And there is found in Draksarama, as 
already noted, a record of the same king 68 dated two years 
later (§aka 977) registering a gift by a daughter of one of his 
ministers, Narayana Bhatta by name. 


Rajadhiraja undertook another expedition against the 
Calukya in which he was accompanied by 
War continued. y OUn g er brother Rajendra, whom he had 

chosen as heir-apparent in preference to his sons who, though 
not mentioned by name, are said to have occupied fairly high 
positions in the administration of the empire. 69 We get a 
vivid and obviously true description of the occurrences in this 
campaign from the records of Rajendra II. The earliest men- 
tion of these events is in a record 70 of his second year a.d. 1054; 
more details are given in the Manimangalam record of his 
fourth year, a.d. 1055. This inscription records 71 that the Cola 
king sought an occasion for war, invaded the Rattamandalam 
and began ravaging the country: the proud Calukya Ahava- 
malla became furious when he heard of this, and marching out 
with his forces he met the Cola in pitched battle at Koppam, 
a celebrated tirtha on the ‘Great River’. Fleet identified it 
with Khidrapur on the right bank of the 

Koppam. ° f river ab ° Ut thirty miles east b y sout h from 

Kolhapur. 72 That the Krsna is the Great 
River par excellence and that Rajendradeva advanced to 
Kolhapur soon after the battle are factors in favour of this 
identification. But Kopbal on the Hire-halla (great river) 
near Maski is now considered the more likely scene of the 
battle 73 which was long and fiercely fought on either side. 
For determining its exact course we have to combine infor- 



BATTLE OF KOPPAM 


257 


mation furnished by some of Rajendradeva’s later inscrip- 
tions 74 with that of the Manimangalam record mentioned 
above. In the early stages of the battle, Rajadhiraja himself 
led the fight, Rajendradeva apparently holding himself in 
reserve. At this stage, the Calukya forces concentrated on 
the elephant on which the Cola king was riding and wounded 
him mortally, so that he ‘went up into the sky and became a 
sojourner in the country of Indra, where he was welcomed 
by the women of the sky.’ Then the vast ocean-like army of 
the Kuntalas dashed themselves against the Cola forces which, 
unable to withstand the onslaught, broke up and began to re- 
treat in disorder. At this stage, Rajendradeva entered the 
fray shouting out to his retreating forces: ‘Fear not,’ and 

pressed forward on his elephant like very Death against the 
Karnataka forces, restored order in his army and won a bril- 
liant success by further fighting. 75 Once more, the enemy con- 
centrated on the Cola king’s elephant, and ‘the shower of 
(Ahavamalla’s) straight arrows pierced the forehead of his 
elephant, his royal thigh, and (his) shoulders which resem- 
bled hillocks,’ and many warriors who had mounted the ele- 
phant with him perished in the action. But Rajendra was 
more fortunate than his brother; he succeeded in putting to 
death several leaders of the Calukyan army including Jaya- 
simha, the brother of the Calukya 76 , Pulakesin, Dasapanman 
and Nanni-Nulumban. At last, ‘the Salukki was defeated, — 
with Vanniya-Revan 77 , Tuttan, (who had) a powerful army, 
Kundamayan, whose army spoke (i.e., threatened) death, 
and other princes, — fled, trembling vehemently, with dishevel- 
led hair, turning (his) back, looking round, and tiring (his) 
legs, and was forced to plunge into the Western ocean.’ The 
elephants and horses and camels, the victorious banner of the 
boar and other insignia of royalty, together with the peerless 
Sattiyavvai, Sangappai and all the other queens, a crowd of 
women and many other things abandoned by Ahavamalla on 
the field, became the booty of the Cola king. Rajendra then 
did a thing not known before, 78 and crowned himself king on 
the battle-field, when the wounds he had 

Rajendra’s received in the fight were still fresh on his 

coronation. , - ,, . 

body. According to some of the inscrip- 
tions, 79 Rajendra pressed on to Kolhapur, where he planted a 
jayastambha. before he returned to his capital Gangapurl. 80 


C. 33 



258 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Such is the account of this celebrated fight at Koppam as nar- 
rated in the Cola inscriptions. 81 

The Calukya inscriptions of the reign of Somesvara tell 
us nothing of the battle of Koppam, and 
Calukya specific references to his warfare with the 

s"len r t P on 0nS Colas are few - In Saka 981 (expired) he 

Koppam, had returned from a conquest of the south- 

ern countries and a victory over the Cola, 
and was camping in the Sindavadi country, 82 a province ruled 
by a Mahamandalesvara Ciddana Cola-Maharaja. In Saka 987 
Visnuvardhana Vijayaditya was encamped 
in Somesvara’s a t Arasiyakere on his way to the conquest 
of the south under orders from the king. 83 
Bilhana’s account has, as has been pointed out already, appa- 
rently no relation to facts and seems to be pure fabrication. 
Shortly after the close of Somesvara’s reign, however, we get 
two inscriptions, 84 both dated about a.d. 1071, giving an 
account of the Cola invasion and the death 
later° Ugh n0t °f Rajadhiraja. Though the date is late and 

the Cola king is not named, it is easy to 
infer from the Cola inscriptions that the transactions record- 
ed here relate to the war that led to the battle of Koppam 
and the death of Rajadhiraja. 85 The vigorous language em- 
ployed by these records against the Cola shows that the 
silence of the epigraphs of Somesvara’s reign is really due to 
a reluctance to record publicly in his life-time unfortunate 
events that caused so much misery and suffering in his coun- 
try at the hands of the foreign invader. The mahapataka 
(great sinner) Tamilian known as Pandya-Cola, we are told, 
took to an evil course (nele gettu ) and abandoning the ances- 
tral observances of his family, entered the Belvola country, 
burned several temples including Jinalayas erected by Ganga- 
perumanadi, and was promptly punished for his wicked deeds 
by losing his life in battle and yielding his head to Somes- 
vara I. The Cola account of the war, we may therefore con- 
clude, is not by any means a greatly overdrawn picture of 
their achievement on this occasion. 

From the maimer of his death Rajadhiraja came to be 
known as ‘the king who died on the back 

ti.leTSdhSa. ° f an elephant ' and he is 50 st ? led in the 

inscriptions of his successors. 86 From the 



RAJADHIRAJA 1 


259 


time he was chosen as heir-apparent by his father to the day 
when he laid down his life on the field of 
A gieat warrior. K 0 p pamj Rajadhiraja led the life of a war- 
rior king and led many campaigns in person. His record 
strikes one as that of a bom fighter and his warlike energy 
found full scope in the task of maintaining intact an over- 
grown empire that had risen on the ruin of old ruling families 
which never reconciled themselves to subjection to the Colas. 
Some of this fighting, like the fatal expedition that led to 
Koppam, was of his own seeking. Rajadhiraja was first and 
foremost a soldier, and possibly his great military talent 
formed the reason for his being preferred for the succession 
against an elder brother of his. His performance of the asva- 
medha apparently in his father’s fife-time goes a long way to 
confirm this view. 

Briefly and without much detail, Rajadhiraja’s prasastis 
tell us that he employed his father’s brother, his own brothers, 
elder and younger, and his sons, in important offices of state 
and constituted them into subordinate rulers of particular 
regions. The star of Rajadhiraja’s nativitiy was Purva-Phal- 
guni. 87 Gangaikonda-colapuram was his capital. 88 His queens 
do not figure as prominently in his records as in those of other 
reigns; Trailokyam Udaiyar was the title, 
rather than the name, of one of them 89 
who, if she was the same as the nambirdttiydr mentioned in an 
inscription of the third year of Rajendra II, 90 may be taken to 
have survived her husband. Besides the title Vijayarajendra 
assumed by him at Kalyanapuram, Rajadhiraja had other sur- 
names like Vlrarajendra-varman, 91 Ahava- 
malla-kulantaka, 92 and Kalyanapurangonda- 
sola. 93 Mention is made of a spiritual preceptor ( gurudevar ) of 
the king by name Adhikarikal Parasaryan Vasudevanarayanan, 
also called Ulagalanda-sola Bramamarayan; 94 one wonders if 
Ulagalanda-sola was also a title of Rajadhiraja, and whether a 
revenue survey was undertaken, in his reign, of a part of the 
country. 95 Among the feudatories of Raja- 
Feudatories. dhiraja mentioned in his records may be 

noticed Dandanayakan Solan Kumaran Parantaka Marayan 
alias Rajadhiraja Nila-gangaraiyar 96 ; a certain Pillaiyar Sola- 
vallabha-deva whose wife was called Pancavan-mahadeviyar 97 ; 
Dandanayaka Appimayya, 98 governor of Maharajavadi 7000, 


Queens. 


Titles. 



2ti0 * 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


who had Valluru in the Cuddapah district as the seat of his 
government, and who may or may not be the same as Rajaraja 
BrahmacLhiraja 99 who is mentioned in the very next year as 
ruler of the same province; and Pillaiyar Visnuvardhana-deva, 
doubtless Rajaraja I of Vengx, whose queen Ammangadevi 
was the daughter of Rajendra I and the sister of Rajadhiraja, 
and who is said to have presented, in a.d. 1050, three hundred 
Rajaraja-madas, gold coins of the Vengi kingdom, to the 
temple at Tiruvaiyaru in the Tanjore district. 100 There was 
also Senapati Rajendrasola Mavalivanarayar, an official who 
apparently took his title from Rajendra I under whom his 
public career might have begun, and who made a large endow- 
ment for higher education, of which more will be said in 
another place. 


Turning now to an account of the reign of Rajendradeva, 
Ra endra II w ^ ose independent rule must have com- 

jen ra menced some time in a.d. 1054-5, his inscrip- 

tions contain, like those of his predecessor, a variety of forms 
of his prasastis. The shortest form is a summary narration of 

TT . his successes beginning Irattapddi and found 

His prasastis. . , . . . . . 

m his records from his second year 101 on- 
wards. Having much in common with this, but slightly more 
elaborate, is the form which begins tiru ( magal ) maruviya 
also dating from his second year. 102 But the chief prasasti of 
the reign is the long account beginning tirumadu (or madar) 
puviyenum, first appearing in the fourth year, 103 and under- 
going a revision in a subsequent edition, so to say, about the 
ninth year. 104 The main differences between the two forms in 
the treatment of the celebrated battle of Koppam have been 
dealt with in our account of that fight. The other points in 
which the later version differs from the earlier are: the omis- 
sion of all other particulars of the Ceylon war except the 
mention of Vira Salameghan; the definite statement that after 


proclaiming himself king on the battle-field in an unprece- 
dented manner, Rajendra returned to Gangapuri; a slightly 
different account of the disposition of the administrative 
places held by the members of the royal family, given not at 
the beginning of the record as in the earlier version, but at a 
later stage; and an account, altogether new, of a fresh war 
with the Calukyas. 



PRINCES AS OFFICIALS 


261 


Both the Kalingattupparani and the Vikramasdlan-uld 
make pointed reference to Rajendra’s part 
His part at in battle of Koppam. The former records 

Koppam. that the king fought fiercely in the battle 

and saved ‘the world’ by his success and celebrated his coro- 
nation on the field of battle. 105 The ula, with intelligible 
hyperbole, says 106 that with the aid of a single elephant he 
captured a thousand of the enemy at Koppam. 

Among the king’s relatives installed in different posts in 
the empire, the Manimangalam inscription 
Employment of 0 f the fourth year mentions no fewer than 
0 {g ces thirteen persons, — a paternal uncle {siriya- 

tatai) of the king, four younger brothers of 
his, six sons and two grandsons. 107 The later records of the 
reign give a shorter list of only six persons so employed com- 
prising the paternal uncle of the earlier record, his son — a new 
figure, only three of the four younger brothers mentioned 
before, and one son of the king Rajendra-solan; why the rest 
are omitted it is not easy to explain. One wonders if they had 
all died in the interval, or were found unfit even for subordi- 
nate employment. There seems to be no evidence whatever 
by which this can be settled. The fact de- 
1° ^ serves to be noted, however, in view of 

later years. somewhat hasty statements which, on very 

slender evidence, fasten on Kulottunga I a 
series of cold-blooded political murders calculated to clear 
his way to the Cola throne. 108 The date of the shorter list 
would fall about a.d. 1061, nine years before the accession of 
Kulottunga. Among the titles conferred on these members of 
the royal family, some like Cola-Pandyan, Cola-Gangan and 
Cola-Keralan perhaps connoted the charge of the administra- 
tion of the particular provinces named; others seem to have 
been merely titles of personal distinction giving no idea of the 
spheres of their duties, if any. Such titles are Irumadi-solan, 
Karikala-sdlan, Uttama-solan, Vijayalayan, and even names 
like Sola-Ayoddhirajan and Sola-Kannakucciyan. Only the 
Cola-Pandya viceroys seem to have left behind a number of 
inscriptions of their own in the land over which they held 
sway; but even in their case, it is extremely difficult to iden- 
tify the particular viceroy from his records, the first viceroy 
Jatavarman Sundara alone excepted. 109 



262 THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

Rajendra’s son, also called Rajendra-sola in the records 
noticed above, was perhaps chosen heir- 
Rajamahendra. apparent some time about a.d. 1059, and 
assumed the title Rajakesari Rajamahendra. One inscrip- 
tion 110 of his third year claims a victory for him against Aha- 
vamalla at Mudakkaru, and furnishes valuable confirmation of 
the events relating to another Calukya war narrated in more 
detail in the inscriptions of the ninth year of his father. We 
learn from these latter 111 that the Calukya, anxious to wipe 
out the disgrace that befell him on the field of Koppam, ad- 
vanced with numerous forces led by Dandanayaka Valadeva 
and other chieftains of the army, and a battle ensued on the 
banks of the Mudakkaru (winding river) in which the Dan- 
Battle of danayaka and his followers fell, Irugaiyan 

Mudakkaru. and others were forced to retreat together 

with their king and the proud Vikkalan, unable to resist the 
vigorous attack of the Cola forces. The inscription of Raja- 
mahendra says, likewise, that by a war-elephant, he caused 
Ahavamalla to turn his back on the Mudakkaru. As it often 
happened that in the Calukya wars several Cola princes 
fought together on the same field, the inscriptions of succes- 
sive rulers also often supplement each other. It is possible, 
therefore, that the future VIrarajendra was 
SangTmam? KU ^ al ~ also P resent °n this field; and if that was 
so, this battle must be treated as identical 
with that of Kudal-Sangamam of the records of VIrarajendra. 
A long description of this battle of Kudal-Sangamam, with 
some details not found in Rajendra’s records, is given in Vira- 
rajendra’s inscriptions even of the second year 112 (a.d. 1063-4) . 
It seems hardly likely that two first-class engagements took 
place on the same field in less than three or four years. In 
some of his later inscriptions 113 occur expressions which imply 
that VIrarajendra had taken part in the fight at Mudakkaru 
before he became king, and that, in consequence, he came to 
be called Irattaraja-kula-kalan. If this view is correct, at least 
three Colas were present at the battle of Kudal-Sangamam 
and took part in the fight: the king Rajendradeva, the heir- 
apparent Rajamahendra, and the king’s brother Vlra-Cola 
Karikala (VIrarajendra), whose achievements came to be 
recorded in his inscriptions in detail when, after the death of 
Rajamahendra, he became heir-apparent and later king. 



KODAL - SANG AM AM 


263 


The account of the battle of Kudal-Sangamam and its 
Description of antecedents given in the early inscriptions 
battle in Vlrarajen- vj rar§j§ndra is as follows: 11 * 
dra s inscriptions. 

‘ (He) drove from the battle-field in Gangapadi into 
the Tungabhadra the Mahasamantas, whose strong hands 
(wielded) cruel bows, along with Vikkalan who fought 
under (his) banner at the head of the battle . 115 (He) 
attacked and destroyed the irresistible, great and power- 
ful army which he (viz., Vikkalan) had again despatched 
into Vengai-nadu; fought the Madandanayakan Camunda- 
rajan and cut off his head ; 116 and severed the nose from 
the face of his (viz., Camundaraja’s) only daughter, called 
Nagalai, (who was) the queen of Irugaiyan and who 
resembled a peacock in beauty. 

‘ The enemy, full of hatred, met and fought against 
(him) yet a third time, hoping that (his former) defeats 
would be revenged. (The king) defeated countless 
samantas, together with these (two) sons of Ahavamalla, 
who were called Vikkalan and Singanan, at Kudal- 
Sangamam on the turbid river. Having sent the brave 
van-guard in advance, and having himself remained close 
behind with the kings allied to him, he agitated by means 
of a single mast elephant that army (of the enemy) , which 
was arrayed (for battle), (and which) resembled the 
northern ocean. In front of the banner troop , 117 (he) cut 
to pieces Singan, (the king) of warlike Kosalai ; along 
with the furious elephants of his van-guard. While 

Kesava-dandanayaka, Kettarasan, Marayan of great 
strength, the strong Pottarayan and (Ireccayan) were 
fighting, (he) shouted “ (Follow) Muvendi, (who wears) 
a garland of gold ! ” and cut to pieces many samantas, 
who were deprived of weapons of war. Then Maduvanan, 
who was in command, fled ; Vikkalan fled with dishevelled 
hair ; Singanan fled, (his) pride (and) courage forsaking 
(him) ; Annalan and all others descended from the male 
elephant on which they were fighting in battle, and fled ; 
Ahavamalla, too, to whom (they were) allied, fled before 
them. (The king) stopped his fast furious elephant, put 
on the garland of victory, (seized) his (viz., Ahava- 
malla’s) wives, his family treasures, conches, parasols, 



264 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


trumpets, drums, canopies , 118 white camaras, the hoar- 
banner, the ornamental arch ( makara-torana ) , the female 
elephant (called) Puspaka , 119 and a herd of war- 
elephants, along with a troop of prancing horses, and, 
amidst (general) applause, put on the crown of victory, 
(set with) jewels of red splendour.’ 

Irugaiyan is said in Rajendradeva’s records to have fled 
with Ahavamalla, Vikramaditya and others 
Compared to from the battle of Mudakkaru ; his wife 
records RS ^ ndiaS suffered mutilation in the Vengl fight of 
Vlrarajendra with Camundaraya just be- 
fore the battle of Kudal-Sangamam. And Vlrarajendra is said 
to have ‘ seen the back of the hostile Salukki ’ at Mudakkaru 120 
before he became king, and there seems to be no other cam- 
paign narrated in Vlrarajendra’ s inscriptions that will explain 
this last reference unless it be the battle of Kudal-Sangamam, 
described in such detail and said to have taken place before 
his second year. It is difficult to resist the conclusion, already 
suggested, that the Mudakkaru of the records of Rajendra- 
deva and Rajamahendra and the Kudal-Sangamam of the early 
records 121 of Vlrarajendra refer to one and the same engage- 
ment. The same event is apparently once at least mentioned 
under the name of Mudakkaru in the inscriptions of Vira- 
rajendra himself. 

Where Rajendra’s records simply state that Ahavamalla 
desired to avenge himself for the defeat at Koppam and ad- 
vanced in great force, those of Vlrarajendra show us the ex- 
tent of the progress made by the Calukyas by recording the 
necessity for chasing them through Gangapadi to the banks of 
the Tungabhadra and thereby indicate how little the Calukyas 
had suffered in the actual extent of the territory ruled by 
them even after Koppam. They also imply, by what they 
say about Camundaraya’s movement against Vengl, that an 
important, but unsuccessful, attempt was made by the 
Calukyas to divide the attention of the Colas between two 
fronts. This is noteworthy as evidence of the interest of the 
Western Calukyas in Vengl apart from any 
of T vlngj aCe complications arising with regard to the 

succession after the death of Rajaraja- 
narendra . 122 We have already had some evidence, though 



END OF RAJENDRA II 265 

slight, of the eagerness of the Western Calukyas to court the 
friendship of their Eastern cousins. In fact the possession of 
Vengi made the Colas formidable to the Western Calukyas; 
the Colas well understood the importance of Vengi to them 
and took care to marry their princesses to the rulers of Vengi 
for generations together and otherwise to keep on friendly 
terms with them. For the same reason, the Western Calukyas, 
who looked upon Vengi as a lost dominion, sought to build up 
their power there. 123 

Kudal-Sangamam must be located at the junction of the 
Tungabhadra and Krsna rivers. 124 The first 
Kudal-Sangamam. battle at this place, the one with which we 
are now concerned, took place after the 
Calukyas were driven across the Gangapadi up to the banks 
of the Tungabhadra, and after the failure of an expedition 
sent into Vengi by the Calukyas. On a later occasion, when 
the Calukya failed to meet VTrarajendra at the same place as 
previously arranged, the Cola planted a pillar of victory on 
the banks of the Tungabhadra before he retired. 125 The Sanga- 
mam meant by the inscriptions must, therefore, be some con- 
fluence of rivers on the course of the Tungabhadra. The choice 
lies between Kudali at the junction of the Tung! and Bhadra 
in Mysore, or that of the Tungabhadra and the Krsna. While 
the name Kudali points to the former as the site of Kudal- 
Sangamam, the Vengi interlude seems to make the latter more 
probable ; a satisfactory identification of Kandai or Karandai, 
where the Cola awaited the Calukya for about a month on the 
second occasion, may decide the choice more definitely. 126 

The latest regnal year in Rajendra’s records is the 
twelfth, 127 corresponding to a.d. 1063. He 

Close of Rajen- was succeeded by Viraraj§ndra already 
dra’s reign. , J " 

heir-apparent for sometime after the death 
of Rajamahendra. Gangapuri continued to be the Cola capi- 
tal under Rajendra II and is mentioned as such in an inscrip- 
tion from Kanyakumari, 128 while another from Kuttalam 
makes mention of a big bazaar within the fort of this capital 
city. 129 Of the queens of Rajendra, only one is mentioned by 
name in his records, a Kilanadigal. His daughter Madhuran- 
taki was the wife of the Eastern Calukya prince Rajendra II, 
afterwards Kulottunga I. 130 Among the feudatories of Rajen- 


C. 34 



266 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


dradeva II, prominent mention is made in his records of the 
Milada chieftain Narasimhavarman who is said to have ruled 
Miladu 2000 after his abhiseka and coronation under this 
title. 131 Others were Senapati Araiyan Kadakkan-gonda- 
solan, 132 and Senapati Jayamuri-nadalvan who is mentioned 
in an inscription from Ceylon, 133 and who may be identical 
with Araiyan Rajarajan alias Virarajendra Jayamurinadal- 
van of another inscription from Karuvur 134 

The Vikramasolan-ula 135 records that Rijamahendra made 
for Ranganatha, the god of Srirangam, a serpent-couch set 
with many precious stones ; and the Koyilolugu, a late work 
on the antiquities and traditions of the Srirangam temple, 
though it knows nothing of the serpent-couch, mentions 136 
many structural alterations in the temple as the work of 
Rajamahendra. commemorated in the name Rajamahendran- 
tiruvldi. An inscription 137 of the twelfth year of Kulottunga I 
from the Salem district states that in Rajamahendra’s reign 
there was a land revenue assessment in Kollimalai-nadu. The 
name of Rajamahendra’s queen. LSkamahadsvi, seems to be 
preserved in a fragmentary inscription from Cidambaram. 138 


For a study of the reign of Rajakesari Virarajendra I, 
(accession a.d. 1062-3), we possess a con- 
Vharajendra. siderabe number of inscriptions with pra- 
sastis in two main forms and in various redactions, which fit 
into one another with remarkable correctness. 139 The longer 
prasasti beginning Tiruvalar-tiral-puyattu gives in its earlier 
form a list of the king’s relations on whom he conferred 
various official positions, 140 but omits this list in its later edi- 
tions. 141 The prasasti grows in length as the reign advances, 
and new events are incorporated in it. The shorter introduc- 
tion beginning Virame-tunahidgavum passes through many 
changes and attains in the seventh year an altogether new 
cast, and records facts not otherwise known. These changes 
will be noticed subsequently when they are of any historical 
importance. The Kalingattupparani and the Vikramasolan- 
nla record no events of the reign of Vlraraiendra other than 
the battle of Knclal-Savcmmam. The Takkaiidgapparani . 142 on 
the other hand, mentions his friendship with Vikramaditya VI. 



VIRARAJENDRA'S WARS 


267 


Early in his reign, the king appointed 143 Madhurantaka, 
described as his son tan-tirup-pudalvan , to rule over Tondai- 
mandalam with the title Colendra ; another Gangaikonda- 
sola, also called son, tindiral maindan, was made the Cola- 
Pandya viceroy over the Pandya country. It is difficult to 
decide, in the light of subsequent events, whether the terms 
pudalvan and maindan are to be understood literally or only 
as terms of endearment applied to mere feudatories- Nor, 
on the former assumption, can it be decided if either of them 
was the son who was the brother-in-law of the Calukya 
Vikramaditya VI and who had a short rule, on VIrarajendra's 
death, as Parakesari Adhirajendra. The kings’s elder brother 
AJavandan and a certain Mudikon^a-soian also received titles 
and recognition ; but though they too seem to have been 
placed in administrative charge of parts of the empire, the 
inscriptions do not tell us what exactly were the areas so 
entrusted to them. 

The early wars of Virarajendra against the Western 
Calukyas, which resulted in the battle of 
Early Wars. Kudal-Sangamam so graphically described 

in the inscription of his second year from Tiruvenkadu, 144 . 
were fought by him, as already observed, perhaps before he 
came to the throne or was even recognised as the successor 
to his elder brother Rajendradeva. The bitterness that 
characterised the Calukya wars of this period becomes clear 
from the eagerness of Virarajendra to count up every little 
victory gained by him or his lieutenants as a personal affront 
to Somesvara I Ahavamalla. ‘ In perfect accordance with 
the longer redaction of the introduction, in which the battle 
of Kudal-Sangamam is stated to have been the third encounter 
with the Calukyas, the Tirunamanallur inscription of the 
fourth year attributes to Virarajendra I the biruda “who saw 
the back of Ahavamalla three times .’” 145 The Kanyakumari 
inscription also gives a general description of the battle of 
Kudal-Sangamam, not very different in character . 146 In the 
Karuvur inscription of the fourth year , 147 we hear for the first 
time that Virarajendra killed the king of Pottappi, the Kerala, 
the younger brother of king Jananatha of Dhara, and Vira- 
kesari, the son of the Pandya Sri Vallabha. The Manimanga- 
lam inscription 148 of the next year adds to this list an expedi- 



268 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


tion against Udagai and the Keralas, from which Virarajendra 
returned after collecting a large tribute in the form of 
elephants. Whether these achievements, altogether obscure 
in their nature and origin, were part of the continuous war 
with the Calukyas that forms the central feature of this reign, 
or were minor punitive expeditions which had nothing to do 
with this war, there is no doubt that the ‘ hot battle ’ which 
is next mentioned as having taken place by previous engage- 
ment on the banks of a river, of unknown name, did form 
part of the Cdla-Calukya hostilities. For in this battle seven 
Calukya generals who are named and the kings of the Gangas, 
the Nulumbas, the Kadavas and the Vaidumbas are said to have 
suffered decapitation; and before the Cola king could get their 
heads nailed to the gates of his capital, Gangaikonda-cola- 
puram , 149 the Calukya king, stung by the intolerable disgrace 
that had befallen his troops on this field, was roused to a 
greater effort against his Cola opponent. Somesvara, we learn, 
Kudal- reproached himself saying : ‘ It is much 

Sangamam better to die than to live in disgrace,’ and 

again- wrote and despatched a letter to the Cola 

king in which he assigned as the field for the next battle the 
very spot at Kudal whence his sons and himself had fled 
before in utter rout, and declared that whoever did not come, 
through fear, to the appointed field, should thenceforth be no 
kings but outcastes 150 who had incurred disgrace in war. This 
message from the Calukya, when it was delivered to Vira- 
rajendra, greatly pleased him. Accordingly he set out for the 
fight, and awaited at Kandai the arrival of the Calukya king 
for one full month beyond the date fixed by him. The Calukya 
ran away and hid himself in the Western ocean ; and the 
Cola king subdued all resistance in Irattapadi by putting 
to flight Devanatha, Sitti and Kesi, each in a separate direc- 
tion, and by setting fire to towns ; he also planted a pillar of 
victory on the banks of the Tungabhadra. Then the Cola 
monarch seems to have made an effigy of Somesvara and sub- 
jected it to various indignities , 151 before turning his attention 
to Vengi. 

The question why Somesvara I failed to keep an engage- 
ment fixed by himself and thus suffered 

Absence of once again the imputation of cowardice at 

Somesvara. , , 

the hands of his Cola enemy cannot be 



virarajendra and vengi 


answered with certainty. The date of the occurrence was 
some time in the fifth year of Virarajendra, and from the 
details preserved in the record the exact day which is men- 
tioned in the Manimangalam inscription is seen to have been 
Monday 10 September a.d. 1067. 152 Somesvara sought relief 
from an incurable disease by religious drowning in the Tun- 
gabhadra and the date of this occurrence was March 29, 
a.d. 1068. 153 The assumption has generally been made that 
Somesvara’s absence from Kudal-Sangamam on this occasion 
was due to his illness and death. 1533 It should, however, be 
observed that as early as 10 September a.d. 1067 we find 
recorded not only the absence of Somesvara from Kudal-San- 
gamam but the subsequent campaign of Virarajendra in 
Vengi and Cakrakuta which resulted in the restoration of 
the Vengi kingdom to Vijayaditya VII. On the other hand, 
Bilhana states distinctly that Vikramaditya VI was encamped 
on the banks of the Krsna 153b on his way back home after his 
conquests when the news of his father’s death reached him. 
And his language, though we eannot be sure about it, seems 
to rule out the protracted illness of Somesvara I, who was sud- 
denly taken ill, in the midst of his rejoicing over his son’s suc- 
cesses in the digvijaya. Unsatisfactory as it seems, we can, 
for the present, only assume that if Somesvara’s absence was 
due to illness, his ailment was of a rather longer duration than 
Bilhana’s account implies. 

The conflicting nature of our sources and the fecundity of 
modern research, carried out sometimes 
Vengi affairs. un <Ier the subtle influence of the nascent 
patriotism of the Andhra country, have greatly obscured the 
course of events in the Vengi kingdom during this period; 
one can hardly be too cautious in dealing with this phase of 
our subject. A more detailed consideration, however, tenta- 
tive, of the course of events in Vengi will become necessary 
when we reach the problems connected with the accession of 
Kulottunga I to the Cola throne. Here we may note simply 
the facts as they are gathered from the inscriptions and the 
Vikramankadeva Carita which seem to speak for themselves. 
The M animan galam inscription records that from Kudal- 
Sangamam Virarajendra proceeded to Vengi, after issuing a 
challenge to the Calukya, saying: ‘We do not intend to return 
(home) till after we reconquer the good Vengi country, 



THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


once ours; listen! if you are a Vallava , 154 come and defend.’ 
This challenge to the Calukya is a clear indication that the 
Vengi country had passed into the hands of the W. Calukyas. 
The rhapsody of Bilhana on Vikramaditya’s digvijaya during 
the life-time of his father seems to furnish the clue to the real 
situation by including Vengi and Cakrakuta 155 in an other- 
wise impossible list of conquests attributed to him. Apparent- 
ly Vikramaditya did succeed in transferring Vengi and Cakra- 
kuta from their rulers to himself and adding them to his 
father’s dominions. Attention has been drawn already to the 
evidence from some Western Calukya records of this period 
showing their eagerness to gain control of Vengi. But if the 
Manimangalam record speaks truly, the success of Vikrama- 
ditya in the east was shortlived; for it states 
B^wlda° f that in a decisive battle on the banks of the 

Krsna, in the neighbourhood of Bezwada. 
Virarajendra inflicted a crushing defeat on the Western Ca- 
lukya forces commanded by Jananatha , 156 Rajamayan and 
others compelling them to flee into the jungle for refuge. 
After this, the Cola crossed the Godavari, marched across 
Kalingam up to the Mahendra mountain and beyond Cakka- 
rakkottam . 157 Having thus regained Vengi, he bestowed it on 
Vijayaditya who had sought his protection, before he return- 
ed to his capital Gangapuri, adorned by the splendour of vic- 
tory gained in many a fight . 158 

The second engagement at Kudal-Sangamam, which 
Ahavamalla failed to keep, and the resumption of the Vengi 
country, which followed, are briefly alluded to in the shorter 
prasastis of the fifth year of Virarajendra I . 159 These imply 
that, by the reconquest of Vengi, Virarajendra fulfilled some 
vow made by his elder brother ; 159 though we cannot be sure 
of it, this perhaps means that the Cola control over Vengi had 
been lost some time during the reign of Rajendradeva II and 
that he had died without being able to recover it; if this view 
is correct, the Western Calukya occupation of Vengi must 
have been more complete and lasted longer than has so far 
been believed, and Somesvara I must have recompensed him- 
self for the defeat at Koppam by substantial success in an- 
other direction. The Kanyakumari inscription 151 also states 
that Vengi and Kalinga, though part of the hereditary domi- 
nion of the Colas, had been neglected by his brother and 



CEYLON AND KADARAM 271 

allowed to fall under the occupation of hostile kings, and that 
Virarajendra regained them for the empire. 

Virarajendra had his attention drawn to Ceylon by the 
efforts made by Vijayabahu to extend his 
Ceylon War. power from Rohana and to expel the Colas 
from the island. The Mahdvamsa and the only inscription of 
Virarajendra which gives an account of this war are agreed 
that Vijayabahu did not succeed in attaining his object. In 
the details, the two accounts differ. The Mahdvamsa says 162 
that when the Cola king heard of Vijayabahu’s designs, he 
sent off his Senapati who was then in Pulatthinagara against 
the Sinhalese ruler. The Cola general entered Rohana, plun- 
dered Kajaragama and returned to his province. Vijayabahu 
sent ‘numbers of people and much costly treasure’ to the king 
of Ramanna (Burma), and got many ships in return laden 
with ‘various stuffs, camphor, sandalwood and other goods’, 
which he gave to his soldiers to gain their goodwill. Then he 
supported opposition to Cola rule in Rajarattha (N. Ceylon) ; 
the Cola monarch sent a great army to quell the revolt. It 
‘landed in Mahatittha, slew many people there and subdued 
the inhabitants of Rajarattha’. After this, the Cola comman- 
der entered Rohana, and was joined by deserters from Vijaya- 
bahu. ‘When the general saw them accompanied by a great 
troop of adherents, he believed Rohana would shortly be in 
his power.’ Vijayabahu saw the strength of the Cola forces 
and was distracted by rebellions and treachery in his own 
camp. So nothing came of his effort. The inscription of Vira- 
rajendra dated in his fifth year, a.d. 1067, states that the king 
sent a large army which crossed the sea in a number of ships 
without erecting a causeway, defeated the Sinhalese forces, 
compelled Vijayabahu to seek refuge in flight, made his queen 
captive and restored the whole of Ceylon to Virarajendra’s 
sway. 163 We cannot accept the last statement literally; Vijaya- 
bahu renewed the struggle with better results three or four 
years later, and he could not have done this if he had lost his 
hold on Rohana. 

For the transactions of the rest of Virarajendra’s reign 
__ we have to depend exclusively on the 

shorter prasash m its later editions. 
Records of the seventh year 164 mention that Virarajendra 
conquered Kadaram on behalf of a king who had come in 



272 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


search of his aid and protection, and handed it over to him. 
If the place of this event in these records indicates its chrono- 
logical position in the reign, it must have occurred before the 
sixth year, c. a.d. 1068. We know as yet little of the relations 
between the Colas and the empire of Sri Vijaya, which no 
doubt is signified by the term Kadaram, in the interval that 
elapsed between Rajendra’s campaign against Sangrama- 
Vijayottunga-varman and the reign of Virarajendra. Conse- 
quently we have no means of elucidating this brief reference 
to a second expedition against Kadaram in this reign. 

On the death of Somesvara I, Somesvara II came to the 
Calukyan throne in a.p. 1068 (11 April), 
S6mSvSa h n and Virarajendra took the occasion to re- 
new the ancient feud. The inscriptions of 
Somesvara II state this fact clearly and imply that the Cola 
began by attacking the fortress of Gutti and ended by retreat- 
ing in haste before Somesvara. 165 The Cola inscriptions and 
Bilhana tell another story. The former state that before 
Somesvara could untie his kanthika. that is, on the occasion 
of his coronation as king, 166 Virarajendra burnt the city of 
Kampili and set up a pillar of victory at Karadigal, a village 
in the Lingsagar Taluk of the Raicur district, 167 and that he 
forced Somesvara to abandon the Kannara country, and in- 
vested the Salukki Vikramaditya with the kanthika. and Ratta- 
padi seven and a half lakh country conquered on his account, 
because he had come and sought the aid of the Cola 
monarch. 168 This occasion is no doubt the one mentioned in 
the Takkayagapparani which says that the Cola king, here 
called Rajagambhira, took away the fillet of royalty from the 
Pirattan and conferred it on the Irattan for the protection of 
the celebrated seven and a half lakh country. 169 And the 
Vikramankadeva Carita tells the same story, embellished from 
the standpoint of the hero of the poem. Soon after his father’s 
death and brother’s accession, Vikramaditya VT quarrelled 
with his brother who had fallen into evil courses, and left 
Kalyana with his younger brother Jayasimha and destroyed 
the troops sent by his elder brother Somesvara in pursuit of 
him. He reached the Tungabhadra and rested his army for a 
time. 170 Then he became desirous of war with the Colas and 
started on the expedition after spending some time in Bana- 
vasi. Jayakesi and the Alupa king did him obeisance, 171 and 



! 


VIRARAJENDRA AND VIKRAMADITY A VI 273 

the Cola himself, unable to resist the advance, sent an ambas- 
sador and offered his daughter in marriage to the Calukya 
prince, and Vikrama agreed to retire to the banks of the 
Tungabhadra, where the Cola king subsequently met him, the 
marriage was celebrated and the alliance between the two 
kings concluded. 172 It may be noted that Jayakesi I, the 
Kadamba king of Goa who was ruling in this period, is said 
in Kadamba inscriptions to have placed the Western Calukya 
firmly on his own throne, and to have brought about peace 
between the Cola and the Calukya at Kancl. 172a All these lines 
of evidence point to the conclusion that 

Alliance with soon after the death of Ahavamalla, trouble 
Vikramaditya VI. , _ , ’ 

arose between Somesvara II and Vikrama- 
ditya on some matters of importance if not about the succes- 
sion itself, that Vikramaditya’s younger brother Jayasimha, 
and the Kadamba Jayakesi of Goa took his side in the dis- 
pute, that Jayakesi officiated as Vikrama’s ambassador to the 
Cola, seeking Virarajendra’s aid for his ally, and that as a 
consequence of the powerful intercession of the Cola monarch, 
Somesvara II was compelled to part with portions of his here- 
ditary dominions to Vikramaditya almost immediately after 
his accession to the throne. Though we have no other evi- 
dence for it than that of Bilhana, the marriage of Vikrama- 
ditya with a Cola princess may be accepted as a fact. Vikra- 
maditya’s inscriptions with the title Trailokyamalla and 
bearing dates earlier than a.d. 1076, which marked the com- 
mencement of the Calukya-Vikrama era, are found in the 
southern parts of the Calukyan empire; 173 and this goes far to 
confirm the hypothesis of a division of territory between the 
Calukya brothers. It was not many years before the younger 
brother completely displaced the elder, as we shall see. In 
fact the alliance between Virarajendra and Vikramaditya is 
part of a diplomatic revolution which will be elucidated in the 
next chapter. 

In summing up the earlier achievements of Virarajendra, 
his later inscriptions which record the tran- 
wf“ y of sactions just noticed, mention at the out- 
set the beheading of the Pandya, the col- 
lection of tribute from the K§rala and the subjugation of 
Ceylon, 174 events which recall the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja 
and Rajendra. It is quite possible that as in the fight at 
C, 35 



274 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Mudakkaru. (which we have identified with the first battle of 
Kudal-Sangamam and which is mentioned at the end of this 
prasasti and the beginning of the grant portion) , Virarajendra 
took part in the campaign conducted by his brothers in the 
southern countries, long before any idea of his accession to 
the throne dawned on his mind. The wars against Somesvara 
in which Virarajendra took part are briefly summed up in this 
form of the prasasti in the statement that the Cola king saw 
the back of Ahavamalla, that is to say. put him to flight, on 
five different occasions. 175 

From the Tirunamanallur inscription of the fourth year, 
and the Yogi-mallavaram and Kanya- 
Titles kumari records of the seventh, 176 Vira- 

rajendra is seen occasionally to have appropriated the full 
regal titles of the Western Calukyas such as Sakala-bhuva- 
nasraya. Medini-vallabha and Maharajadhiraja, besides 
specially Cola titles which, like Ahavamallakulakala, recall 
the victories won against the Calukyas. He also styled him- 
self Pand.vakulantaka. Rajasraya, and Rajarajendra, titles 
which, together with Vallabhavallabha, Vira Cola, and Kari- 
kala. are found in the Kanyakumari inscription as well. 177 
The same inscription tells us that Virarajendra presented a 
fine ruby called Trailokyasara for being mounted on the 
crown of the Dancer of the Golden Hall, Nataraja of Cidam- 
baram 178 and that he endowed many brahmadeyas in the coun- 
tries of Cola, Tundira, Pandya, Gangavati, and gratified forty 
thousand Brahmans, learned in the Vedas, by gifts of land. 179 
We have already noticed that Gangapurl was the capital of 
the Cola empire in this reign as well, and that at the end of 
his wars he returned to it in state. A palace in Gangaikonda- 
colapuram called Sdlakerala-maligai and a throne in it called 
Rajendrasola Mavali-vanarajan are mentioned in a record of 
the fifth year. 180 The latest regnal year of Virarajendra that is 
found in inscriptions is the eighth, which is mentioned in a 
record 181 of the third year of Parakesari Adhirajendradeva, 
the son and successor of Virarajendra, and the brother-in-law 
of Calukya Vikramaditya VI. VIrarajendra’s death must have 
occurred, therefore, early in a.d. 1070. Sravana Aslesa was 
the asterism of his birth. 182 One of his queens, Arumolinangai, 
survived till the fifteenth year of Kulottunga I ; her name is 



NOTES 


275 


mentioned in an incomplete inscription oi that year from 
Tanjore . 183 The presence of Buddhism in the Cola kingdom 
in the reign of VIrarajendra, and the influence of Buddhist 
scholarship on Tamil literature, are attested by the Vlra- 
soliyam, a curious work on Tamil grammar conceived on 
ultra-Sanskritic lines by Buddhamitra, who calls himself 
chieftain of Ponperri. This place is identified by Venkayya 
with Ponpetti in the Pattukkottai taluq of the Tanjore 
district . 184 


1. Verse 73. 

2. 30 of 1919. 

3. SII. ill p. 195; EC. vii Sk. 136. 

4. 110 of 1908. 

5. 129 of 1912 dated (3)8 is doubtful. It is a solitary record and the 
first figure in the date is not secure. 

6. EL vi p. 24. 

7. EL vii p. 9. 

8. 87 of 1895 of year 9 of Rajendra II is said to mention a gift of 
year 3 of VIrarajendra ARE. 1895 I 9. If this is correct, VIrarajendra's 
accession must be placed earlier. But the published text (SII. v, 647 11. 
52-3) does not seem to mention any such gift in VIrarajendra’s reign 
though the name VIrarajendra does occur. 

9. viii 28; SII. iii, p. 113. 

10. 119 of 1902 cited at SII. iii p. 191. 

11. ‘tan-tirumagan’: 87 of 1895. (SII. v 647, 1. 26) . Another recoi d 
of the same date mentions a Rajamahendra-road. SII. iii p. 41 (1. 6) . 

12. Cp. EI. xviii pp. 30-1. 

13. 15 of 1890; SII. iii 57. 

14. For a succinct study of the variations by Dr. N. Venkatara- 
manayya, see Journal of the Madras University, xv. pp 1-22. 

15. e.g. SII. iii 28 (Yr. 29); 6 of 1890 (Yr. 30); 81 of 1895: 221 of 
1894 (Yr. 32). 

16. See the discussion ARE. 1907, II 38; 1908 II 56. 

17. 135 of 1892; 477 of 1911; EC. x KI. 112 (b). 

18. 534 of 1906. 

19. 129 of 1912. 

20. BG. I, ii, 441. But this rather late date for the death of Rajad- 
hiraja is contradicted by the inscriptions of his successor Rajendra; see 
infra. 

21. Contra ARE, 1908 II 56. 

22. 92 of 1892; 172 of 1894. 

23. SII. iii 28, p. 56. 



276 THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

24. Text: ‘mun-tanakkudaindw,’ apparently rendered by Hultzsch 
into ‘which had previously belonged to him.’ 

25. 'Ilanjiridenrenni ulangol tannadu tannuravodum pugundu’ is 
the text. 

26. Or daughter. The text has kddali. 

27. Text ‘ulamda.’ Hultzsch has 'perished’; but see later. 

28. The text is ‘Kannaran-vali-vandurai-kola-vilat-taraisan- 
Cigiya,’ which Hultzsch translates into 'who had come to Kannaran 
(Krishna) and taken up (his) abode (with him).’ Urai means in the 
context ‘pride.’ ’glory.’ The point seems to be that Madanaraja, though 
a Rastrakuta or, more generally, a Karnata by descent, became king of 
Ceylon. 

29. Ch. 55 vv. 24-29. 

30. CV. Ch. 56, vv. 1-6. 

31. 92 of 1892 where he is only called ‘king of the Ceylonese.’ 221 
of 1894. 

32. Geiger CV. ii. p. xxi. 

33. CV. Ch. 56, v. 7. 

34. ibid, w. 8-10 

35. ibid, w. 11-14. 

36. PK. p. 113. 

37. CV. ibid., vv. 13-15. 

38. Cf. Hultzsch SII. iii, p. 53. 

39. ibid. 3 Deer. a.d. 1046. 

40. ibid; also CV. 56, v. 16. 

41. Cf. Hultzsch — JRAS. 1913, pp. 519-21 where the opinions ex- 
piessed by him in SII. iii are withdrawn. 

42. Jagatipala’s queen and her daughter Lilavati escaped later on 
from their captivity in the Cola country, CV. Ch. 59 vv. 23-4. 

43. SII. iii. 29. JRAS, 1913, p. 519. 

44. 87 of 1895; 270 of 1915, both of the ninth year. 

45. SII. iii p. 59; 612 of 1912, (SII. iv 1408). 

46. Virarpadaik-kalingar-man, 1. 12 of SII. iii 29. 

47. Supposing that a VIra-Salamegha 'perished in a hot battle’ 
(SII. iii p. 56) with Rajadhiraja, Hultzsch distinguishes from him the 
' knlingar-man ’ of the same name ot the Rajendra inscriptions (JRAS. 
1913 p. 520), and connects the latter with Trilokasundarl, a Kalinga 
queen of Vijayabahu I, a.d. 1054-1109, and suggests that her nephew 
Kitti-siri-megha may have been named after VIra-Salamegha. He 
also suggests that the Pandya Manabharana who was decapitated by 
Rajadhiraja was the ancestor of that Manabharana who was the nephew 
and son-in-law of Vijayabahu I; and that Sri Vallabha Madanaraja, the 
Ceylonese opponent of Rajadhiraja, was the ancestor of his namesake 
Sri Vallabha. a third nephew and son-in-law of Vijayabahu I. Argu- 
ments from the similarity of common names cannot be final; and 
Hultzsch has not considered the relation between the Manabharana 
whose sons were captured by Rajendra and his namesakes. 

48. Vide p. 221 ante. 



NOTES 


277 


49. Codrington, Ceylon Coins pp. 84-5. 

50. Cf. SII. iii 84 (266 of 1901) of the 7th year of VIrarajendradeva, 
claiming the subjugation of Ceylon among the king’s achievements and 
594 of 1912 — SII. iv 1388 (Yr. 3 of Adhhajendradeva) . 

51. CV. Ch. 57 vv. 65 ff. EZ. ii. p. 207; 182 of 1915. 

52. SII. iii 28. 

53. The text is: 'Kandar Dinakaran Naranan Ganavadi vandalar 

teriyal Madisudanan .’ Hultzsch takes this to be four names; perhaps 
there are only three. In any case their identity cannot be made out 
fully though some of them seem to figure in the Western Calukya in- 
scriptions of the time. 

54. 6 of 1890 (Yr. 30); 221 of 1894; 81 of 1895 (Yr. 32). 

55. 172 of 1894, Yr. 36 not (2)6; 96 of 1892 (n.d.)— resp. SII. v, 
no. 465 and iv no. 539. 

56. This was not Vijayaditya, but Telugu-Coda Bijjana ruling 
from Etagiri (Yadgir) on the Bhlma— 430 of 1923; SII. ix (1) no. 147; 
Telingana inscrr. p. 113. Pundi or Pundur is in what was the 'Gadval 
state’ on the left bank of the Krsna river. 

57. Cf. Kalingattupparani, viii 26. 

58. Sendadi — some game with a ball seems to be meant. 

59. 172 of 1894. 

60. 244 of 1925 (Yr. 36). 

61. Cf. Yah Kalyanapnram daddha of v. 73 of the Kanyakumari 
inscription. 

62. The vague phrase ‘balavac-cola-narendra-darpa-dalanam’ at 
the beginning of a stereotyped Kannada verse in some of his records 
means little; it is repeated of his son Somesvara II, and as Barnett has 
observed of the conquests detailed in this verse, the list 'seems to be 
more epic than historical '. (El. xv. p. 86 it. 6; pp. 87, 97). The inscrip- 
tions noticed by Fleet (DKD. p. 441) are of a later date and will be 
considered in the proper place. I find it impossible to attach any value 
to the poetry of Bilhana who in his Vikramahkadevacarita makes 
Somesvara enter Kancipuram in victory, (I. 114-7). It was more or 
less the poet's job to do it as Somesvara was the father of Bilhana’s 
more fortunate hero Vikramaditya VI. 

63. 484 of 1914 

64. 92 of 1892 (SII. iv 539) 1. 31. 

65. 41 of 1904 (SII. ix (i). no. 106): 711 of 1919. Also SII. ix(i) nos. 
98-102; 104-25 for other records ranging from 1044 to 1061. 

66. Contra Hultzsch, SII. iii p. 57, n. 1. 

67. El. xvi p. 53. 

68. 185 of 1893. 

69. SII. iii 28. 1. 1. which also mentions an elder brother of the 
king, possibly passed over by Rajendra I. 

70. 214 of 1911. SII. iii, 55; ii p. 304 A (of Yr. 3). 

71. SII. iii 29. 



278 THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

72. Fleet El. xii pp. 296-8. Lat. 16=36'. Long. 74=44'. For an earlier 

discussion of the identity of Koppam, EC. ix Introduction p. 16 n. 3. 
where attention is drawn to the reading in 168 of 1911 — tirthakkoppat- 
tahavayil. Hultzsch rendered ‘sepparundiralta into- The strength (of 
whose position is) hard to describe’ ( SII . iii p. 63) . W e must now read 
the phrase as: 'sepparundirtta,’ meaning a tirtha (whose merits are) 
hard to describe.’ Rajendradeva’s introductions beginning Tirumagal 
marumya use the phrase: ‘per&rrangaraik-koppattu-vandedirtta Aha- 

vumallan.’ 

73. HAS. no. 12, pp. 1-5. 

74. 87 of 1895; 270 of 1915, both of the ninth year. A study of 
these records by the side of the Manimangalam inscription clearly shows 
that the latter has omitted the earlier stage of the battle in which 
Rajendra took no part and Rajadhiraja met his fate. 

75. From this point the two accounts agree closely. 

76. This could not have been the younger brother of Vikramaditya 
VI; he survived the battle of Koppam for many years. 

77. Perhaps same as Revarasa, ruling in the neighbourhood of 
Kembhavi in a.d. 1054-55. Fleet, BG. 1. ii p. 439; Sll. iii p. 59: 

78. 87 of 1895. 

79. Sll. iii 55, ii p. 304 c. 

80. 87 of 1895. 

81. In the Tirumagal marvviyo form of Rajendra's prasastis, the 
clause that occurs is: ' Tan munnon senai pinnaduvaga munnedir senru 
* * * Irattapadi-yelarai-yilakkamun -gondii, often contracted into 
' plnnadu vaga Irattapadi.’ This is rendered by Hultzsch generally into 
'while the army of his elder brother was at his back.’ In the light of 
other records (esp. 87 of 1895) which clearly state that Rajadhiraja be- 
gan the fight and Rajendra entered it after he died, we must, it seems 
amend Hultzsch’s translation and say— while the army of his elder 
brother began to retire’ a translation which is also required by the 
phrase employed in the fuller of the two forms quoted above, viz ‘mun- 
nedir-senru’. ‘going to the front in opposition’, as also by the reading 
'munner senai pinnaduvaga ‘when the advancing army began to retreat’ 
found in some records (Sll. ii p. 305, F and G) and amended by Hultzsch 
into ‘munnon senai.' It is perhaps hardly conceivable, according to 
Indian notions of precedence, that while the elder brother was present 
in person on the battle-field, the younger took the lead; but this con- 
sideration need not be pressed as the cumulative force of all the inscrip- 
tions taken together is, doubtless, very clear. I may also observe that 
some records omit the word ‘tan’ in ‘tan munnon e.g., S1L iii 55; on this 
account, it should not be assumed, as Hultzsch seems to do, that the 
phrase ‘Tirumaruviya sengol vendan refers to the elder brother, (Sll 
iii p. 112 — English translation). 

It may also be observed, in passing that the words: ‘tannanaiyil 

munnanai sella munndnai tavirttu’ SII. iii 55 (11. 1-2). which occurs 
between Trattapadi-yelarai-yilakkamum-gondu’ and ‘Kolla-purattu 
jayastamba-natti,’ has been translated by Hultzsch into: ‘when the first 
elephant (of the enemy) went at his elephant, (his) elder brother 



NOTES 


279 


stopped (it).’ But this seems hardly satisfactory, as the words ‘(of the 
enemy)’ introduce into the meaning a concept not warranted by the 
original, and the locative of the first ‘tanndnaiyil’ seems to call for 
another explanation. I think that, in the context, ‘anai’ should be taken 
to be a mis-spelling of ‘anai’ and the phrase translated into: ‘Displacing 
the old command (rule) by causing it to follow his own commands.’ 
The suggestion made at ARE. 1900 I 20 in reviewing the Tirukoyilur in- 
scription (123 of 1900, Yr. 6) of Rajendra that the battle of Koppam was 
a later event than the expedition to Kollapuram must be abandoned in 
view of the new identification of Koppam. The wording of the Tiru- 
koyilur records (El. vii pp. 145-6), however, seems to lend some sup- 
port to Hultzsch’s view, and many of the shorter introductions mention 
Kollapuram before Koppam. 

82. BG., I, ii, p. 441; 392 of 1920, ARE 1921, II 5. 

83. ARE. 1919 II. 30. 

84. Annigere: BG. I, ii p. 441; and Gawarwad El. xv. 23. ed. Bar- 
nett. See also EC. viii Sorab 325. 

85. Fleet and, following him, Barnett ascribe the expedition and ap- 
parently the loss of life that followed to Rajendradeva. But we have no 
evidence that Rajendra lost his life in the Calukya wars, though he was 
present at Koppam, cf. SII. iii p. 53. 

86. 193 of 1925 (Yr. 6 of Rajendra II); possibly also 5 of 1899 of 
Rajaraja II (Yr. 6). This latter inscription, which is nearly one cen- 
tury later in its date, seems to mix up the achievements of Rajadhi- 
raja I and Rajendra II. It speaks of ‘Perumal Vijayarajendra-deva who 
was pleased to conquer-Kalyanapuram and Kollapuram and to fall asleep 
(i.e., to die) on an elephant’ (.SII. iii p. 191). Hultzsch remarks: ‘This 
statment must refer to Parakesarivarman alias Rajendradeva, who is 
known to have set up a pillar of victory at Kollapuram’ — a view ex- 
pressed with more caution in ARE. 1899 I 53 by Venkayya. 472 of 1920 
from Salukki (NA.) of the fourth year of Rajakesari Rajendra (Kulot- 
tunga I) gives the same description much earlier than the record noticed 
by Hultzsch; the title Vijayarajendra is not, however, given here. 
Rajendradeva nowhere claims to have conquered Kalyanapuram, did 
not have the title Vijayarajendra, and as far as we know, did not die on 
an elephant in battle. These features distinctly recall Rajadhiraja I 
(ARE. 1925 II 16), whose third year would fall, however, about a.d. 1021, 
in the reign of Rajendra I. (See also 472 of 1920 — Yr. 4 of Kulottunga I). 
If this view is correct, I am not sure it is, the theory, that during the 
Alangudi famine the state could not help the sufferers owing to the 
treasury being impoverished by the horse-sacrifice of Rajadhiraja (ARE. 
1899 I 53), cannot stand. But after all the famine might have occurred 
in the reign of Rajendra II, about a.d. 1055; only the king might have 
been wrongly described in the record of Rajaraja II. The horse -sacri- 
fice is, however, mentioned in the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja as early 
as the 26th year, a.d. 1044, if not earlier. 

87. 258 of 1910 (Yr. 35) 

88. 420 of 1925 (Yr. 35). 

89. 446 of 1918 (Yr. 24). 

90. 213 of 1894. 



280 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


91. 78 of 1920 (Yr. 33) . 

92. 188 of 1919 (Yr. 35). 

93. 258 of 1910 (Yr. 35). 

94. 413 of 1902 (Yr. 33). 

95. Tirukkalukkunram is called Ulagalanda-solapuram in a record 
of the 26th year" (172 of 1894). 

96. 102 of 1912. 

97. 85 of 1920. 

98. 279 of 1895. 

99. 295 of 1922. 

100. 221 of 1894 ( SII . v 520). Visnuvardhana has been identified 
with the future Kulottunga I in ARE. 1895 1, 11. 

101. 214 of 1911. In 421 of 1903 the king seems to be called Raja- 
raja by mistake. Sewell: (HISJ. p. 82) adopts a.d. 1052. May 28, the 
date of the accession of Rajendradeva, for the battle of Koppam. But 
we have no evidence that Rajendra did not become heir- apparent 
some time before the battle. See El. vi. pp. 213-9 for Belaturu record 
of yr. 6 (S. 979). 

102. 81 of 1928. 173 of 1894 (Yr. 5) has 'mlaviya for ‘maruviya,’ 
but is otherwise the same. 

103. 3 of 1892, (SII. iii 29) : 396 of 1913. 

104. 87 of 1895: 270 of 1915. 

105. viii 27. 

106. 11. 38-40. 

107. SII. iii p 58. Kadalar definitely means 'sons' in this record; 
Rajendrasola one of the 'kadalar’ is clearly called ‘ tan-tirumagan ’ in 87 
of 1895, ( contra . Hultzsch. op. cit. p. 62 n. 9) — unless indeed, we must 
assume the more general meaning for ’kadalar,’ take ‘tirumagan’ to be 
a loose expression for son-in-law, and identify Rajendra with Kulottunga 
I. But the phrase ‘kadalar kadalar,’ clearly means grandson; and this 
favours the first suggestion. 

108. ARE. 1899 I, 51. 

109. He quotes his father’s prasasti in some records. For the others 
many guesses have been put forward. 

110. 119 of 1902. His other records begin in three ways; Mauunldi- 
-muraivalara: tirumangai-valara; tirumagal-vilanga: none of them is 
of any historical value. 80 of 1935-6 of yr. 4 (22 July 1062) is the latest 
date known for him. ARE. 1935-6, II 38. 

111. 87 of 1895; SII. v. p. 271 11. 32-39. 

112. 113 of 1896 SII. v. no. 976; 718 of 1909. 

113. SII. iii. 84, 1. 8. Hultzsch thinks this a reference to the fourth 
encounter preceding that in which Kampili was burnt (ibid. p. 195). 

114. SII. iii. p. 37 (11. 3-8) identical with 113 of 1896. 

115. I have adopted the reading; 'ikalmunai vimdodu malaikkum’ 
ot 113 of 1896. 

116. Hultzsch translates: ‘serravan-sirattinai-yaruttu’ into ‘cut off 
the head of the corpse’ apparently failing to notice that ‘serravan’ is 
made up of 'serru' and 'avan.' cf. serrn van-sirattinai (133 of 1896). 



NOTES 


281 


117. i.e. the van-guard (of the Cola king) -Hultzsch. 

118. Megha-dambar. 

119. The text is Puspakap-pidiyum. 

120. 266 of 1901 (SII. iii no. 84) — 11. 8-9. 

121. Another engagement fixed at this same place for a later day 
did not come off. See post. pp. 268 ff. 

122. Contra S. K. Aiyangar -Ancient India p. 121. 

123. Another view of these events is possible. Mudakkaru may 
not be Kudal-Sangamam; Irugaiyan may have fought at Mudakkaru, 
and this need have no connection with the mutilation of his wife in 
the Vengl campaign of Virarajendra, which preceded the first battle of 
Kudal-Sangamam. As VIrarajendra’s record is dated in his second year 
(c. a.d. 1064) and E. Calukya Rajaraja-narendra died in 1063, it is just 
possible that Vikramaditya’s entry into Vengl (Camundaraya’s expedi- 
tion) was connected with some succession dispute after Rajaraja’s death. 
On this scheme, we have to assume that the battle of Muclakkaru— 
whatever river may be meant — took place c. a.d. 1060; and three years 
or so later came the first battle of Kudal-Sangamam recorded in the 
inscriptions of a.d. 1064. On the whole the view adopted in the text, 
based on the identification of Mudakkaru with Kudal-Sangamam, seems 
simpler, and there appears to be nothing that can be urged against such 
a position. It should also be observed, in this connection, that Virara- 
jendra’s inscriptions of the second year say nothing about his helping 
Vijayaditya to gain or regain the Vengl throne, — an event which is 
not mentioned as having taken place till after the second battle of 
Kudal-Sangamam and about the fifth year of Virarajendra (c. a.d. 1067) . 
So that if we drop the somewhat uncritical assumption that Vikramaditya 
and Virarajendra concerned themselves about Vengl only after Raja- 
raja-narendra’s death, the course of events becomes clear and perhaps 
more easy to follow. 

124. SII. iii. p. 32. 

125. SII. iii. no. 30, 1. 26. 

126. If Kandai is Kumool ( Eastern Calukyas, p. 260), it would point 
to the confluence of the Tungabhadra with the Krsna. Fleet suggested 
the confluence of the Panca-ganga and the Krsna in the neighbourhood 
of Khidrapur (Koppam) as the Kudal-Sangamam of the Cola inscrip- 
tions; and identified Karandai with Incal Karafiji in the same place 
(EL xii p. 298). But as he does not seem to have written the more 
detailed note promised by him on the subject, it is impossible to see 
how he would have met the objections to these identifications that arise 
from the narrative of the campaign as given in the Cola records which 
do not once mention Rattapadi as having been entered by the Cola 
forces on this occasion. On the later occasion Rattapadi is said to have 
been devastated; but the pillar is erected on the banks of the Tunga- 
bhadra. 

127. 144 of 1898. 

128. TAS. i 164-8. 

129. 102 of 1926 (Yr. 9). 

130. El. v. p. 77 v. 11; Cellur v. 12. 

131. 123 of 1900, El. vii. pp. 145-6. 

C. 36 



282 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


132. 84 of 1895. 

133. 612 of 1912. 

134. SII. iii. 21. / 

135. 11. 40-42. 

136. In the section on Rdjamahendran kainkaryam. 

137. 502 of 1930. 

138. 612 of 1930. 

139. An admirable discussion of Virarajendra’s records by Hultzsch 
is found at SII. iii pp. 192-6. 

140. SII. iii 20; 113 of 1896 (SII. v. 976). 

141. SII. iii, 30. 

142. V. 774. Pandit V. Swaminatha Aiyar’s identification of the 
king with Rajaraja II seems rather doubtful. 

143. 113 of 1896; SII. iii, 20, p. 33. 

144. 113 of 1896. 

145. Hultzsch. SII. iii, p. 193. 

146. v. 76. 

147. SII. iii 20. 

148. SII. iii 30. 

149. It must be noted that all the events up to this point are men- 
tioned in a fourth year record found in Malur, of which only the prasasti 
is preserved (194 of 1911; EC. ix Cp. 85). 

150. The term ‘pirattan’ seems to be the Sanskrit word ‘bhrasta’, 
rather than the Tamil 'pnrattan' a fraud or a liar contra Hultzsch SII. 

151. This. I think, is the real meaning, as suggested by A. V. Ven- 
katarama Aiyar (Life and Times of Calukya Vikramaditya VI. Tamil 
Edn. pp. 22-3 and n. 3). Hultzsch understands this rather obscure 
passage as referring to Virarajendra's alliance with Vikramaditya. But 
that. I think, belongs to a later stage of the war when Somesvara I was 
no more and to the first fight of Virarajendra with Somesvara II. On 
the present occasion, VIrarajendra is still fighting the entire family of 
Somesvara I and on every front. The difference between Vikramaditya 
VI and his brother which gave Virarajendra the chance of an alliance 
with the former did not, it seems, arise until after the death of Somes- 
vara I. of which Virarajendra had no knowledge on this occasion. The 
Manimangalam inscription of the fifth year, therefore, cannot be said to 
anticipate, as Hultzsch says it doos (SII. iii pp. 194-195), the events re- 
corded in the inscriptions of the sixth and seventh years of Virarajendra. 
for one thing, the word pirattan in 1. 27 of the Manimangalam record 
makes it impossible for us to identify him with Vikramaditya VI (cf. 1. 
22 of the same record; also Takkayagapparani v. 774, where pirattan, an 
unfriendly Calukya, is contrasted with irattan, a friendly one). Again 
the expressions of the records of the sixth and seventh years make it 
clear that they are referring to a single occasion, which is different from 
that of the Manimangalam record and in which Vikramaditya became 
friends with Virarajendra. SII. iii. 83 (Yr. 6) says that 
Virarajendra burnt Kampili and occupied Karadigal before 
Somesvara (II) could untie his necklace (11. 7-8), and this is the first 
occasion of an encounter with the Calukyas after the conquest of Vengi 



NOTES 


283 


on behalf of Vijayaditya VII; 84 (Yr. 7) records (II. 5-6) that on the 
same occasion, Somesvara (II) was forced to abandon the Kannaradesa 
and that the submissive Vikramaditya was invested with the necklace 
by the Cola king. The Vikramankadeva Carita also places the alliance 
between its hero and the Cola king some time after Somesvara I's demise 
and on the banks of the Tungabhadra; and according to the same poem, 
at the time of his father’s death, Vikramaditya was absent on a con- 
quering tour which extended to Vengi and Cakrakuta, which, again, 
seems very probable, as Vlrarajendra himself had to go off to Vengi 
after Somesvara I failed to keep his engagement with him at Kudal- 
Sangamam. Lastly, it does not seem necessary to assume that the 
kanthika (necklace) was necessarily a symbol of heir-apparentship and 
not of kingship in general, and hold, as Hultzsch does (Sll. iii p. 194). 
that in the sixth year of Vlrarajendra, Somesvara I was alive and Somes- 
vara II was still only crown-prince ( IA . xx p. 267 under 17-Vijayaditya 
V and the references given there). Even if the kanthika. was a symbol 
of subordinate position, Somesvara II’s untying it may mean that his 
father was no more and that he had become ruler in his own right.— 
probably the best view of the case. 

152. El. vii p. 9. 

153. Vikramankadeva Carita iv 44-68; EC. vii Sk. 136. 

153a. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar Ancient India p. 123; A. V. Venkatarama 
Aiyar op. cit. p. 23. 

Dr. Venkataramanayya holds that Somesvara I deceived Vlrarajen- 
dra by a false message promising to meet him at Kudal-Sangamam while 
he really meant to carry the war mto the Cola country by sending his 
son Vikramaditya to the south along the west coast; this was why 
Somesvara went to the western ocean and the Cola inscriptions mis- 
represent this as a flight. The evidence relied on for this reconstruction 
is mainly Bilhana’s kdvya ( Eastern Calukyas. pp. 259 ft) . 

153b. iv. 36. 

154. Means both ‘a strong man and Calukya.’ 

155. iv. 29, 30. 

156. We have a number of undated inscriptions at Draksarama 
recording vows taken by chieftains promising exclusive allegiance to 
Sri Parantaka, Konerinmaikondar Sarvalokasraya Sri Visnuvardhana 
Maharaja. Perhaps Vijayaditya VII is meant by these titles and the 
records are of this period (SII iv. 1269-1275). Eastern Calukyas. pp. 
249-50. 

157. 182 of 1915 distinctly says that the Calukya forces were met 
at Sakkarakkottam and defeated by Virai-ajendra-padaifc-kadaleui 
vada-tisaic-Cakkarakkdttattu puk-kudanrelunda Salukkiyat-tanaiyaik- 
kanal-pada nun: (cf. also the early inscriptions of Kulottunga). El. xxi. 
pp. 232-3. The same record mentions battles at Kondai (about 70 miles 
N.W. of Rajahmundry, Eastern Calukyas. p. 266 n. 2) and Kavi, resulting 
in the capture of much booty and many prisoners including women by the 
Colas, and the erection of a pillar of victory bearing the tiger emblem. 
The expression puli-suUukallir-jayastamba natti (1. 9) simply means: 
‘having set up a stone pillar of victory bearing the tiger (emblem)’; the 



284 


THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


editor of the inscription, in EL, however, discovers a place-name Puli- 
Suttukkal (p. 243) though he offers no identification of it at p. 228. 

158. Hultzsch has clearly misunderstood the phrase — ‘igalidaippunda 
jayattiruvodum’ which he translates into: ‘with the goddess of victory, 
who had shown hostility in the interval,’ and in which he sees ‘an 
admission of the fact that the Colas had experienced reverses.’ SII. 
iii. p. 70 and n. 4. The ‘idai’ after ‘igal' is clearly a locative suffix to the 
preceding word meaning ‘battle,’ not ‘hostility’, in the context. 

159. Hultzsch SII. iii. p. 193. 

160. Hultzsch identifies this elder brother of the king with Ala- 
vandan, SII. iii. p. 194. 

161. v. 77. 

162. CV. Ch. 58 vv. 1-17. Codrington ( Short History p. 56) says: 
A first attempt to secure Polonnaruwa was made in or about a.d. 1066 
but ended in failure, and Vijayabahu was compelled to fortify himself 
at Vatagiri (Wakirigala in Kegalla district).’ I think that the fortifi- 
cation at Vatagiri belongs to the later campaign of 1070 of which the 
narrative in the CV. begins with v. 18. 

163. 182 of 1915. cf. Kadaladaiyadilangai-konda-Sola-valanadu. 

164. 175 of 1894; 266 of 1901, SII. iii. 84. 

165. EC. vii Sk. 136. 

166. SII. iii. 83. 

167. El. xii. pp. 295, 309 

168. SII. iii. 84. 

169. v. 774. 

170. Vikramankadeva Canta iv 69— v. 10. 

171. v. 25-6. 

172. v. 28 — vi. 3. 

172a. JBBRAS. ix. p. 278, 242; BG. 1, ii p 567. 

173. e.g. 127 of 1913; 455 of 1920; EC. xi CdL 82; SII. iii p 65 

174. SII. iii. 84 11. 1-2. 

175. SII. iii. p. 194. 

176. 371 of 1902, SII iii. 81; 273 of 1904. 

177. vv. 75; 77-8. 

178. v. 79 (fragment). 

179. w. 80-81. 

180. 182 of 1915. 

181. SII. iii. 57 11. 11-12. 

182. 182 of 1915. 1. 25. 

183. SII. ii. 58. p. 234. 

184. ARE. 1899, paragraph 50; SII. iii. p. 197; VhasdUyam-Payiram. 



Chapter XU 

THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I (a.d. 1070) 


Virarajendra died early in a.d. 1070, the eighth year of 
his reign. He was succeeded on the throne 
Adhuajendra. Parakesari Adhirajendra who had a 

very short reign of some weeks’ duration and was followed 
by Rajakesari Kulottunga Cola I on 9 June a.d. 1070. 1 
As we find inscriptions of Adhirajendra dated in his third 
year, and as the exact date of Kulottunga’s accession is quite 
clearly attested by his dated stone inscriptions from the Telugu 
country, it is evident that Adhirajendra must have been 
chosen heir-apparent by Virarajendra some time in 1067-8. 
Adhirajendra’s relation to Virarajendra may be inferred from 
the explicit statement in the Vikramdnkadeva Carita that on 
the death of his father-in-law, Vikramaditya started for Kahci 
and Gangakundapura in order to place his wife’s brother on 
the Cola throne. 2 Why his reign was so short and how the 
Eastern Calukya prince Rajendra II came to occupy the Cola 
throne in 1070 are questions that do not admit of decisive 
answers. The evidence bearing on them proceeds from several 
quarters. These various sources differ so much from one 
another, and suggest so many explanations of the occurrences 
that the conviction is borne in upon us that almost every one 
of our authorities had strong motives to put forward a separate 
version of the course of events. 

As a result of several inter-marriages, for some time the 
members of the Eastern Calukya dynasty 
Eastern” caukyas ^ad become plainly Colas at heart, far more 
than Calukyas. 3 The following genealogical 
table illustrates the interrelation between the two dynasties: 
Rajaraja I (Cola). 

L 

| | (E. Calukya) 

Rajendra I Kundava m Vimaladitya m. Medava 

' ) ; Mahadevi 

| ] ’ (also of Cola 

Rajendra II Ammangadevi m. Rajaraja Narendra descent) 

I I 

Madhurantak! m. Rajendra II (Calukya) Vijayaditya YII 
(Kulottunga I) | 

Saktivarman II. 



286 THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

The Eastern Calukya copper-plates of the period fall into two 
sets, one of them mentioning the transactions of Vijaya- 
ditya VII and his son Saktivarman II, omitted by others, — a 
feature not unknown in other passages of E. Calukya history 
as we know. The facts as set forth in the first set of plates 
are the following. After twelve years had elapsed from the 
accession of Rajaraja-narendra, his step- 
Vijayaditya VII. b ro ther Vijayaditya ousted him from the 
throne and crowned himself king in Saka 952, a.d. 1030 ; 4 the 
grant which mentions this fact is dated in the second year of 
the reign of Vijayaditya. 5 Then the Telugu Academy plates 
of Saktivarman II, which do not mention any regnal year, 
state that Saktivarman was crowned as king in the year Saka 
983, on a day corresponding to 18 October a.d. 1061, after 
Rajaraja had enjoyed a reign of forty-one years ; they omit 
the coronation of Vijayaditya in a.d. 1030. 6 Lastly, the Ryali 
plates (two sets) of Vijayaditya VII omit all reference to the 
occurrences of a.d. 1030-2, give forty-one years to Rajaraja, 
state that Vijayaditya took by force the kingdom of his step- 
brother without his knowledge (at his death) , 7 that he handed 
it over to his son Saktivarman out of the love he bore him, 
and that, when Saktivarman died at the end of one year by a 
bad stroke of fate, Vijayaditya was only persuaded with diffi- 
culty, like Arjuna at the death of Abhimanyu, to resume the 
duties of state. These grants are dated in the twelfth year of 
Vijayaditya’s rule. There is nothing in the palaeography or 
the dating of these records that raises any doubt as to their 
genuineness. 

Alike in their chronology and in their narration of events, 
these plates differ from those of Kulottunga which will be 
noticed presently. These imply that Rajaraja-narendra came 
to the E. Calukya throne in 1018 after Vimaladitya had occu- 
pied it for seven years from a.d. 1011, thus completely vindi- 
cating the date of Vimaladitya’s accession calculated by 
Kielhorn, 10 May 1011. 8 But the facts that the Ranasta- 
pundi grant of Vimaladitya is dated in his eighth regnal year, 
and that Rajaraja-narendra’s coronation is stated elsewhere 
to have occurred in a.d. 1022 should not be lost sight of. 
Though the grants of Vijayaditya VII and Saktivarman II 
thus agree with those of the time of Kulottunga I in ascrib- 
ing a rule of forty-one years to Rajaraja-narendra, they seem 



VIJAYADITYA VII IN VeNGI 287 

to reckon the years from a different starting point, a.d. 1018, 
which is four years earlier than the date usually given, in the 
later grants, for Rajaraja’s coronation, a.d. 1022. The 
language of the Ryali plates and the date 
His usuipation. gaktivarman II’s coronation 9 even raise a 
doubt if Vijayaditya waited till the natural end of Rajaraja’s 
life or deposed him earlier. In any event, seeing that Vlra- 
rajendra’s inscriptions before his seventh year (a.d. 1068-9) 
do not mention his having had anything to do with Vijaya- 
ditya, there is no room for assuming, as has been sometimes 
done, that he interfered in any dispute relating to the succes- 
sion, on Rajaraja’s death, between Kulottunga I and Vijaya- 
ditya VII or that he helped to keep out the former. 10 

The hostility of Vijayaditya VII to Rajaraja, and possibly 
to his son Rajendra-Kulottunga, that be- 
Two Vijayadityas? comes a pp aren t from these plates has led to 
the identification of Vijayaditya VII with Visnuvardhana- 
Vijayaditya (of some Western Calukya inscriptions) who 
bears Eastern Calukya titles like Sarvalokasraya and Vengl- 
mandalesvara. Fleet who first proposed this identification, 
basing himself mainly on the similarity of names and titles, 11 
subsequently gave it up and made the Western Calukya prince 
a fourth son of Somesvara I. not mentioned by Bilhana, 
apparently because he played a very insignificant part. 12 In 
recent years, Fleet’s original identification has again found 
support from scholars under the influence of the newly dis- 
covered copper-plates of Vijayaditya VII and his son Sakti- 
varman II, and attempts have been made to prove that after 
the failure of his first usurpation (a.d. 1030-32), Vijayaditya 
left the Vengi country and sought service under and support 
from Somesvara I. 13 It is true that a marriage relation 
between the two branches of Calukyas such as was postulated 
by Fleet is impossible, and Vijayaditya-Visnuvardhana, if he 
was a son of Somesvara. could not have had an Eastern 
Calukya princess for his mother. 14 Again the omission of this 
name by Bilhana, and the phrase tatpadapadmaradhaka in the 
inscriptions, describing the relation of Visnuvardhana-Vijaya- 
ditya to Somesvara I, raise a doubt as to whether he was the 
son of Somesvara though he is elsewhere called maga and 
nandana. 15 



283 


THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


To return to the evidence from the Eastern Calukya 
copper-plates. Three grants of the sons of 
E. Calukya plates Kulottunga, known as the Teki, Cellur and 
son^ Ul ° ttUnga S Pithapuram grants, dated respectively in the 
seventeenth, twenty-first and twenty-third 
years of his reign, narrate in almost identical terms the course 
of events in Vengx as it was described by Kulottunga himself 
to his son Rajarajamummadicoda, while sending him to Vengl 
as viceroy of the northern province of the Cola empire. 16 
From these plates we learn that, at the death of Rajaraja 
after a rule of forty-one years Rajendra was first crowned as 
lord of Veng! and attained great celebrity. He was then 
crowned in the Coda-rajya, not less exalted in status than the 
position of Devendra. He married Madhurantaki, the very 
Laksml risen from the ocean, namely Rajendra-deva, the tilaka 
of the Solar race. He had many children by her, and to one 
of them. Rajaraja. he said : ‘ Child, the great kingdom of 

Vengi was. in days gone by, entrusted by me to my paternal 
uncle, king Vijayaditya, as I was desirous of undertaking a 
conquering tour (or according to the Cellur plates, “as I was 
desirous of securing the Cola kingdom”)- He too, who was 
like a god and resembled a lion in his strength, went to heaven 
after ruling the kingdom for fifteen years.’ And the Teki 
plates make it clear that Vijayaditya’s death occurred some 
time in a.d. 1077 : 17 this would mean that Kulottunga appoint- 
ed him as his deputy in a.d. 1062 or thereabout. 

In order to reconcile these statements of Kulottunga on 
his relations with Vijayaditya VII with what we know of them 
from other sources, we must recall the time and circumstance 
of the utterance attributed to Kulottunga. By 1077 Kulot- 
tunga was firmly seated on the Cola throne ; and securely 
established at the head of a prosperous and extensive empire, 
he was addressing his own son, after the death of his uncle 
and on the eve of sending him out as viceroy to the northern 
kingdom. Paternal solicitude as well as good taste and policy 
required that, rather than expatiate on ancient family feuds 
that deserved to be forgotten, he should give the best possible 
account of the past history of the viceroyalty that the young 
prince was about to take upon himself. 



VIJAYADITYA VII AND KULOTTUNGA 


289 


That Vijayaditya’s relations with Kulottunga and his 
father, however, had been nothing so 
Kuiattunga P leasant as Kulottunga afterwards re- 

Vijayaditya. presented them to his son, becomes clear 

not only from his Pamulavaka, and Ryali 
plates, and the Telugu Academy plates of Saktivarman II dis- 
cussed above, but from other evidence as well. We learn 
from Eastern Ganga inscriptions that even after Kulottunga 
became Cola emperor, the hostile relations between Vijava- 
ditya and his nephew continued more or less unabated. The 
Vizagapatam plates of Anantavarman Codaganga 18 state that 
his father Rajaraja having, in the first instance, become the 
lord of the goddess of victory in a ‘ Tamil battle then married 
Rajasundari, the daughter of the Cola king. The same lady 
is described elsewhere in unmistakable terms as the daughter 
of Rajendra Cola (Virarajendra) and the chief queen of 
Rajaraja. 19 


The Ganga king is also said to have offered help to 
Vijayaditya at the end of his life. The grant that mentions 
the ‘ Tamil battle ’ also states that ‘ when Vijayaditya, begin- 
ning to grow old, left the country of Vengi, as if he were the 
sun leaving the sky, and was about to sink in the great ocean 
of the Codas,’ Rajaraja of Kalinganagara ‘ caused him to 
enjoy prosperity for a time in the Western region,’ that is. 
Vengi to the west of Kalinganagara. 20 The approximate date 
for these occurrences is furnished by the Dirghasi inscription 
of Vanapati dated Saka 997, a.d. 1075, which makes a pointed 
reference to Vanapati’s successes gained on behalf of his 
Ganga overlord against the Cola forces. 21 A war between 
Kulottunga and the E. Ganga Rajaraja followed by a media- 
tion by Rajaraja Ganga between Vijayaditya VII and his 
nephew Kulottunga on a subsequent occasion, and the demise 
of Vijayaditya some time after the successful intercession of 
Rajaraja are thus clearly attested by the Ganga records of the 
time. 

We are now in a position to explain the relations among 
the monarchs interested in Vengi and the probable reason for 
Virarajendra bestowing Vengi on Vijayaditya VII whom he 
had fought for many years both in Vengi and in Karnataka. 
The death of Rajaraja Narendra (1061) starts the trouble 



29ft THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

which ends soon after the death of Somesvara I (1068) with 
a veritable diplomatic revolution. When Vijayaditya VII seiz- 
ed the throne of Vengi after Rajaraja’s death and bestowed it 
on his son Saktivaiman II with the aid of Somesvara I, the 
Cola Virarajendra wanted to re-establish 
Virarajendra s (] le C5( a influence in Vengi which had 
intercession. ' . 

disappeared in recent years owmg to the 

neglect of his brothers. But though he killed Saktivarman II 
in battle, that did not change the political alignment. Vijaya- 
ditya, though bereaved, allowed himself to be persuaded to 
rule in Vengi and was actively supported by Somesvara I and 
his sons, particularly Vikramaditya. This political set up con- 
tinued till the death of Somesvara I, after which event the 
schemes of the ambitious Vikramaditya dominate the political 
field. Though a younger son of Somesvara I, Vikramaditya 
was conscious of his superior ability and set about plotting 
against his elder brother Somesvara II who succeeded his 
father. He made up his mind to secure the support of the 
Cola ruler by paying a price; knowing full well how keen 
Virarajendra was on Vengi, he resolved to satisfy him here 
provided he got the Cola’s aid against his brother and thereby 
secured a part, if not the whole, of the Calukya kingdom for 
himself. This brought to an end this phase of the Cola- 
Calukya war. Vijayaditya consented to receive and hold the 
Vengi kingdom as a fief of the Cola empire: Vikramaditya 
got half the Calukya kingdom forced from his brother by Vira- 
rajendra who also gave him one of his daughters in marriage 
and another (Rajasundari) to the Kalinga ruler Rajaraja, the 
other ally on Vikramaditya’s side. And if Virarajendra had 
lived for some years after this settlement instead of dying very 
soon after it. the course of history may have been very differ- 
ent from what it turned out to be. 

If Rajendra-Kulottunga was first crowned as lord of 
Vengi, as the later E. Calukya plates assert 
Kulottunga’s (in contradiction to those of Vijayaditya) , 

1063-70 m ^ is remarkable that these plates fail to 

give us the exact date of this coronation as 
they do of most other coronations. The Telugu inscriptions 
of Kulottunga containing both regnal years and gaka dates 
support the date a.d. 1070 for the commencement of his rule, 
and this was the date of his accession to the Cola throne. 22 



KULOTTUNGA IN 1063-70 


291 


The crux of the Kulottunga problem is, in fact, the question: 
what did he do with himself in the interval between his father’s 
death and a.d. 1070? Fleet added up the two statements in 
the Teki and Cellur grants that Kulottunga appointed his 
uncle as deputy in Vengi because he wanted to have (i) a 
conquering tour and (ii) the Colarajya, and stated that ‘Kulot- 
tunga acquired the Cola crown by hostile invasion and con- 
quest,’ and placed this event in a.d. 1063, in spite of the indi- 
cation of a much later date for it furnished by the Vikra- 
mankadeva Carita. 23 He also pointed out that Kulottunga’s 
conquest and annexation of the Cola empire were not entirely 
the result of a failure of the Cola succession, and that it must 
have been powerfully aided by a rebellion in the Cola coun- 
try and a state of anarchy of which we get some idea from 
the Kalingattupparani. Later writers, while they have recog- 
nised the mistake in Fleet’s date for these occurrences, have 
not been so ready to give up his suggestions of hostile inva- 
sion, and in fact have added to it the charge of political 
murder against Kulottunga. 24 Reserving the literary sources 
for more detailed consideration at a large stage, it may be 
observed here that the course adopted by Fleet in putting 
together two alternative statements made in peculiar circum- 
stances about past events and evolving the theory of hostile 
invasion seems to be of doubtful validity, and that even the 
Vikramiinkadeva Carita does not contain the remotest sugges- 
tion that Kulottunga put his rivals out of the way by secret 
murder, or even by open fighting. And now we must remem- 
ber what Fleet was not aware of, viz., that the supposed ap- 
pointment of Vijayaditya by Kulottunga to deputise for him 
at Vengi and his occupation of the Cola throne are separated 
by the whole interval of the reign of Virarajendra. 

At the time of his father’s death and the forcible 

seizure of the Vengi throne by Vijayaditya 
Evidence of the mentioned in the Ryali plates, Kulottunga, or 
early Tamil Rajendra as he was then known, must have 

inscriptions of , , , 

Kulottunga. been a youth in his teens. For considering 

that he lived on to have a long rule of fifty 
years from a.d. 1070, it is hardly likely that about a.d. 1062 
he was more than twenty years of age. His earliest Tamil 
inscriptions record certain facts which seem to indicate how 
Rajendra engaged himself when he was thus kept out of his 



292 


THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


inheritance. The records of his second year 25 state that, with 
the aid only of the strength of his arms and his sword, he 
overcame the treachery of his enemies, captured many herds 
of elephants, levied tribute from the Nagavamsi king, Dhara- 
varsa of Cakrakuta, and gently raised the Earth resembling 
the lotus expecting the rise of the sun for blooming, as Visnu 
raised the Earth from the ocean in his boar incarnation, and 
seated her, to her great pleasure, under the shade of his 
parasol. 26 His records soon came to describe these achieve- 
ments as belonging to the period of his ilangop-paruvam, when 
he was still heir-apparent. 27 If this view is correct, we must 
conclude that Rajendra spent the best part of the period 
a.d. 1063-70 in the region of the modern Bastar state, and pos- 
sibly even carved out for himself a small dominion beyond it 
in the Purvadesa. even if he did not gain complete control 
over the Cakrakuta state and annex parts of the Purvadesa to 
it, as his inscriptions imply. Possibly this northern extension 
of the influence of Vengi, so closely allied to the Colas, was 
the cause of Vikramaditya’s expedition against Vengi and 
Cakrakuta, counteracted by the campaign of Virarajendra 
culminating in the battle of Bezwada. It will be remembered 
that in the course of this campaign. Virarajendra is said also 
to have marched up to Sakkarakkbttam. After the death of 
Virarajindra, Kulottunga marched into the Cola country in 
good time to get himself accepted as king; but more of this 
later. And as he did some fighting during these years and 
subsequently came to look upon the whole period as a sort 
of probation for the Cola throne, he might have felt justified 
in saying that he left Vengi to his uncle Vijayaditya at the 
death of his father for a double reason. 28 

We may now turn to the literary evidence on the subject 
of Kulottunga’s accession. On one matter 
Literary evidence. evidence of two works is in complete 
accord with that of the inscriptions. Both the Vikramdnkadiva 
Carita and the Vikramasolan-uld 29 are explicit in stating that 
Virarajendra was succeeded by another king before Kulot- 
tunga came to the throne; the ala by its very brief reference 
giving no particulars whatever of his reign, and the Carita by 
directly stating that he lost his life in a rebellion that occurred 
within a few days of his installation 30 , imply that he had a 
very short reign; this king was no doubt Parakesari Adhi- 



NO ADOPTION OF KULOTTUNGA 


293 


rajendra of the inscriptions. And Kulottunga himself recog- 
nised the legitimacy of Adhirajendra’s position when he styled 
him self Rajakesari. In some of his records, however, is found 
a double prasasti which, by combining the two forms virame 
tunai-ydgavum and pugalmadn vilanga, seems to set up a 
claim that Kulottunga should be considered the direct suc- 
cessor of Vlrarajendra. 31 And the Kalingattupparani of Jayan- 
gondar, makes it a point to ignore the reign of Adhirajendra. 32 
This poem is often cited in support of the notions that at his 
birth Kulottunga was adopted by Rajendra 
Was Kulcttunga Coladeva I into the Cola family and that he 
ad°pted mto was brought up in his maternal grand- 

father s court. 33 But there is nothing in the 
actual words employed by the poet to suggest either a formal 
ceremony of adoption or to enable us to know where the 
prince spent his early years. In fact the date of this prince’s 
birth must be placed at the end of Rajendra I’s reign, some 
time after a.d. 1040. By that time Rajadhiraja I had long been 
associated with his father as yuvaraja. and there were several 
brothers of his perhaps occupying responsible posts in the 
administration of the empire. There was no need for any adop- 
tion; and considering his marriage with Madhurantaki, it is 
impossible to postulate it. In fact all that Jayangondar says 
is that on the birth of the child, the queen of Gangaikonda- 
sola raised him in her hands and expressed her admiration of 
the marks on his limbs by observing that he was fit to be a 
son of the solar line born for its protection; in the very next 
verse the poet takes good care to add that the kings of both 
the lunar and the solar dynasties, that is Rajarajanarendra 
and Rajendra Gangaikonda, experienced joy on the occasion 
of the birth of the prince 34 After a convential account of the 
early years of the prince, the poet states than Abhaya 35 (Vira- 
rajendra) made him crown prince, and then proceeds to des- 
cribe his digvijaya of which particulars are furnished only 
with reference to the northern direction. He is said to have 
made his mark in Vayirakaram and Sakkarakkoftam. He was 
still in the north engaged in these campaigns when the Co] a 
king died in the south, and there ensued anarchy and confu- 
sion until Abhaya Kulottunga returned and restored order. 
This account of Jayangondar is remarkable in some ways. It 
studiously refrains from mentioning Adhirajendra and asserts 
that Vlrarajendra made Abhaya crown prince for the rule of 



THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


fhe Earth, meaning no doubt, the Cola kingdom; and it re- 
counts details of campaigns in Wairagarh and Cakrakuta 
exactly like the early inscriptions of Kulottunga to which 
attention has been drawn above. Though the poet aims, as 
Fleet has remarked, at treating Abhaya on the whole as a 
Cola prince rather than as Calukya, he has still not alto- 
gether suppressed the Calukya connections, and in his account 
of the youthful achievements of Abhaya he follows the early 
records of the reign rather closely. Above all. his account leaves 
no room for doubt as to the whereabouts of Abhaya at the 
time when his chance arrived to seize the Cola throne. It is 
also of some interest to note that in the account of Abhaya’s 
digvijaya. and in the attempt made, in the inscriptions, to 
combine the prasasti of Vlrarajendra with that of Kulottunga, 
and thus cast a doubt on the legitimacy of Adhirajendra’s rule, 
the poem and the inscriptions are in perfect agreement. 


The Vikraminkadeva Carita of Bilhana gives the story 
from yet another point of view, which is as 
A(Sir5j§ndra* hostile to Kulottunga as the Kalingattup- 
parani is favourable to him . 36 Soon after 
Vikramaditya’s marriage, his father-in-law the Cola king, 
died and the kingdom fell into a state of anarchy. When he 
heard of these things, he set out for Kanci with the definite 
object of helping the late king’s son to the throne. At Kanci, 
Vikramaditya spent some days in bringing the wicked (dusta- 
varga) to their knees, and then marched to Gangakunda 
where he destroyed the forces of the enemy and finally secur- 
ed the throne for the Cola prince. After spending about a 
month in that city, Vikramaditya. apparently satisfied that 
peace had been restored, retired to the Tungabhadra. Within 
a few days after his return, the news reached him that his 
brother-in-law had lost his life in a fresh rebellion and that 
Rajiga. the lord of Vengi, had captured the throne vacated 
by the Cola prince. ‘Vikramaditya VI marched at once 


against Rajiga. The latter induced Somesvara II to combine 
with him; and a battle was fought. But the victory rested with 
Vikramaditya VI; Rajiga fled and Somesvara II was taken 


prisoner. This lost Somesvara the throne; and shortly after- 
wards, according to the poem, Vikramaditya VI allowed him- 
self to be proclaimed ruler of the Dekkan .' 37 



CAUSE OF ANARCHY 


295 


Certain questions naturally arise from this account: who 
was responsible for the troubles that fol- 

Kulottungas lowed Vlrarajendra’s death and rendered it 

share in them. 

necessary for Vikramaditya to come over 
to KancI and Gangakunda to secure the succession for his bro- 
ther-in-law? Who were the wicked people of KancI and the 
hostile forces of Gangakunda whom Vikramaditya had to sup- 
press before Adhirajendra could feel secure on the throne and 
Vikramaditya himself retire to the Tungabhadra? And what 
was the nature of the rebellion in which Adhirajendra lost 
his life within a few days after Vikramaditya’s retirement? 
There is no direct statement in the Vikramankadeva Carita of 
Kulottunga’s complicity in these conspiracies and rebellions; 
but the facts that they paved the way for Kulottunga’s acces- 
sion to the Cola throne, that Vikramaditya VI marched 
against him and made an attempt to oust him after he occu- 
pied it, and the silence of the Kalingattupparani on Adhira- 
jendra’s reign seem to furnish some ground for the inference 
that Kulottunga’s ambition and intrigue brought about these 
occurrences. But a strict regard to the actual statements of 
Bilhana may not support any conclusion more precise than 
that of Fleet, 38 ‘that Kulottunga Coladeva I was enabled to 
seize the Cola crown through internal disturbances in the 
Cola kingdom, which culminated in the death of the last 
Cola king.’ 

An attempt has been made 39 to connect these internal dis- 
turbances in the Cola kingdom that led to 

Was religion the extinction of the direct line of the Colas 
Ihe cause? ■ 

with the story of the persecution suffered 
by Ramanuja and his disciples as it is narrated in Vaisnava 
hagiology. Without minimising the difficulty of reconciling all 
the data proceeding from a mass of contradictory legends, but 
confining our attention to the professedly earliest biographies 
of Ramanuja like the final chapters of the Divyasuricarita 40 
and the Yatirdja-vaibhavam , u it is just possible to identify the 
Cola who died as Krmikantha in consequence of the perse- 
cution to which he subjected Ramanuja and his followers with 
either Adhirajendra, or possibly with Virarajendra with whom 
the direct C5la line practically comes to a close. The cate- 
gorical statement in the Divyasuricarita that God Siva of Tiru- 
varur proclaimed the end of the rule of the kings of the Cola 



296 THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 
family, 42 and the chaos at the end of Vlrarajendra’s rule 
which is attested by, but not accounted for, by the Kalingat- 
tupparani and the Vikramdnkadeva Carita, and which might 
have been the concomitant of a religious upheaval, lend plau- 
sibility to the suggestion thus made. But it must be recognised 
that the details of the chronology of the life of Ramanuja fur- 
nished by other works are not easy to explain on this assump- 
tion, and that it is perhaps impossible to reconcile all the data 
furnished by legend on any single hypothesis. 42 

Before concluding this discussion of the circumstances of 
Kulottunga’s accession, it must be pointed out that the prove- 
nance of the inscriptions of the early years of Kulottunga now 
known does not confirm the views to which Hultzsch gave 
expression in his masterly introduction to Kulottunga’s ins- 
criptions of these years. It shows, on the contrary, that from 
a.d. 1070 onwards Kulottunga was practically master of the 
entire Cola country, except, of course, for the hostile move- 
ment of Vikramaditya VI which remained to be dealt with, 
and the risings in the south, always ready to break out on 
every possible occasion and now favoured by the confusion 
following Virarajendra’s death. Inscriptions of Rajendra’s 
second year 44 with the characteristic introduction or with a 
verifiable date are found in Kandamangalam (South Arcot) 
and Valuvur (Tanjore) : of the third year 45 at Alangutji, Nal- 
lur (Tanjore) . Idaiyar and Tribhuvani, (South Arcot) . And 
there are records of the second and fourth years already giv- 
ing him the name Kulottunga. 46 It seems necessary therefore 
to give up the ideas that some years elapsed after Rajiga 
entered the Cola kingdom and before he actually occupied the 
territory on the banks of the Kaveri; and that his formal 
assumption of Cola sovereignty in the fifth year was marked 
by the adoption of the name Kulottunga. 47 The fact seems to 
have been that, as is implied by the Vikramankadei'a Carita, 
Rajiga came to the south soon after Adhirajendra’s demise 48 
and appropriated to himself the whole kingdom of the Colas, 
in so far as it was possible to do this by a single formal act. 
In fact, he became the Cola king. It remained of course for 
him to hold the new position against Vikramaditya’s attack 
and to suppress other disorders. And if it is true, as seems 
likely, that some other records bearing early regnal years like 
the second and third of Kulottunga 49 are also really his, then 



MANNER OF ACCESSION 


297 


it becomes quite certain that the title Kuldttunga was also 
assumed by him from the very commencement. 

To sum up the results of the discussion. Despite the 
statement in the Kalingattiipparani that 
Summary. Virarajendra made Kuldttunga his crown 

prince, the evidence of Adhirajendra’s inscriptions, the Vikra- 
mankadeva Carita and the Vikramasolanula makes it clear 
that this could not have happened, and that, consequently, we 
have to assume that the court-poet of Kuldttunga introduced 
this story to give validity to Kulottunga’s title to the Cola 
throne. There is no direct statement even by Jayangondar 
that Kuldttunga was either adopted into the Cola family or 
that he was brought up in the Cola court. The copper-plate 
grants of the Eastern Calukyas, those of Vijayaditya VII, of 
Saktivarman II and of the sons of Kuldttunga himself, to- 
gether with the early Tamil records of Kulottunga’s reign, 
lead us to reconstruct the period of Kulottunga’s youth and 
his career until he came to the Cola throne somewhat as fol- 
lows. At the time of his father’s death, his uncle Vijayaditya 
made himself master of the Vengl kingdom and kept the 
prince Rajendra. as he was then called, out of his inheritance. 
Alone and unaided, he sought a life of adventure across the 
Vengl frontier in the land of Cakrakuta (Bastar). Possibly 
he carved a small principality for himself and after making 
his peace with his uncle Vijayaditya, especially as, after the 
death of Saktivarman II, this must have been easy, he bided 
his time hoping that in some manner he might gain the Cola 
throne for himself. The confusion that followed the death of 
Virarajendra in the internal affairs of the Cola kingdom help- 
ed him to achieve his object in spite of the attempts of 
Calukya Vikramaditya VI to prevent the union of the Vengl 
and Cola kingdoms in the same hands. The evidence is not 
clear on the question of Kulottunga’s complicity in the rebel- 
lions that at first obstructed the accession and then shorten- 
ed the rule of Adhirajendra. There is just a possibility that 
these disturbances were religious in origin and connected with 
the Cola persecution of Vaisnavism in the days of Ramanuja, 
a fact well attested in legends, though the details of the story 
are very obscure. In any event, Kuldttunga began to rule in 
the Cola kingdom from about 9 June a.d. 1070. 50 In his 
later inscriptions Kuldttunga claims to have obtained the Cola 
C. 38 



298 


THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


crown by right and thereby become an acceptable companion 
to the land of the Kaveri in her loneliness . 51 

1. El. vii p. 7 n. 5. June 13 is now suggested, ARE. 1947-8 p. 3 
and No. 108 from Srirangam of the year’s collection. 

2. vi. w. 6-25. 

3. IA. xx p. 277 

4. Pamulavaka plates of Vijayaditya VH. 11. 62-3; JAHRS. ii. 287. 

5. (ibid) 1. 81. 

6. JAHRS. v. pp. 33, ff. 

7. paroksam Rajarajasya bhratur-dvaimaturasya yah | 
paryagrahin-maha-rajya-sriyam vira-sriya yutah | | 

My thanks are due to Mr T. N. Ramachandran (of the Madras 
Museum) for assisting me in consulting the unpublished Ryali plates in 
his custody. See also ARE. 1925. II. 5; JAHRS. v: p. 44, v: 16: 

8. El. vi, pp. 349-50. 

9. This date is given as S. 986 in ARE. 1914 II 10 and 983 in App. 
A. (ibid.). The text is: guna-vasu-nidhi. The astronomical details fit 
98S better. 

10. ARE. 1901, paragraph 12; S/7, iii p. 128. Eastern Calukyas, pp. 
245 ff, and 295-302. 

11. 7A. xx 277-8. 

12. BG. I, ii 454 and n. 5. 

13. JAHRS. i p. 215; v. 206-8; ARE. 1925 II 3, Eastern Calukyas, 
pp. 250-5. 

14. ARE. 1925 H 3. 

15. Fleet. BG. ibid. 

16. El. vi 35. SU. i. 39, 1A. xix. p. 427; EL v. 10. 

17. Rajaraja Coda-ganga was crowned in Vengl in Saka 1006 (v. 
34); before him Vira Coda was viceroy for six years and Mumma^i- 
coda for one year (w. 19 and 17), so that the beginning of Mummadi’s 
viceroyalty fell in Saka 999 or a.d. 1077. 

18. JA. xviii pp. 166-9; Komi plates, JAHRS. i, pp. 106. ff. 

19. IA. xviii. pp. 163-4. 

20. IA. xx. p. 276. 

21. 271 of 1896; El. iv. 45. E. Ganga Rajaraja came to power on 
May 20, aj>. 1070 (ARE. 1919, App. A. No 4): 248 of 1896, dated Saka 990 
records a gift by a queen of his predecessor Vajrahasta. 

22. SI1. iii. p. 127. 

23. 7A. xx. 277, 282. 

24. ARE. 1899 paragraph 51. 

25. SII. iii 64-7, as corrected by Hira Lai, El. ix p. 179 n. 1 and 2. 
Also 125 of 1900 with the pu me I arivai introduction recording the same 
transactions in other words. 

26. The phrase arukkan udayattu asaiyil irukkum kamalam anaiya 
nilamagal has been often misunderstood. It is mere poetry, and con- 
tains no geography. Hultzseh's equation of this phrase with Vengi 
(SII. iii p. 132) and Dr. S. K. Aiyangar’s suggestion that there is a 



NOTES 


reference to Kadaram here ( Ancient India, pp. 130-1), are alike wrong. 
The correct explanation was first put forward by A. V. Venkatarama 
Aiyar in his Sankara-Parvati lecture (1943) in the University of Madras 
— see Proceedings, Indian History Congress, Aligarh, 1943, pp. 161-2. 

27. SII. iii. 68. 

28. It is obviously impossible to discuss fully all the theories that 
have been suggested about Kulottunga ’s position in 1063-70. I am 
fully alive to the responsibility of adding one more to these, not to my 
knowledge suggested before by others. My only warrant is that this 
seems to be the normal interpretation of the language of the inscriptions 
of Kulottunga himself. The other views centre round the hypothesis 
that Rajendra was yuvaraja to his father Rajaraja-narendra when he 
fought the campaign against Dharavarsa or that he was yuvaraja to 
VIrarajendra. The latter seems impossible, in view of Adhirajendra’s 
position and inscriptions. The former hypothesis is quite feasible, pro- 
vided the date is not placed too early. ( JAHRS . i. pp. 217-8). 
Another view makes Kulottunga a dupe of circumstances who, having, 
after a fight in which Saktivarman II was killed like Abhimanyu (an 
inference not supported by the language of the Ryali plates), made his 
peace with his bereaved uncle, found himself baulked in his design 
upon the Cola throne by the prompt usurpation of VIrarajendra (JAHRS. 
v. pp. 208-11). This writer has apparently overlooked the probability 
that VIrarajendra might have been recognised as heir to Rajendradeva 
on the death of Rajamahendra. He is also clearly wrong in mixing up 
Yasah-karnadeva’s inroad into Trikalinga with these transactions, for 
he did not come to power till aj>. 1073 (EL xii p. 207). Hultzsch’s view 
that before a.d. 1072 Rajendra-Kulottunga took Vengi from his uncle 
Vijayaditya VII who appears to have received it from the Cola king 
VIrarajendra (SII. iii. p. 132) goes against the express statement in the 
Teki and other grants that Vijayaditya ruled Vengi continuously for 
fifteen years, and is now contradicted by the Ryali plates of the twelfth 
year of Vijayaditya c. a.d. 1074; but the E. Ganga records (p. 289 ante ) 
must be taken into account here. See also ARE. 1914, II 10 where SII. 
iii. p. 128 is followed. 

29. 11. 44-5 — Angavan pin Icavalpurindavani kattonum. 

30. vi. 26. 

31. 156 of 1923 (Yr. 2); 197 of 1919 (Yr. 5), the former having only 
virame tunai; 197 and 199 of 1929 and 434 of 1912 (Yrs. 37, 38 and 43). 
ARE. 1913, II. 33. 

32. Verse viii. 29 asserts that directly after the victory of Kudal- 
£angamam the earth, to her great good fortune, passed into the hands 
of Abhaya, the hero of the poem. The ‘mannar-mannan’ or ‘mannar- 
vlran’ of x. 25 cannot be Adhirajendra as Hultzsch thinks (SII. iii p. 
129), but VIrarajendra. 

33. Hultzsch SII. iii. pp. 127. 196. S. K Aiyangar — op. cit. pp- 125 

129. 

34. x, vv. 5-7. 

35. Abhaya’ in this verse x. 18 does refer to VIrarajendra cf. viii 
29; and from this account of VIrarajendra’s recognition of Kulottunga, 
the conclusion has been drawn that Adhirajendra was a bastard with 
no title to the throne. 



300 THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

36. vi. 7-26. 

37. Fleet IA. xx. p. 281. 

38. IA. xx. p. 282: 

39. IA. xli pp. 217 ff. 

40. Ed. Alkondavilli Govindacarya-Mysore 1885, text in Telugu 
characters. Nagari text in the Sahrdaya (New series). 

41. IA. xxxviii pp. 129 ff. See, however, IA. xl p. 152, for a critique. 

42. xviii 84. 

43. To refrain from dogmatism in dealing with such shifty material 
is as necessary as it is difficult. Krmikantha-Cola has generally been 
identified with Kulottunga I, on the strength of the name Kulottunga 
given to the Cola persecutor of Ramanuja in late works like the Kdyilo- 
lugu. A. Govindacaryasvamin — Life of Ramanuja (Madras 1906) p. 170. 
S. K. Aiyangar Ancient India pp. 150 and 207. Dr. Aiyangar is inclined 
to date the decline of Cola power from the end of Kulottunga I’s reign, 
op. cit. pp. 152 and 318. It has been pointed out that the traditional date 
for the foundation of the temple at Melukote is against this identifica- 
tion of Krmikantha. (IA. vol. xli. p. 224). It is possible that 'Kulot- 
tunga' is used in late works as a generic name for Cola. The name is 
not found even in the Guruparampraprabhava. (Arayirappadi; ed. Mad- 
ras 1927). Krmikantha-Cola is said to have uprooted and thrown into 
the sea the image of Govindaraja from the front of the Nataraja shrine 
at Cidambaram, and this act of sacrilege is placed by the Divyasuricarita 
at the very beginning of the Cola persecution of Visnuism, (xviii 72). 
The same fact is recalled by the much later Prapannamrtam (quoted 
by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar op. cit. p. 320). The poet Ottakkuttan seems to 
attribute this deed to Kulottunga Il—Kulottungasolanula 11. 76-8; Raja- 
rajasolan-ula 11. 64-6 which is most explicit, and Takkayagapparani v. 
777. But no one, on this account, seems to be prepared to identify the 
persecutor of Ramanuja with Kulottunga II. This king is, however, 
known to have extended the temple of Nataraja by putting up new 
structures and 'gilding' it, and it may be that the Tamil poet in describing 
this act of his attributes to him a deed of one of his predecessors. Other- 
wise the genuineness of even the Divyasiincarita would be suspect. 

44. 358 of 1917; 425 of 1912. 

45. 497 of 1920. 55 of 1911: 279 of 1929; 185 of 1919. 

46 156 of 1923. (2): 101 of 1928. 468 of 1913 (4). 

47. S/I. iii pp. 132. 140. 

48. The civil war between Adhirajendra and the ‘usurper’ postu- 
lated in ARE. 1904 paragraph 21 is pure myth. 

49. 145. 147. 151 of 1906: 142 of 1929; 55 of 1911; 586 of 1907; 267 
of 1917; 126 of 1912. 

50. El. vii p. 7 n. 5. See also n. 1 ante. 

51 SII. iii 68. ‘Podumai’ does not mean ‘prostitution’ as Hultzsch 
understands it. The idea is that LaksmI, the wealth of the southern 
country, had become common, ownerless, and the land of the Kaveri 
lonely, uncompanioned, when the C61a succession failed: both found 
a remedy for their situation in the coming of Kulottunga. 



Chapter XIII 


KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 

The accession of Kulottunga I marks the commencement 
of a new era in the history of the Cola 
A new epoch. empire. At the end of nearly a century of 
dubious subordination to the Cola empire, the kingdom of 
Vengl now became definitely a province of the empire resus- 
citated by its own ruler. After Kulottunga became Cola 
emperor, Veng! was ruled successively by his sons as vice- 
roys, and this added greatly to the strength of the Cola . 

empire by shutting the door against the intrigues of the West- ; 

ern Calukyas in that quarter. The first Calukya-Cola empe- 
ror soon overcame the troubles that threatened at his acces- > 

sion to bring about the collapse of the empire, and after estab- J 

lishing himself on his new throne, he had a long reign charac- jj 

terised, for the best part of it, by unparalleled success and 
prosperity. He avoided unnecessary wars and evinced a true 
regard for the well-being of his subjects. The permanent 
results of his policy are seen in the reigns of his successors. 

For about a century, until we reach the time of Kulot- 
tunga III, the empire, though not so extensive as before, 
still holds well together, and there is on the whole less of the 
chronic warfare of the age which preceded the accession of * 

Kulottunga. The impossible attempt to extend the empire 
across the Tungabhadra frontier into Rattapadi is definitely 
given up by Kulottunga I, and he even puts up with some 
loss of territory in the Mysore country consequent on the rise 
of the Hoysalas about the close of his reign. And the loss of 
Vengi, though serious, was only temporary, as his successors 
recovered most of it. The wisdom of Kuldttunga’s statesman- f 

ship lay in adjusting his aims to his resources, in his not for- * 

saking the possible good in the pursuit of the impossible 
better, and in his preferring the well-being of his subjects to 
the satisfaction of his personal vanity. He ensured for his 

subjects a century of peace and good government. | 


302 


KULOTTUNGA I 


Kul5ttunga’s reign began approximately on 9 June a.d. 

1070 1 . As he ruled for fifty years there- 
^ Historical intro- after, 2 he must have been a young man at 
accession. The asterism of his birth was 
Pusya. 3 The numerous inscriptions of this long reign contain 
several prasastis. each with some variant forms. In the first 
four years the most common prasasti is the one commencing 
tiru manni vilanga or valara which records the achievements 
of Kulottunga (here called Rajendra) before he came to the 
Cola throne. These events have been discussed already in 
relation to the problem of his accession. The latest records 
containing this early prasasti are dated in the fourth year. 
The same events are also narrated in different words in an- 
other prasasti known so far only from one record of the sixth 
year at Tirukkovalur and commencing pu mil arivaiyumA Yet 
another prasasti. briefer and of far less historical value, also 
occurring in these four years, is that commencing pumiyum 
timvum, of which we have an expanded form in the rare 
introduction beginning pit maruviya tirumadandaiyum. 5 The 
two most common forms of the prasastis of the reign are the 
short introduction commencing pugal-madu vilanga which 
begins to appear in the fourth year 6 and the longer one com- 
mencing pugal siilnda punari appearing for the first time in 
the fifth regnal year. 7 Of these it is the latter prasasti that is 
most helpful to the historian on account of the revisions 
undergone by it as the reign advances. Other prasastis are: 
pu mevi valara appearing in the ninth year, 8 pu madu valara 
in the year after that, 9 tirumagal jayamagal in the twelfth 
year, 10 and possibly also pii madu punara in a mutilated ins- 
cription 11 of which the date is lost. We must also take account 
of the double introduction, virame tunai followed by pugal 
madu vdanga. which couples a prasasti of Virarajendra with 
that of Kulottunga and to which attention has been drawn 
already. This introduction is found as early as the fifth year 
in an inscription from Tribhuvani which also gives the Tri- 
bhuvanacakravartin title of Kuldttunga. 12 It is seen from the 
inscriptions of the reign now accessible to us that the titles 
Kulottunga and Cakravartin were also assumed by the 
emperor much earlier in his reign than was once thought. 



IN BASTAR 


303 


Of the early wars fought by Kulottunga in his youth 
(ilangop-paruvam) , some account has been 
Early wars. given in discussing his position between 

a.d. 1063 and 1070. It has been pointed out that he levied tri- 
bute from the Nagavamsi ruler Dharavarsa and possibly also 
carved out for himself a separate and independent principality 
in that quarter. The first few lines of the prasasti beginning 
pugal sulnda punari refer to the same events and add that by 
the strength of his arm he routed an army of the king of Kun- 
tala, 13 and thus donned the garland of victory in the north 
before he turned his attention to the south. This war with 
the king of Kuntala, doubtless the Western Calukya king, 
waged before 1070, was part of Kulottunga’s activity in the 
region of the modern Bastar state, and the circumstances that 
led to this conflict are the same as those recorded in some of 
the later inscriptions of Virarajendra and in Bilhana’s account 
of Vikramaditya’s digvijaya in so far as it relates to Vengl 
and Cakrakuta. After Somesvara I failed to turn up for the 
second encounter fixed to take place at Kudal-Sangama, Vira- 
rajendra threw down a challenge to the Vallabha (Calukya) , 
proceeded to recover Vengl, and after the victory of Bezwada, 
bestowed that kingdom once more on Vijayaditya VII. These 
data corroborate Bilhana’s statements that in his war-like 
career as yuvaraja Vikramaditya had conquered Vengl and 
Cakrakuta, and was encamping on the banks of the Krsna 
when the news of his father’s illness and death reached him. 
The Kalingattupparani 14 also implies that Vikramaditya fought 
against Kulottunga in the north at this time and that it was 
in this war that Kulottunga earned the title Virudardjabha- 
yankara, i.e. terror to Virudaraja or Vikramaditya. These 
events took place in a.d. 1067. And now it becomes clear 
from Kulottunga’s prasasti that his northern adventure might 
have helped Virarajendra in the war against Vikramaditya. 
Whether this means that Kulottunga, on his own account, 
repulsed Vikramaditya’s attack on Cakrakuta, or whether we 
may infer further that Kulottunga co-operated with Vira- 
rajendra and was present at the battle of Bezwada, it is not 
easy to decide. In any case, the effective assistance of Kulot- 
tunga in the release of Vengl from the Western Calukya hold 
shows that Kulottunga might have been on friendly relations 
with Virarajendra and kept up a live interest in the affairs 



304 


KULOTTUNGA I 


of the Vengi and Cola kingdoms. That, as a result of the 
wars, the kingdom of Vengi was restored to Vijayaditya gives 
us the measure of the truth of Kulottunga s statement made 
later to his son Rajaraja that in his youth he preferred a life 
of war and adventure and so left the kingdom of Vengi to be 
ruled by his uncle Vijayaditya. It is probable that this exile 
was not altogether voluntary and was in the first instance 
brought about by the ambitions of Vikramaditya and Vijaya- 
ditya . 15 

The death of Virarajendra after he had made his peace 
with Vikramaditya VI, the accession of 
Accession to the Adhirajendra, and the revolution in the 
Cola throne. Cola country that was arrested for a time 

by Vikramaditya's intercession, but, after the retirement of 
Vikramaditya to the Tungabhadra, ran its full course and 
ended fatally for Adhirajendra, gave Kulottunga the opportu- 
nity to make himself master of the Cola kingdom. The theory 
of a civil war between Adhirajendra and Kulottunga that has 
sometimes been put forward 16 gets no support from the ins- 
criptions, and appears highly improbable. There is likewise 
no warrant for the view that Kulottunga at first gained con- 
trol of a part of the Cola kingdom and became master of the 
whole of it only at the end of four or five years of fighting , 17 
or that he killed many princes of the blood to clear his way 
to the throne . 18 The inscriptions of Kuldttunga, however, 
agree with the Kalingattuppcirani in stating that his advent 
to the south rescued the Cola country from a state of anarchy 
and dissolution, and restored unity and order in that land. 
The inscriptions say: ‘In the south, he put on the pure jewel- 
led crown by right so as to put an end to the commonness of 
the goddess 19 of the sweet smelling lotus-flower (Laksmi) 
and the loneliness of the good earth-maiden who had the Ponni 
(Kaveri) for her garment.’ There is not the slightest sugges- 
tion here of any opposition encountered by Kulottunga in the 
Cola country; rather his advent is said to have been quite 
welcome, if not actually sought after. Writing some years 
later, when Kulottunga had, by his wise and strong rule, 
secured for the people of the empire several years of con- 
tinued peace and prosperity, Jayangondar draws in deeper 
colours his picture of the anarchy that preceded the advent 
of Kulottunga : 20 



ANARCHY ENDED 


305 


‘Brahmanical sacrifices were given up; the path of 
Manu was totally deserted; the six sciences were for- 
gotten and the chanting of the Vedas ceased. 

‘The castes mixed one with another in wild confu- 
sion; none keeping to their prescribed paths of duty, (the 
code of proper) conduct was forgotten. 

‘Each sought to tyrannise the others, the temples of 
the gods were neglected; women lost their chastity; and 
fortresses fell into ruin. 

‘While the darkness of Kali was thus spreading, he 
(Abhaya) came to the rescue of the world, like the sun 
rising above the roaring sea and driving away darkness. 

‘He made it his duty to create afresh all the safe- 
guards (for the people), he restored all the (old) rules 
and again established the earth on the proper path. 

‘Amidst the roar of the four oceans and the chanting 
of the four Vedas, and the blessings of the three worlds, 
he was anointed. ’ 

We may recognise a substratum of fact beneath the 
exaggerations of this conventional picture of anarchy. Though 
the true course of events is obscure, and the hypothesis of 
religious persecution leading to a political revolution rests on 
vague and confused tradition, it is clear that the prospect was 
gloomy indeed when Kulottunga came to rule over the Cola 
dominion. War and rebellion had raised their heads, and the 
southern portions of the empire including Ceylon had pro- 
claimed their independence. Kulottunga devoted the first few 
years of his reign to deal with these troubles. 

The first enemy to be dealt with was the Western Caluk- 
ya Vikramaditya VI, who now found that 
m§ditya Vith Vikra ’ his efforts to extend his power to Vengl 
had proved futile, and what was worse, that 
Vengi became more closely united than ever to the hostile 
power of the Colas. Vikramaditya was therefore sure to 
oppose Kulottunga’s accession and lead an expedition against 
him. Kulottunga lost no time in strengthening himself by 
fresh alliances. There was no love lost between Vikramaditya 
and his elder brother Somesvara II, who had been compelled 



30ft 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


by Virarajendra to part with some of his territory to Vikra- 
maditya , 21 and it was obvious that Kulottunga could make a 
successful appeal to Somesvara for assistance in the war 
against his brother; and that was what he did. Says Bilhana 22 

‘After the lapse of only a few days, when the Cola’s 
son (Adhirajendra) was slain in a rebellion of his sub- 
jects, the lord of Vengi, Rajiga by name, took possession 
of his throne by the concurrence of fortune. This crooked- 
minded man suspected danger from him (Vikramaditya) . 
and in order to create a diversion in his rear, he put him- 
self straight with Somadeva, his (Vikramaditya’s) natu- 
ral enemy .... What has this noble-minded (Vikramadit- 
ya) done to his elder brother, that the latter should, with 
intent to injure him, enter into a compact with their 
family foe, the Cola Rajiga? When the king’s son (Vikra- 
maditya) started on his expedition for the chastisement 
of the impolitic Rajiga, Somadeva pursued him quickly 

at the back with his entire forces When the mass of 

the Dravida army drew near the liberal-handed prince 
(Vikramaditya), this king (Somesvara) also approached, 
having gained at last an opportunity of injuring (him ) . ,23 

Vikramaditya was also very ably assisted in the campaign 
by a number of his allies and vassals. The Yadava king of Deva- 
giri helped him as an ally . 24 Among the vassals present with 
Vikramaditya were the Hoysala Ereyanga 25 and Tribhuvana- 
malla Pandya 26 besides the Kadamba Jayakesi, already men- 
tioned as the ally of Vikramaditya. Accord- 
Bilhana s account. - n g Bilhana’s account, at the end of a 
hard contest in which the armies of Somesvara and Kulot- 
tunga engaged the forces of Vikrama, ‘the Dravida lord fled 
the field and Somadeva entered the prison .’ 27 Vikrama then 
retired to the Tungabhadra. He intended to restore his cap- 
tive brother to liberty and to the throne, but, as on the eve 
of the battle, Siva interposed a second time in a dream and 
commanded Vikrama to assume the sovereignty himself , 28 
and he did so. He also made his younger brother Jayasimha 
viceroy at Banavase . 29 After some further expeditions and 
conquests, of which no details are forthcoming, and after once 
more extinguishing the valour of the Cola . 30 he duly entered 
his capital Kaljana. 



FIGHTING IN GANGAVADI 


307 


As may be expected, the account of the campaign found 
in Cola inscriptions differs in many details 
Cola version. j n the result of the fight; the subse- 

quent course of events shows, however, that this version is 
on the whole nearer the truth than the kavya of Bilhana. 

‘Not only did the speech (of Vikkalan) — “After this 
day a permanent blemish (will attach to Kulottunga), as 
to the crescent (which is the origin) of (his) family” — 
turn out wrong, but the bow (in) the hand of Vikkalan 
was not (even) bent against (the enemy). 31 Everywhere 
from Nangili of rocky roads — with Manalur in the middle 
— to the Tungabhadra, there were lying low the dead 
(bodies of his) furious elephants, his lost pride and (his) 
boasted valour. The very mountains which he ascended 
bent their backs, the very rivers into which (he) des- 
cended eddied and breached (the banks) in their course: 
(and) the very seas into which he plunged became 
troubled and agitated. (The Cola king) seized simultan- 
eously the two countries (pan?) called Gangamandalam 
and Singanam, troops of furious elephants which had been 
irretrievably abandoned (by the enemy) , crowds of 
women with beautiful lustrous eyes, the goddess of fame 
who gladly brought disgrace (on Vikkalan) , and the great 
goddess of victory who changed to the opposite side and 
caused (Vikkalan) himself and his father, who were desi- 
rous of the rule over the western region, to turn their 
backs again and again on many days.’ 

Some earlier versions of these incidents substitute the 
general phrase V elkulattarasar or V elpulattarasu i.e., the 
Galukyan king or kings, for Vikkalan, and the specific place- 
name Alatti for the region from Nangili to Tungabhadra. 32 

The earliest allusion to this war traceable in the inscrip- 
tions of the reign occurs in the words: 
Date ' ‘Vikkalan and Singanan plunging into the 

western sea’, found in the pugal mudu introduction for the 
first time in the seventh year. 33 The actual fight with Vikra- 
maditya took place, therefore, some years after Kulottunga’s 
reign began and not, as Bilhana’s narrative implies, im- 
mediately after his accession. This is also borne out by 
Calukya inscriptions which place these occurrences in the ex- 
pired &aka year 998, or a.d. 1076. 34 The interval of five or six 



308 


KULOTTUNGA I 


years was doubtless employed by both sides in preparations, 
diplomatic and military, for the coming fight. For Vikrama- 
ditya would not acquiesce without a struggle in the permanent 
union of Vengi and Cola in the same hands, and Kulottunga 
knew this very well. 

The war began with an advance of Vikramaditya into the 
Cola territory till he encountered the Cola army in the 
Kolar district, whence, if the Cola inscrip- 
tions may be trusted, Vikramaditya was 
results of the pursued by the Cola forces, through Mana- 
war ' lur 35 not identified, up to the banks of the 

Tungabhadra; and there was heavy fighting 
all along the road. In the result, the Cola ruler, besides cap- 
turing much valuable booty, became master of the Ganga- 
mandalam and Singanam. The identity of Singanam is doubt- 
ful; Hultzsch suggested that it means the dominions of Jaya- 
simha III : 36 but the territory ruled over by Jayasimha III was 
Banavase and not only is there no evidence of the present 
campaign having extended to that country, but Bilhana says 
that Vikramaditya made his brother Jayasimha ruler of Bana- 
vase at the end of the war with Kulottunga, and that Jayasimha 
was still in charge of that territory some years later when he 
revolted against his brother and sought the assistance of Kulot- 
tunga. It is probable, however, that before the war began, 
Jayasimha was in charge of some territory to the south and 
east of the Tungabhadra. Kulottunga’s claim that, as a result 
of the war, he found himself in possession of a considerable 
part of the Mysore country is borne out by the provenance of 
his inscriptions, and Bilhana’s statement that Kulottunga fled 
from the battlefield is not to be trusted. The Kalingtittup- 
parani 37 mentions some of the incidents of this war such as 
the fights at Alatti and Manalur, and the capture of elephants 
in Navilai. possibly the same as Navile-nad of the Mysore in- 
scriptions . 38 The Vikramasdlan-ula states that Kulottunga 
reached the western sea. and captured Konkana and Kan- 
nada countries and humbled the pride of the Mahratha king — 
a statement which implies that even Banavase might have 
been overrun, though perhaps only for a time. The worst suf- 
ferer was Somesvara II. who fell into the hands of his brother 
as a prisoner and thus lost his kingdom. What ultimately 
became of him is not known . 39 



SOUTHERN AFFAIRS 


309 


Bilhana says that Jayasimha, the newly appointed vice- 
roy of Banavase, contemplated treason 
simha 01 * 0l Jaya ~ against his brother Vikramaditya, within a 
year after his appointment, and that he 
sought the aid of Kulottunga in his attempted revolt. 40 It is 
not necessary to pursue the story of this rebellion here; for 
Bilhana’s account makes it clear that Kulottunga took little 
or no part in the civil war that followed. This was obviously 
because he had more important affairs claiming his attention. 
Vikramaditya, thus left free to deal with the rebellion, sup- 
pressed it without any difficulty, and. as we shall see. soon 
began to add to the troubles of Kulottunga by establishing 
friendly relations with his enemies. Soon after Vijayabahu 
proclaimed himself ruler of the whole of Ceylon after his ex- 
pulsion of the Colas from the northern half of the island, 
Vikramaditya sent him a friendly embassy with rich presents. 41 
In fact, throughout his long reign Vikramaditya was untiring 
in the pursuit of his design against Kulottunga in all possible 
quarters. But Bilhana’s rhapsodic account of a final expedi- 
tion against Kahci for the exercise of his hero’s arms 
itching for a fight in the absence of suitable foes, 42 can hardly 
be accepted as true. 

While Kulottunga was settling his affairs in the south, 
the kingdom of Vengi in the north was in- 
in^VSnlf invasion vaded by Yasahkamadeva, the Haihaya 
ruler of Tripurl. In his inscriptions, dating 
from a.d. 1072-3, this king claims to have easily overcome the 
strong ruler of the Andhra country and to have propitiated 
Bhagavan BhTmesvara of Draksarama with presents of many 
costly jewels. 43 The Andhra ruler mentioned was no doubt 
Vijayaditya VII. Yasahkama’s inroad does not seem to have 
had any consequences, military or political, worth mentioning. 
And there is no proof that it was in any manner connected 
with the designs of the Western Calukyas or of Vijayaditya 
VII. as has sometimes been assumed. 44 

At the close of his war with Vikramaditya VI, Kulottunga 
turned his attention to the south. The 
C^lonese" affairs P^hidya country was never reconciled to the 
imposition of Cola overlordship, and its 
rulers had always been a source of trouble to the most power- 
ful Co]a emperors. The period of confusion that followed the 



310 KULOTTUNGA I 

death of Virarajendra, the popular rebellion against his suc- 
cessor Adhirajendra, and the hard struggle forced on Kulot- 
tunga in the early years of his reign by the policy of Vikra- 
maditya VI, provided a golden opportunity to the kingdoms 
of the south to reassert their independence. The adminis- 
trative arrangements made by the Colas in these lands went 
to pieces, and the native rulers of the countries began to rule 
in their own right as their inscriptions show. 45 The most sus- 
tained efforts of Kuiottunga resulted in the reconquest of the 
Pandya and Kgrala countries between the seventh and eleventh 
years of his reign, but Ceylon permanently disappeared from 
the Cola empire. Some account may be given of the establish- 
ment of Ceylonese independence before the story of the re- 
conquest of the south is taken up. 

We have seen that before the accession of Virarajendra, 
the Sinhalese prince Kitti freed Rohana of 
Ceylon. enemies and, in 1058, assumed the title 

Vijayabahu in his seventeenth year of age. 46 Cola rule was 
thereafter mostly confined to the northern part of the island 
known as Rajarattha. The latest Cola inscription found at 
Polonnaruwa is dated a.d. 1070, the third and last year of the 
reign of Adhirajendra. The disappearance of Cola power from 
Rajarattha is clearly narrated in the Mahavamsa. The chro- 
nicle does not give exact dates for all the transactions record- 
ed; but it says definitely that Vijayabahu I entered Anuradha- 
pura in the fifteenth year of his Rohana rule and thirty-third 
of his life, in a.d. 1073 and that two years later, there took 
place his coronation as ruler of all Ceylon. 47 This is in per- 
fect accord with what we know otherwise of the first five 
years of Kulottunga’s reign and with the absence of any Cola 
inscription of Kulottunga’s reign in Ceylon. The Mahavamsa 
says 48 that the successful efforts of Vijayabahu to liberate 
Ceylon from the Colas began in the twelfth year of his reign, 
a.d. 1070. He took up his abode in the fortress on the Paluttha 
mountain, round which ‘a terrible fight between the two armies 
took place’. The Damila army was put to fight, and in the 
pursuit that followed, the C6]a general was captured and de- 
capitated. Then Vijayabahu occupied Pulatthinagara without 
any further resistance from the Tamils. But soon a larger 
Cola army came from the mainland, and there ensued another 
‘fiery battle’ near Anuradhapura: victory was with the Cola 



LOSS OF CEYLON 


311 


army, and Vijayabahu was compelled to fortify himself at 
Vatagiri, Vakirigala, in the Kegalla district. 49 The Colas now 
stirred up rebellion against Vijayabahu in the rear, but the 
king of Ceylon successfully stamped it out, and forced the 
leader of the revolt to seek refuge with the Colas. Vijayabahu 
then proceeded to Tambalagama where he erected a new 
stronghold,’ and taking up his residence in Mahanagakula on 
the lower Walawe Ganga, he made fresh preparations for the 
Cola war. He despatched two armies to attack the position 
of the Colas from two sides: one by the coast highroad against 
Polonnaruwa, and the other to the west of the mountain 
system against Anuradhapura. The king himself advanced by 
Mahaveliganga. Polonnaruwa fell after severe fighting, and 
‘when the ruler of the Colas heard of this destruction of his 
army, he thought: the Sihalas are (too) strong, and sent out 
no further army.’ Anuradhapura was captured by the other 
section of the Ceylonese army which pushed forward to Maha- 
tittha. Vijayabahu, ‘the best of kings, greatly rejoicing, ad- 
vanced in the fifteenth year (of his reign) to the greatly 
longed for, the best (town of) Anuradhapura’. His corona- 
tion as ruler of Lanka was delayed by a rebellion, and took 
place in his eighteenth year, a.d. 1076-7. Polonnaruwa now 
lost its Cola title and was styled Vijayarajapura. 50 Vijaya- 
bahu married Lilavati, daughter of Jagatlpala of Kanauj. 
whose queen had escaped from captivity in the Cola country, 
and also Trilokasundari of the Kalinga royal race, while his 
sister Mitta espoused a Pandyan prince, who became the 
grandfather of Parakramabahu the Great. ‘The king restored 
the Buddhist religion, renewing the priestly succession from 
Ramahna (Pegu), and caused a temple for the tooth relic to 
be built at the capital by his general Nuvaragiri’. 51 The in- 
scriptions of Kulottunga are silent on the loss of Ceylon. 

The declaration of independence by Ceylon did not involve 
so great a subtraction from the plenitude 
Wa* 16 Pandyan °f Cola power as the revolt of the southern 
kingdoms on the mainland. The Cola em- 
pire had nothing to fear from the independence of Ceylon if 
only it kept its power on the mainland unimpaired. The case 
of the Pandyan kingdom was different. If the Cola king 
failed to reduce it to subjection, it was sure to become a 
menace to the very existence of the Cola power. Kulottunga 



312 


KULOTTUNGA I 


knew this, and the moment he found himself free from the 
Calukya war, he bent all his energies towards the suppression 
of revolts in the Pandya and Kerala countries. 

Records of the fifth year of the reign contain a vague 
statement that the head of the Pandya king lay on the ground 
pecked by kites; later inscriptions say that this was outside 
the beautiful city of Kulottunga . 02 It is clear that these state- 
ments are not meant to be taken literally, and that they are 
no more historical than the exaggerated phrases of conven- 
tional praise that precede them in the inscriptions. For a 
more business-like account of the southern campaign, we must 
turn to the additional matter that begins to appear in the 
pugal siilnda punari introduction from the eleventh year , 53 
and to some other inscriptions of the reign. 

An undated Sanskrit inscription from Cidambaram 54 
states that Kulottunga overcame five Pandya kings, set fire 
to the fortress of Kottaru (like Arjuna burning the Khandava 
forest), subdued the numerous forces of the Keralas, and 
erected a pillar of victory on the sea-coast; thus it was that 
he reduced to obedience ( savidhikam akarot) the rebellious 
group of vassal kings. The more detailed account given by 
the Tamil inscriptions is as follows : 55 

‘ Having resolved in his mind to conquer the 
Pandimandalam together with great fame, he des- 
patched his great army, — which possessed excel- 
lent horses resembling the waves of the sea, war-ele- 
phants resembling ships, and infantry resembling water, 
— as though the Northern ocean was overflowing the 
Southern ocean. He completely destroyed the forest 
which the five Pandyas had entered as refuge when they 
fled cowering with fear, from the field of battle. He sub- 
dued their country, drove them into hot jungles in hills 
where woodmen roamed about, and planted pillars of 
victory in every direction. He seized the pearl fisheries, 
the Podiyil mountain where the three kinds of Tamil 
flourished, the Saiyya mountain in the heart of which 
were found furious rutting elephants, and Kanni. and 
fixed the boundaries of the Southern (Pandya) country. 
While all the Savers in the Western hill-country ascended 
to the unique heaven (attained by warriors who fell 



NEW POSITION OF PANDYA 313 

fighting), he was pleased to bestow on his commanders, 
who were mounted on horses, settlements on every road, 
including one at Kottaru, to strike terror into his enemies. ’ 
The V ikramasolan-uld 56 describes Kulottunga as the king 
with the army which routed the carp of the enemy (Pandya) , 
destroyed the bow (emblem of the Cera) and twice destroyed 
the fleet at Salai. The Kalingattupparani confirms these ac- 
counts: 57 

‘ Have you not heard of the destruction that overtook 
the five Pandyas when his army was despatched against 
them? Has it not reached your ears that the Ceras turned 
their backs when the (Cola) army marched to the fight? 
Was it not with the army that Vilinam on the sea was 
destroyed, and Salai captured? ’ 

These accounts of the conquest of the Pandyas and Ceras, 
the fights at Kottaru, Vilinam and Salai are substantially true; 
the Kulottunga-solan Pillaittamil mentions also a battle of 
Semponmari (Ramnad Dt.). 58 The decimation of the ranks 
of Savers , veteran soldiers who had banished from their hearts 
all fear of death and who formed a considerable section of the 
forces of the Pandyas 59 and the Ceras, must have been the 
result of very hard fighting. The identity of the five Pandyas 
conquered by Kulottunga remains obscure; 60 even Jatavar- 
man Srivallabha was not one of them, but seems to have be- 
gun his rule sometime after Kulottunga’s conquest and settle- 
ment of the southern country. Kulottunga was evidently not 
in a position to restore the Cola administrative arrangements 
introduced into the Pandya country by Rajaraja, I, and he 
hit upon the device of establishing military colonies (nilaip- 
padai ) along the important routes of communication in the 
Pandya and Kerala territory. Except for the presence of 
these military outposts, the symbols of Cola overlordship, the 
attempt to change place-names to commemorate Cola titles, 61 
and the collection of an annual tribute from the subordinate 
rulers of these districts, there was no attempt on the part of 
Kulottunga to interfere with their internal administration. The 
numerous inscriptions of the Pandyan kings of this period 
betray few signs of their political subjection to the Colas, and 
the inscriptions of Kulottunga and his successors are not 
found in such numbers in this area as in the territories under 
their direct rule. 62 


C. 40 



314 


KULOTTUNGA I 


About fifteen years after this reconquest and settlement 
of the southern country there seems to have been another 
revolt in which Venad took the lead. This 
Revolt and sup- f ac t is to be inferred from the considerable 
number of inscriptions which describe the 
services of Naralokavira, the earliest date occurring in these 
inscriptions being the twenty-eighth year of the reign of Kulot- 
tunga. 63 The interval between the close of the first Pandyan 
war of the reign and the first mention of Naralokavira in its 
inscriptions, and the frequent mention of Kalingaraya, one 
of the titles of Naralokavira, in the inscriptions of Jatavarman 
Srivallabha, render it likely that the southern campaign in 
which this commander distinguished himself, was different 
from the war in the early years of the reign. 64 The enemies 
dealt with and the places which formed the centres of conflict 
were naturally more or less the same as in the earlier war; 
the result was also the same. 

The success of Vijayabahu in establishing the indepen- 
dence of Ceylon by putting an end to Cola power in the island 
rankled in the mind of Kulottunga who was waiting for a 
favourable opportunity to renew the war with the Ceylonese 
ruler. 65 The Tamil population in Ceylon was quite consider- 
able, and Tamil mercenaries formed a large part of the Sinha- 
lese army at this time. 66 This was the natural result of the 
recent change of rulers brought about by Vijayabahu in the 
northern half of the island. But as the Tamils were loyal to 
the memory of the Cola rule, still fresh in their minds, Kulot- 
tunga found favourable conditions for furthering his designs 
against the Ceylonese ruler in secret. The following account, 
given by the Mahavamsa. of the occurrences about a.d. 1088 
sheds a lurid light on the policy of Kulottunga: 67 

‘ Envoys sent by the Kannata Monarch and by the 
Cola King came hither with rich presents. They sought 
out the Monarch. He was greatly pleased thereat and 
after rendering both embassies what was their due, he 
sent at first with the Kannata messengers his own envoys 
to Kannata with choice gifts. But the Colas maimed the 
noses and ears of the Slhala messengers horribly when 
they entered their country. Thus disfigured they re- 
turned hither and told the King everything that had been 



CEYLON : VELAIKKARA REVOLT 


315 


done to them by the Cola King. In flaming fury Vijaya- 
bahu in the midst of all his courtiers had the Damila en- 
voys summoned and gave them the following message for 
the Cola king. “Beyond ear-shot, on a lonely island in 
the midst of the ocean shall a trial of the strength of our 
arms take place in single combat, or, after arming the 
whole forces of thy kingdom and of mine a battle shall be 
fought at a spot to be determined by thee; exactly in the 
manner I have said it shall ye report to your master.” 
After these words he dismissed the envoys clad in women’s 
apparel in haste to the Cola King, then he betook himself 
with his army to Anuradhapura. To the seaports Matti- 
kavatatittha and Mahatittha he sent two generals to 
betake themselves to the Cola kingdom and begin the 
war. While the generals were procuring ships and pro- 
visions in order to send the troops to the Cola kingdom, 
then, in the thirtieth year (of the king’s reign) , the divi- 
sion of the troops called Velakkara revolted as they did 
not want to go thither. They slew the two generals and 
like rutting elephants in their unbridledness, they plund- 
ered the country round Pulatthinagara. They captured 
the younger sister of the King with her three sons and 
burned down with violence the King’s palace. The King 
left the town and betook himself in haste to Dakkina- 
desa and having hidden all his valuable possessions on 
the Vatagiri rook, he advanced together with the Uparaja 
Vlrabahu, of lion-like courage, and surrounded by a great 
force, to Pulatthinagara where after a sharp fight he 
shortly put the assembled troops to flight. Placing them 
around the pyre on which were laid the remains of the 
murdered generals, he had the recreant leaders of the 
troops, their hands bound fast to their backs, chained to 
a stake and burnt in the midst of the flames blazing up 
around them. The Ruler having (thus) executed there 
the ring-leaders of the rebels, freed the soil of Lanka 
everywhere from the briers (of the rebels). 

‘ The King did not lose sight of the aim he had set 
himself of fighting with the Cola (King) , and in the forty- 
fifth year (of his reign) he marched with the war-equip- 
ped troops to the port on the sea and stayed there some 
time awaiting his arrival. But as the Cola (King) did 



316 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


not appear, the King dismissed his envoys, returned to 

Pulatthinagara and resided there a considerable time. ’ 

The tortuous policy of Kulottunga, however, failed com- 
pletely. The Velaikkara rebellion was suppressed and the 
mercenaries bound themselves to serve the king loyally there- 
after and the chief Buddhist shrine of Polonnaruwa 68 was 
placed under their protection. Kulottunga apparently made 
his peace with Vijayabahu, for one of his daughters, Sutta- 
malliyar, married Virapperumal, a Sinhalese prince of the 
Pandyan party in Ceylon, and made a gift of a 'perpetual’ 
lamp to an isvara temple in the reign of Jayabahu I, the suc- 
cessor of Vijayabahu. 69 

From the Song annals of China we learn that an embassy 
from Chulien (Cola) reached the Chinese court in the year 
1077 and that the king of Chulien at the 
Chhfa ati ° nS Wth time waS ca ^ ec * Ti-hua-kia-lo. It is possible 
that these syllables disguise the name of 
Deva Kulo (ttunga) . Indeed Deva-kala and Divakara, it has 
been said, 70 are the only possible restorations, and Deva-kula 
or -kulo is impossible. But considering that the name is that 
of the Cola king ruling in 1077, the suggestion that 
it is Kulottunga’s name that has been thus distorted does 
not seem far-fetched. This ‘embassy’ was clearly a trad- 
ing venture and seems to have ended very profitably for the 
Tamils. For the seventy-two men who formed the embassy 
‘were given 81.800 strings of copper cash, i.e., about as many 
dollars, in return for the articles of tribute comprising glass- 
ware. camphor, brocates (called Kimhwa in the Chinese text) , 
rhinoceros horns, ivory, incense, rose-water, putchuck, asafoe- 
tida, borax, cloves, etc.’ 71 Turning now to Kadaram, there is 
indeed a stray reference in the Kalingattuppararii to Kulot- 
tunga’s destruction of Kadaram on the wide ocean, 72 and his 
inscriptions speak of costly tributes from foreign islands. But 
the references are vague and we should not lose sight of the 
literary convention by which a poet may attribute to one ruler 
all the achievements of his predecessors on the throne. That 
Kulottunga was in touch with the empire of Sri Vijaya be- 
comes clear from other evidence, particularly the smaller 
Leyden grant. The suggestion has been made that Kulot- 
tunga spent part of the period 1063 to 1070 in Sri Vijaya res- 
toring order and maintaining the Cola power in that quarter. 73 



CHINESE MISTAKE STATUS OF COLA 317 

Two facts have been cited in support of this view: Kulottunga 
restored peace in the Eastern lands in his youth, like Visnu 
gently raising the Earth from the waters of the ocean; secondly 
the names of the high official who visited China as envoy from 
Sri Vijaya in 1067 and of the Cola emperor who sent the em- 
bassy to China (noted above) ten years later are the same, 
Ti-hua-kia-lo — Devakala, probably a part of Deva Kulo 
(ttunga). The first is obviously the result of a misunder- 
standing of a Tamil phrase. 74 It is very surprising that if 
Kulottunga had such a romantic career across the seas before 
taking possession of the Cola throne we should not get more 
specific information about it in the numerous records of the 
reign. One inscription 75 indeed says that a beautiful stone 
was shown to Kulottunga by the king of Kambhoja as a curio 
(katci). When did he do so? Did Kulottunga visit Kim- 
bhoja, the Khmer kingdom? 

Scholars have been puzzled by a statement in the Chinese 
annals (preserved in the pages of Ma Tuan- 
and Kadaram. lhi) that the Cola Kingdom was subject to 
Sri Vijaya in a.d. 1068-77. In recording an 
embassy from Pagan in 1106, Ma Tuan-lin says in effect: 
‘The Emperor at first gave order to receive them and treat 
them as they treated the envoys of Tchou-lien (Cola) ; but 
the President of the Council of Rites presented the following 
observations: “the Cola is subject to San-fo-ts’i; this is why in 
the years hi-ning (1068-1077), we were content to write to 
the King of this Kingdom on strong paper with an envelope 
of plain stuff. The King of Pou-kan (Pagan), on the contrary 

is sovereign of a great kingdom of the Fan ” ’ 76 From this 

interesting passage we gather that the ambassadors of San-fo- 
ts’i (Sri Vijaya) had some time in 1068-1077 claimed in the 
Chinese court that the Cola kingdom was subject to them and 
that they were entitled to a higher rank than the representa- 
tives of the Cola ruler, and that this order of priority was 
cited as a precedent in 1106 to justify the ranking of Cola 
envoys below those from Pagan. To appraise these state- 
ments at their proper value, one must recall the difficulties 
that would most naturally be experienced by envoys from 
the Tamil country in making their position and that of their 
ruler properly understood in distant China. We may notice 
that much earlier than 1068, the embassies sent to China by 



318 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


Rajaraja I and Rajendra I experienced similar difficulties and 
were ranked much below their proper place. 77 The gaucherie 
of the Tamil envoys, the ignorance of Chinese officialdom of 
the true state of politics in remote countries, and perhaps, the 
readiness of the ambassadors of Sri Vijaya to indulge in unjust 
misrepresentations relating to Cola must have combined to 
bring about the situation recorded by Ma Tuan-lin. There is 
not the slightest ground, however, to believe that either in 
1068 or in 1106 the Cola Kingdom became the vassal of Sri 
Vijaya. All the other evidence on the relations between the 
two kingdoms is opposed to this assumption. 78 

Virarajendra, as we have seen, claims to have sent an 
expedition to Kadaram (Sri Vijaya) in a.d. 1068 and to have 
conquered that country on behalf of one of its rulers who 
sought his protection and to have established him on the 
throne. This seems not improbable, and might have resulted 
in a vague recognition of the suzerainty of the Cola power by 
the new ruler. However that may be, the king of Sri Vijaya 
sent an embassy to Kulottunga I about 1090 and requested 
him to issue a copper-plate grant containing the names of the 
villages granted by the Cola kings as palUc-candam to the two 
vihnras built by the king of Kadaram at Sola-kulavalli-patti- 
nam, evidently another name for Negapatam. In the smaller 
Leyden grant, 79 for it is by this name that Kulottunga’s grant 
made on this occasion is generally known, the two vih&ras 
are called Rajendra-solap-perumballi and Rajarajap-perum- 
balli; 80 the latter having also the alternative name Sri Sai- 
lendra-Cudamanivarma-Vihara, 81 showing its indentity with 
the vihara mentioned in the Larger Leyden grant of the reign 
of Rajaraja I. The embassy from Kadaram comprised two en- 
voys ( dutas ) Rajavidyadhara Sri Samanta and Abhimanot- 
tunga Samanta, who petitioned the King (vinnappam seyya ) 
for the issue of the grant, while he was seated on his throne 
Kalingaravan in the coronation-hall (tirumanjana salai) 82 in- 
side the palace at Ayirattali alias Ahavamallakula-Kalapuram. 
And the longer prasasti of Kulottunga’s inscriptions mentions 
the fact that at the gate of his palace stood rows of elephants 
showering jewels sent as tribute from the island kingdoms of 
the wide ocean. 83 Another proof of the continued friendly 
relations between the two kingdoms in this period comes from 
Sumatra. It is a fragmentary Tamil inscription dated 1010 



VENGI AFTER VIJAYADITYA VII 


319 


Saka (a.d. 1088) from Loboe Toewa, and mentioning the 
name of a celebrated mercantile corporation of South India, 
the Tisaiyayirattu-Aihnurruvar, 84 a name which, from ana- 
logous forms in the Cola inscriptions of the period, is best 
understood as ‘the Five Hundred of the thousand (districts) 
in the (Four) quarters.’ While there is little evidence of 
the political power of the Colas having extended to the is- 
lands of the Malay archipelago in this period, trade relations 
and culture contacts established in an earlier age seem to have 
been actively maintained in the reign of Kulottunga, and per- 
haps also under his successors. 

In the north, Kulottunga left the administration of the 
Vengi kingdom in the hands of Vijayaditya 

, VII until his death. The relations between 
Viceroys of 

Vengi. them, never very happy, seem to have con- 

tinued strained even after Kulottunga’s 
accession to the Cola throne. There are Eastern Ganga ins- 
criptions which, as already noted, show that the Ganga king 
Rajaraja took up the cause of Vijayadita VII with Kulottunga 
and secured for him a peaceful time towards the end of his 
life and career as ruler of Vengi. After the death of Vijaya- 
ditya at the end of fifteen years of his reign in Vengi, Kulot- 
tunga appointed his son, Rajaraja Mummadi Coda, as Viceroy, 
and he was anointed as Viceroy most probably on July 27 
a.d. 1076. 85 He, however, preferred living under the same 
roof as his parents to the enjoyment of a distant viceroyalty, 
and relinquished his office at the end of a year. His younger 
brother, Vira Coda, was then chosen Viceroy and continued 
to rule in Vengi for a period of six years from the date of his 
coronation in Saka 1001 (a.d. 1078-9). 86 From 1084 to 1089 
another son of Kulottunga, by name Rajaraja Codaganga. 
was the Viceroy. This is clear from the Teki plates of this 
ruler, dated in the seventeenth year, obviously of Kulottunga. 
The Pithapuram plates of Vira Coda 87 also state that Vira 
Coda was recalled from Vengi by his father who desired ‘to 
see the growing beauty of his youthful countenance’, and that 
he was sent again to the north at the end of five years though 
his father’s ‘eyes had not attained satiety’. But these plates 
do not state what happened at Vengi during the five years 
that Vira Coda spent with his father, and the Cellur plates 



320 


KULOTTUNGA I 


of Vila Coda make no reference either to the break in his 
Vieeroyalty or to Codaganga. Hultzsch says 88 that this total 
silence of the Cellur plates and the omission of Codaganga's 
name from the Pithapuram plates may lead us to suppose 
that Codaganga had discredited himself with his father and 
had been on bad terms with his brother. The fact that Coda- 
ganga, though apparently the eldest son of Kulottunga, 89 was 
not appointed Viceroy until a comparatively late stage lends 
colour to the supposition. In any event, Vira Coda’s second 
term as Viceroy of Vengi seems to have commenced about 
a.d. 1088-89 and lasted till at least 1092-93. As Viceroy of 
Vengi, Vira Coda was assisted by a Velananti prince Vedura II, 
a nephew of Gonka I, in a battle against an unnamed 
Pandya king, and Vira Coda conferred on Vedura the doab 
country, Sindhu-yugmantaradesa, identified by Hultzsch, 
with the land between the Krsna and Godavari. 90 Soon after, 
Kulottunga likewise favoured other princes of the same line. 
Vira Coda was succeeded by Vikramacola who apparently 
ruled in Vengi till he was chosen heir-apparent to the Cola 
throne in a.d. 1118. 

We hear little of happenings in Vengi and further north 
till we reach the period of Vikramacola’s 
north rS m the °ffi ce - In his inscriptions dated after his 
accession to the Cola throne, there occurs 
a brief description of his Viceroyalty of Vengi. It is this: 

‘While yet a child, 91 (he) bore the cruel weapons 
(of war), so that at Kulam the Telinga Vlman ascended 
the mountains as refuge, and so that hot fire consumed 
the land of Kalinga; he thus stayed joyfully in the 
Vengai-Mandalam and was pleased to subdue the north- 
ern region.’ 

The inscriptions of Kulottunga himself contain accounts 
of two Cola invasions of Kalingam, one of which is, no doubt, 
the subject of the celebrated Parani of Jayangondar. 92 The 
first invasion of Kalingam is mentioned in inscriptions of the 
twenty-sixth year, 93 and from the brevity with which the 
subjection of Kalingam is mentioned on this occasion, we may 
conclude that this was the war in which Vikramacola dis- 
tinguished himself as a young man. The second and later 
invasion of Kalinga is mentioned in the inscriptions of the 



VIKRAMA’S KALINGA WAR 


321 


forty-second and subsequent years; 94 this is the invasion 
which gave the occasion for the Parani, and apparently Vik- 
ramacdla had no part in it. 

The first Kalinga War seems to have been brought about 
by Kalinga aggression against Vengi, and 

First Kalinga to have resulted in the annexation of the 
War. 

southern part of the Kalinga country to 
the Cola Empire. The chief of Kolanu, modern Ellore near 
the Colair lake, was evidently in league with the ruler of 
Kalinga, and Vikramacola had to fight on two fronts simul- 
taneously. A vassal of the Cola Emperor from the distant 
south, the Pandya King Parantaka, took part in this war and 
assisted Vikramacola. The inscriptions of Parantaka 
Pandya, 95 like those of Vikramacola, state that Kulam of the 
Telunga Bhima was captured and that Southern Kalingam 
was subdued, Bhima was a very common name in the family: 
it was borne by many rulers of Kolanu, Saronathas, from the 
time of Rajaraja I Cola to at least the middle of the twelfth 
century a.d . 96 No details are forthcoming of this first war 
against Kalinga. The campaign seems to have been under- 
taken for the suppression of local revolts rather than for the 
conquest of fresh territory. Southern Kalinga was apparent- 
ly the territory between the Godavari and the Mahlndra 
mountain, 97 and this territory was already part of the Vengi 
province some years before the war of Vikramacola. 98 Pos- 
sibly, the subordinate rulers whose territories were included 
in the Viceroyalty of Vengi conspired together and rose in 
rebellion when the young prince Vikramacola was appoint- 
ed to the charge of the province. The revolt was unsuccessful, 
and the entire province was restored to subjection. A Tamil 
inscription of Kulottunga at Simhacalam dated Saka 1021 
(a.d. 1098-9) 99 and several others at Draksarama and other 
places attest the successful restoration of authority. 

The later invasion which took place about a.d. 1110 is 
described in some detail in the inscriptions 
Second War. 0 f Kulottunga and at greater length in the 
Kalingattupparani. According to the inscriptions, 100 the Cola 
army crossed the Vengi territory, destroyed the elephant 
corps that was sent by the enemy to oppose its march, spread 
fire across the enemy country of Kalingam. killed in the 
C. 41 



322 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


fight many powerful leaders of the Kalinga army whose heads 
rolled on the battle-field, pecked by kites, and in the end 
subdued the Seven Kalingas. The account in the Kalingattup- 
parani may be summarised as follows. 101 When the emperor 
sat in darbar in his palace at Kanci, the tiru-mandira-olai 
announced to his master the arrival of subject kings who had 
brought the annual tribute, and were waiting outside. The 
vassals were then permitted to enter and exhibit their pre- 
sents. At the end, the emperor enquired if there were any 
who had defaulted, and was informed that the king of North 
Kalinga had done so twice. The emperor forthwith issued the 
command that an expedition should be sent against Kalinga 
to storm the hillforts of Kalinga and bring its ruler as a 
prisoner of war. The valiant Pallava chieftain, Karunakara 
Tondaiman, lord of Vandai, offered to carry out the emperor’s 
orders and was accepted. The expeditionary force led by 
Karunakara soon started from Kanci. It crossed the Palar 
and the Ponmukhari rivers and reached the Pennar; among 
the other streams crossed by it before reaching Kalingam 
were the Mannaru, the Krsna, the Godavari, the Pampa and 
the Gotami. The Cola army began to spread destruction as it 
entered Kalinga. and the suffering inhabitants fled to their 
king and reported to him what they had seen and suffered. 
Anantavarman. who had known no defeat before, made light 
of the whole business, as it was only Kulottunga’s army, not 
the emperor himself, that was advancing; one of his mini- 
sters. Engaraya, remonstrated with him and spoke of the 
great achievements that already stood to the credit of the 
Cola army. Nothing daunted, Anantavarman prepared for 
the fight. The battle that ensued ended in a complete victory 
for the Cola forces and Anantavarman sought his safety in 
flight. After a futile search for him, the victorious Cola army 
returned home with vast booty. 

The invasion of North Kalinga. called the Seven Kalin- 
gas. and the part of Karunakara in it are thus well attested 
by the inscriptions and the poem. Only the poem gives the 
immediate cause of the war, namely the default on the part 
of the Kalinga king in the payment of the annual tribute. 
This king, Anantavarman Codaganga, was the grandson of 
Virarajendra by his daughter Rajasundari. Dynastic connec- 



SECOND KALINGA WAR 323 

tions, however, seldom availed to stop the course of political 
ambition, and it would seem that Kulottunga was the aggres- 
sor on this occasion. It is hard to believe that throughout the 
long and, apparently, prosperous reign of Anantavarman, the 
kingdom of Kalinga was a vassal state remitting a fixed tri- 
bute annually to the Cola court. It may be noted that an 
inscription from Draksarama 102 dated Saka 1003 in the reign 
of Visnuvardhana (Kulottunga?) records a gift by the wife 
of a Pradhani of the Tri-Kalingadhipati Rajarajadeva. If this 
is a reference to the father of Anantavarman, it would follow 
that Kalinga was such a vassal state at least for a time. The 
real cause of the war, however, is obscure; and the darbar 
held by Kulottunga at Kanclpuram in the historic palace of 
the Colas in that city 103 and the report of Anantavarman’s 
default made to the emperor by his secretary, may be, not 
history, but only a literary setting for the grand military 
enterprise described in the poem. It is clear that the expedi- 
tion of Karunakara led to no permanent results. There is no 
evidence of a Cola occupation of Northern Kalinga. 104 It 
may also be noted that a Kota chief BhTma is said, in an ins- 
cription of a.d. 1108, 105 to have assisted the Cola in subduing 
the Kalinga country. This may be a reference to his part in 
the first or the second war. 

The Empire of Kulottunga still retained its greatest 
extent in his forty-fifth regnal year or 
Extent of Empire, ther-eabouts. Barring the loss of Ceylon, 
the troubles and risings in the first years of the reign had not 
resulted in any serious loss of territory. The boundary bet- 
ween the Western Calukya and Cola dominions was what it 
had always been, a shifting frontier in the neighbourhood of 
the Tungabhadra, whose exact position at any particular time 
is to be determined by the provenance of contemporary ins- 
criptions. The presence of Kulottunga’s inscriptions in Nan- 
dalur (Cuddapah) called Kulottunga-sola-Caturvedimanga- 
lam, and in Tripurantakam (Karnul) , 106 as also in the Mysore 
country up to the forty-fifth year 107 proves that the rule of 
Kulottunga was successfully maintained in these quarters. 
The hold over Vengl was quite firm and had rendered pos- 
sible a successful invasion of the territory of its northern 
neighbour, Kalinga. 






EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 


325 


The Cola Empire under Kulottunga maintained extensive 
foreign connections in India and outside. 

Foreign connec- ^he relations with the Empire of Sri 
ticns. 

Vi jay a have been noticed above. An in- 
complete Gahadval prasasti engraved on the walls of the 
temple of Gangaikonda-colapuram shows that Cola diplomacy 
m this period embraced the Northern India States within the 
range of its orbit. This prasasti which begins Akunthotkantha 
must belong to Madanapala or his son Govindacandra of 
Kanaui. The inscription 108 opens by citing the forty-first 
regnal year of Kulottunga, and then gives a good part of the 
Gahadval prasasti. but stops without giving the name of the 
actual ruler who makes the record or detailing the gift which 
furnishes the occasion for it. This prasasti in the distant Cola 
capital is perhaps evidence of some dynastic connection, 
otherwise unknown, between these two dynasties. And the 
increased emphasis on sun-worship in the Cola country in 
Kulottunga’s reign may be due to the close association with 
the Gahadvals who were great worshippers of the sun. 109 It 
mav also be noted in passing that a certain Vagisvara-raksita 
of the Coda country is mentioned in a copper-plate grant of 
Govindacandra (a.d. 1129) as a disciple of Sakyaraksita of 
Orissa. 110 We have already noticed the inscription from 
Cidambaram which is dated 13 March a.d 1114. and men- 
tions the fact that Kaiendra received a peculiar stone as a 
present from the king of Kambhoja. and that he caused this 
stone to be inserted into the wall of a hall in front of the 
shrine at Cidambaram. 111 One wonders if this is a relic of the 
friendly connections maintained by Kulottunga with the 
powerful Khmer empire across the seas, on the sea-route to 
China. Kyanzittha (a.d. 1084 — 1112), the ruler of Pagan, is 
said in Burmese accounts, to have met a Cola prince, con- 
verted him to Buddhism and married his daughter; Tamil 
epigraphy and literature offer no help in settling the identity 
of the Cola prince or the truth of the Burmese story. 112 

Towards the end of his reign, Kulottunga lost the pro- 
vince of Gangavadi to the rising power of 
Loss of Ganga- the Hovsalas. Though the Hoysalas are 
vadl mentioned as early as a.d. 1006 in the reign 

of Rajaraja I, 113 Hoysala history really commences with 
Nrpa-Kama (c. a.d. 1022 — 1040), the father of Vinayaditya 



326 


KULOTTUNGA I 


and patron of Ecama or Eciga, the father of Gangaraja, the 
Hoysala general who captured Talakad from the Colas in 
1116. For many years the Hoysalas acknowledged the supre- 
macy of the Western Calukyas, the enemies of the Cola 
power, and we have seen that Ereyanga, the son of Vinaya- 
ditya, assisted Vikrmaditya VI in his wars against Kulot- 
tunga after the accession of the latter to the Cola throne. 
The real extent of Hoysala rule in the early stages of their 
rise is not easy to determine. The boundaries of the Hoysala 
territory recorded in an inscription of Ballala I 114 and the 
provenance of the Hoysala and Cola inscriptions of the period 
suggest the conclusion that Hoysala rule was confined to the 
Hassan and Kadur districts and parts of Nagamangala taluq. 
And it is also clear that Vinayaditya was a feudatory of the 
contemporary Calukyas throughout the long period of his 
rule c. a.d. 1047-1100. as is seen from the part of the Hoysala 
in the war between Vikramaditya and Kulottunga. 

It was under Bittiga Visnu-Vardhana (1100 — 1152) 115 
that the Hoysala attained a really prominent position. The 
title ‘Talakadu-gonda’ is first applied to him in an inscription 
dated a.d. 1116, and in the same year he is described as ruling 
in Talakadu and Kolala (Kolar), over the whole of Ganga- 
vadi as far as Kongu. 116 The Belur copper-plate grant 
(a.d. 1117) records that ‘he first acquired the wealth of the 
Hoysala rule or dominions; that, pushing on so far as to take 
Talakad, he was the first to promote the race of Yadu to the 
rule of the dominions of the Gangas; and that he burnt the 
capital city of the Gangas.’ It is thus clear that Visnu-Var- 
dhana inherited some limited territory round about Belur and 
that, in the first five or six years of his rule, he greatly ex- 
tended his sway by the conquest of the Gangavadi province. 

This province was under the Colas at the time and 
regularly administered as a division of the Cola Empire. It 
was conquered for the Hoysala by his Dandanayaka Ganga- 
raja. The ancient line of Adigaimans of Tagadur (Dharma- 
puri) in the Kongu country acted as the representatives of 
Cola power in this region. The Hoysala inscriptions begin 
their narrative of Gangaraja’s conquest of the Cola province 
with the statement that the Cola’s samanta Adiyama (Adi- 
gaiman) was stationed like the bolt of a door above the ghats, 



HOYSALA CONQUEST OF GANGAVADI 327 

in the camp at Talakadu, on the frontier of the Gangavadi- 
nadu, that Adiyama refused to surrender to Gangaraja, the 
Nadu which the Cola had given and told Gangaraja to fight 
and take it. 117 The battle which followed and practically 
decided the fate of the Gangavadi province must have been 
fought not far from Talakad. Besides Adiyama, two other 
chiefs, Damodara and Narasimha Varma, and other unnamed 
Samantas fought on the Cola side. The victory of Gangaraja 
against the Tigulas (Tamils) was complete, and he followed 
up his success by expelling the Tamils from Gangavadi. 
‘Having driven out the Tigulas, he restored Gangavadi to 
Vlra Ganga (Visnu-Vardhana); was not Gangaraja a 
hundred-fold more fortunate than the former Raja 118 of the 
Gangas?’ 

Other inscriptions of Visnu-Vardhana give an exaggera- 
ted and doubtless partly fictitious account of his achieve- 
ments, and it is by no means easy to sift the evidence. 119 To 
confine our attention to statements relating to his conquests 
from the Colas, it is probable that Talakad (Rajarajapura) . 
Nilagiri, Nangili, Kolala, Tereyur and Koyattur 120 became 
subject to him as a result of Gangaraja’s campaigns, and the 
same may be true of a part, though not the whole, of Kongu; 
but the claim that Kahcl obeyed his commands and that he 
squeezed, as if he held it in his hand, the southern Madhura- 
pura is not less incredible than his wars against Cakrakuta or 
Lata. On the other hand there is some evidence of a raid 
into the heart of the Cola country by the Hoysala forces in 
this period, evidence which gives some colour to Visnu-Var- 
dhana’s claim that he marched up to Ramesvaram. An ins- 
cription of Parakrama Pandya 121 states that several years 
before the date of the record, certain Pallis of the temple at 
Aduturai rescued some of its images which were being carried 
to Halebld, and were rewarded by the grant of certain privi- 
leges which were renewed by Parakrama Pandya. It is pro- 
bable that the unsuccessful attempt to remove images from 
Aduturai to Halebld was made in Visnu-Vardhana’s reign, 
and if this view is correct, the exaggerated statements of 
Visnu-Vardhana’s conquests in his inscriptions must have 
some basis in fact. In any event, the absence from the Mysore 
country of Kulottunga’s inscriptions after his forty-fifth year 



328 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


(1115) is sufficient proof of the transfer of Gangavadi from 
the Colas to the Hoysalas as a result of the war; but even 
here the re-appearance of Vikramacola’s inscriptions in the 
Kolar region and elsewhere shows that the Colas managed 
either to retain or recover part of the province. 

Towards the end of his reign, Kulottunga lost much of 
his territory in another direction. The 
Trouble m Vengi. nort j iern jjgjf Q f the Vengi kingdom, if not 
the whole of it, seems to have slipped from his hands and 
gone over to the empire of the Western Calukya ruler Vikra- 
maditya VI. That the latter was bent on making reprisals for 
his failure in the first war against Kulottunga and that 
he kept up his enmity against Kulottunga unabated is 
clear from the records of his reign. In a.d. 1084. Vikrama- 
ditya complains that the ‘hostile Cdla does not come to the 
battle-field.’ 122 In fact, Vikramaditya’s plan was to take advan- 
tage of Kulottunga’s pre-occupation with affairs in the south 
and create a diversion in the north by proceeding against the 
kingdom of Vengi and its vassal states. From the history of 
the Viceroyalty of Vengi. we see that the efforts of the West- 
ern Calukya ruler did not apparently have any tangible 
result up to the accession of Vikramacola to that office about 
a.d. 1092-3. Soon after came the war against the chief of 
Kulam and against South Kalinga; these revolts were perhaps, 
at least in part, due to the intrigues of Vikramaditya. And 
so too might have been the defiance of the E. Ganga ruler 
Anantavarman Codaganga which necessitated the second 
Kalinga war. the war against North Kalinga. It was not. 
however, till Vikramacola was summoned to the south in 
a.d. 1118, by the aged Kulottunga to become the heir-apparent 
to the Cola throne, that the troubles that had long been gather- 
ing against Kulottunga in the north came to a head. The 
Pithapuram inscription of Mallapadeva, 123 dated 6 1124 
(a.d. 1202), makes the definite statement that after the mar- 
vellous ( apiirvapuruso ) Kulottunga had ruled for fifty years 
the five Dravidas together with the Andhra country, when 
Vikramacola went to rule the Cola country, the land of Vengi 
at once fell into a state of anarchy ( Vengi-bhumir-nayaka - 
rahitd jata ). 124 This statement throws much welcome fight 
on the contemporary inscriptions of the Andhra country rela- 



VENGI UNDER VIKRAMADITY A 329 

ting to the close of Kulottunga’s reign and the period of Vik- 
ramacola’s rule as Cola king. 

Kulottunga’s inscriptions are found in Draksarama in a 
continuous series up to his forty-ninth year, a.d. 1118-19. 125 
On the other hand, there are no inscriptions of Vikramacola 
in the Northern Circars dated earlier than his ninth year 
(a.d. 1127) , and even then they form a very limited number 
and are confined to the southern parts of the Vengi kingdom 
in the modern Guntur district. 126 Vikramaditya’s inscriptions 
are found in considerable numbers in Draksarama and are 
dated in the years of the Calukya-Vikrama era which started 
from the commencement of his reign. The largest number of 
these inscriptions bear dates from 45 to 48, but earlier and 
later dates are not unknown either in Draksarama or else- 
where in the Telugu country. 127 Many among these records 
are engraved by the Telugu feudatories of Vikramaditya who 
acknowledge their subordinate position either openly or 
implicitly, by naming their suzerain lord or by simply dating 
their records in the Calukya-Vikrama era. It has to be 
remembered, however, that in some instances the use of the 
era may have been no more than the continuance of a habit 
even after the reason for it had disappeared. That Vikrama- 
ditya’s rule did extend in this period over practically the 
whole of the Telugu country becomes clear from the prove- 
nance of his inscriptions. In a.d. 1115-6 his general Ananta- 
palayya is found ruling in state in the Guntur area. 128 In 
S. 1039 (December, a.d. 1117). the Kakatiya chief Prola of 
Anumakonda acknowledges the supremacy of the Western 
Calukya ruler and records that the Anumakonda territory 
was conferred on his father Beta some time before by the 
same sovereign. 129 About a year later, in December a.d. 1118. 
Anantapalayya, the davdandyaka of Vikramaditya, was, 
according to an inscription from Kommuru in the Guntur 
district, ruling over Vengi 14,000. 130 A record in Cebrolu 
dated in the same year (1118) praises the heroism of a Konda- 
padumati general Sura in a battle at Bezwada, fought perhaps 
in the Calukya war of conquest in Vengi. 131 And about 
a.d. 1120, Anantapala’s wife made a gift to the celebrated 
shrine of Bhlmesvara in Draksarama. 132 Velananti Rajendra 
in the same year, and Mayilama, the wife of a Telugu Coda 
C. 42 



330 


KUL6TTUNGA I 


chief, in the year after that, also made gifts in Draksarama 
recorded in inscriptions dated in the Calukya-Vikrama era. 133 
Another Western Calukya commander, a nephew of Ananta- 
pala, was ruling Kondapalli in the Krishna district, in 
a.d. 1127, 134 The inscriptions from Draksarama bear dates in 
the Calukya-Vikrama era up to 57, a.d. 1132-33. Towards the 
close of this period, about S. 1053 (a.d. 1131) a certain Nambi- 
raja, son of Malla, ruled in apparent independence, over the 
Satsahasra country to the south of the Krsna river and styled 
himself Lord of Kollipaka. 135 The Calukya-Cola power in 
Vengl was undoubtedly eclipsed by that of the Western Ca- 
lukya ruler Vikramaditya from a.d. 1118, and the Colas were 
unable to regain even part of the territory so lost until after 
the death of Vikramaditya in a.d. 1126. Towards the close of 
Kulottunga’s reign, therefore, the extent of the Cola empire 
had become much less than what it was at his accession. To 
the loss of Ceylon at the commencement of the reign was now 
added that of Gangavadi and Vengl, and the Cola empire 
became more or less a purely Tamil power for the time being. 
In the prolonged duel between Vikramaditya and Kulottunga, 
the former had the satisfaction, though belated, of carrying to 
a successful end his policy of breaking the union of the Vengl 
and Cola thrones, and Kulottunga had to acquiesce in the 
result which he had so long withstood but could no longer 
avert. The latest known inscription of Kulottunga mentions 
his fifty-second year, 136 showing that he lived up to a.d. 1122. 

Kulottunga had various other names and titles. The 
Title name Rajendra found mostly in the early 

records of the reign before the fifth year, 
sometimes makes its appearance in those of a later date. 137 
A Rajakesari by his place in Cola succession, the Parakesari 
title occurs in his inscriptions sometimes by mistake. 138 He is 
called Tribhuvana-cakravartin as early as the fifth year of his 
reign, 139 though this title is not systematically repeated as in 
the records of his successors. His inscriptions from the Telugu 
country give him, besides the usual Eastern Calukya Sarva- 
lokasraya and Visnuvardhana, the titles, 140 Parantaka, Per- 
manadigalu, Vikrama-Cola, Kulasekhara-Pandya-Kulantaka. 
The Kalingattupparani calls him Virudarajabhayankara, 
Akalanka. Abhaya and Jayadhara. 141 The name Abhaya 



SUNGANDAVIRTTA, ETC. 


331 


occurs also in an inscription from Sucmdram dated in the 
thirty-second regnal year, 142 while Jayadhara is found in ins- 
criptions from Tiruvorriyur, Pennadam and Cidambaram. 143 
Tirunlrruc-Cola seems to have been another surname of the 
king, as a devaddna village granted to a new temple at Tri- 
sulam is called Tirunlrruc-Cola-nallur in an inscription of the 
thirty-ninth year. 144 The name Sunganadavirtta-solanallur 
occurs in an inscription of the twenty-eighth year, 145 and an- 
other record dated four years later gives the king the title: 
Sungan-davirttu iru-nikki ulagaiula, meaning ‘who abo- 
lished the tolls and ruled the world after dispelling darkness.’ 
Though there are many literary references to the abolition of 
tolls by the king, 146 none of them is calculated to throw any 
light on the exact nature and scope of the reform. The term 
Sungam is explained by Parimelalagar to mean the tax (irai) 
on commodities carried in ships and carts, 147 and this expla- 
nation would include not only what we now call ‘tolls,’ but 
‘customs’ as well. Though the exact date of Parimelalagar 
cannot be determined with certainty, his explanation of 
Sungam may be accepted as applicable to the time of Kulot- 
tunga; one might even suggest that the annotator had Kulot- 
tunga’s reform in his mind when he wrote his gloss on the 
verse in the Tiruk-kural. However that may be, we have no 
means of deciding whether Kulottunga did away with the tax 
on trade in one part only of his dominions or over the whole, 
and whether the abolition was permanent or only temporary 
and confined to a period following some occasion he wanted 
to celebrate by a boon to his subjects. On any of these alter- 
natives, he would be entitled to the epithet ‘Sungandavirtta’ , 
but it is inconceivable that he meant to deprive the entire state 
permanently of a traditional and very profitable source of reve- 
nue. An inscription of a.d. 1194, 148 however, still refers to the 
Cola-nadu as the country where no Sungam was collected. 
Perhaps the exemption was permanent, but confined only to 
the Cola country proper. If this was so, the imperialism of 
the Colas did not lack an economic side to it; it was not the 
purely military ideal of the vijigisu of the Arthasastras. It is 
curious how little the numberless inscriptions, which record a 
vast amount of detail on taxes and tax exemptions, assist us 
in obtaining a clear view of the prevailing tax-system or of 
the changes, if any, in taxation policy. That a land survey 



6o2 


KULOTTUNGA I 


was undertaken m the sixteenth and fortieth years of Kulot- 
tunga’s reign is mentioned in the incriptions oi his successors 
and confirmed by an inscription of his forty-eighth year men- 
tioning the name of one of the survey officers. 149 

Kulottunga’s capital was Gangapuri or Gangaikonda-cola- 
puram. 150 The city next in importance was 
CapitaI ' Kahclpuram where there was a royal palace 

with an abhiseka maiidapa whence the king issued several 
important grants. 101 Other places the presence of royal 
palaces in which finds specific mention in the inscriptions of 
the reign are: Ayirattali, 132 Tirumaluvadi, 153 Mudikonda-sola- 
puram, 154 and Vikrama-so.lapuram. 133 

The copper-plate grants state that Kulottunga married 
Madhurantaki, the daughter of Rajendra- 
“ ' 1 deva of the Solar race, doubtless Rajen- 

dra II Cola. Considering that the sons born of this marriage 
became successively Viceroys of Vengl from a.d. 1077, it seems 
probable that this marriage alliance must have been contract- 
ed some years before Kulottunga's accession to the Cola 
throne. Madhurantaki had seven sons of whom Vikrama- 
cola, the successor of Kulottunga, was perhaps the fourth. 136 
She is not mentioned by name in any of the prasastis in the 
stone records; it is however, possible that, as the chief queen, 
she is referred to in them as puvana-mulududaiyal or avani- 
muhidudaiyal, ‘the mistress of the whole world.’ If this view 
is correct it follows that Dinacintaxpani was also a sur name of 
the same queen. 137 She seems to have died some time before 
the thirtieth year of Kulottunga when Tyagavalli took her 
place as chief queen with the title puvana-mulududaiyal. The 
Kalingattupparani, it may be noted, only mentions her and 
Elisai-vallabhi, 158 and distinctly states that Tyagavalli enjoyed 
the right to equal authority with the king. Elisai-vallabhi is 
also called Elulagudaiyal, ‘the mistress of the seven worlds’, 
both in the inscriptions and in the Kalingattupparani. The 
same title is applied to Nambirattiyar Slraman Arumoli-nangai 
in an inscription 159 of the twenty-sixth regnal year; if this 
reference is also to the same queen, as most probably it is, 
her personal name must have been Arumoli-nangai. Other 
queens mentioned in the inscriptions are: Trailokya-maha- 
devi who endowed a lamp in the Arpakkam temple in a.d. 



NARALOKAVIRA. KARUNAKARA 333 

1072, for the spiritual benefit of her mother Umai-nangai; 160 
Solan Sorudaiyal alias Kadavan Mahadevi, apparently a prin- 
cess of Pallava extraction; TribhuvanamadevI alias Kampa- 
madevi, born in the asterism of Svati, and a devotee of Visnu, 
like another queen, Adittan Andakuttiyar alias Sola Kulaval- 
liyar, mentioned along with her in an inscription from Kanci- 
puram 161 (a.d. 1111). Two sisters of Kulottunga, Kundavai 
and Madhurantaki by name, are mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions from Cidambaram dated in the years a.d. 1114 and 
1116. 162 Besides his seven sons by Madhurantaki, Kulottunga 
had, as we have seen, a daughter Suttamalli married into the 
royal house of Ceylon. A fragmentary record from Mysore 
dated early in the reign, a.d. 1075, mentions a Pillaiyar Am- 
mangai Alvar who was another daughter of Kulottunga. 163 A 
certain Rajasunu (prince) Madhava presented a gold diadem 
to Siva at Ramagrama about a.d. 1082; 164 the identity of this 
prince remains obscure. 

Many subordinates and feudatories of Kulottunga are 
mentioned in his inscriptions. The best known are the two 
Tamil generals of his army who played the leading part in the 
conquest of the southern countries and of Kalingam. 
The important services of Naralokavira in the southern 
wars are borne out not only by the Vikramasdlan- 
ula and the laudatory inscriptions of Cidambaram 
and Tiruvadi in South Arcot, but by a number of inscrip- 
tions from the Pandya country which mention his titles and 
record gifts made by him. He was a highly respected official 
who enjoyed a large fief in Manavil and was responsible for 
many improvements in the old temple cities of Cidambaram 
and Tiruvadi. He is called the prime-minister of Jayadhara 
and he continued to serve Vikramacola after Kulottunga’s 
death. 165 For the career of the other great general, who led 
the expedition against Northern Kalingam, we depend mainly 
on literary sources — the Kalingattujyparani and Vikramasolan- 
ula. 166 Karunakara Tondaiman was apparently a descendant 
of the Pallavas, and true to the traditions of the Pallavas, 
Jayangondar describes him as born in the family descended 
from Brahma. 167 He is generally called the ruler of Vandai- 
nagar, which is also called Vandalanjeri in Tirunaraiyur-naclu, 
a sub-division of Kulottunga-solavalanadu in the Solamanda- 
lam, 168 and is now represented by Vanduvanjeri 169 in the 



334 


KULOTTUNGA 1 


Kumbakonam taluq. The inscription from Kancipuram, which 
records the details of the situation of the fief of Karunakara, 
also mentions the name of his wife Alagiyamanavalani-man- 
daiyalvar. Karunakara had an elder brother whose flag dis- 
played the usual Pallava emblem of a white bull, who assisted 
him in the Kalinga war, 170 and who is mentioned under the 
name Senapati-Pallavarasar in an inscription of a.d. 1099 from 
Tiruppanandal. 171 From the reference in the Vikramasdlan- 
ula it is clear that Karunakara, like Naralokavira, survived 
Kulottunga, and served Vikramacola for some years. 


1. El. vii, p. 7, n. 5. June 13 Sunday is now suggested, ARE. 
1947-8, p. 3, and No. 108 of the year from !§rirangam. 

2. El. iv, p. 227; 520 of 1920; 139 of 1902. A record of year 52 is 
given in the Pudukkdttai Inscriptions No. 127. 

3. 45 of 1921, ARE. 1929, II, 33. 

4. 125 of 1900. 

5. 425 of 1912. 

6. 468 of 1913. 

7. SII. iii, 68, 69 etc. It must be noticed that this prasasti opens 
with a reference to the youthful achievements of Kulottunga followed 
by a rhetorical eulogium, of no historical value. I think this part ends 
with the phrase: tan pon-nagarp-purattidaik-kidappa. 

8. 57 of 1898. 

9. 124 of 1928. 

10. 231 of 1912. 

11. 365 of 1928. 

12. 197 of 1919. Hultzsch did not know of any inscription earlier 
than the twentieth year giving the Tribhuvanacakravartin title. SU. 
iii, p. 131. It may also be noted that the earliest record certainly giving 
the titles Cakravartin and Kulottunga is 468 of 1913 (of the fourth 
year) with the pugal rnddu vilanga introduction. 

13. SII. iii, pp. 142-146. R. D. Banerji has strangely misunderstood 
tile early inscriptions of Kulottunga and cited them as proving that 
Kulottunga defeated Laksma-deva of Malava in Cakrakuta ( Haihayas 
of Tripuri, p. 25). 

14. x. v. 25. 

15. See ante, Ch. xii. 

16. ARE. 1904, paragraph 21. 

17. SII. iii, p. 132. ARE. 1904, paragraph 21. 

18. ARE. 1899, paragraph 51. 

19. See ante, Ch. xii, p. 298 and n. 51. 

20. Kalingattupparani, x, vv. 27-32. IA. xix, p. 332. 

21. Ante. p. 290. 

22. vi, 26-27; 38-9; 54. 



NOTES 


335 


23. Biihler has rightly exposed the hollowness of the moralisings 
of Bilhana and pointed out that far from being a victim of destiny, as 
Bilhana wishes to make out, Vikrama designedly used his superior 
talents to oust his weaker brother. Vikrama, who married a Cola 
princess in order to be able to deprive his brother of a good part of 
his inheritance, could not well object to Somesvara’s political alliance 
with Kulottunga. Biihler’s Vikramankadevacarita, pp. 36-8 and nn. 
Fleet was the first to recognise that Rajiga is a familiar form of Rajen- 
dra, the earlier name of Kulottunga. I A. xx, pp. 276 and 282. See also 
BG. I, ii, p. 445. ' 

24. BG. I, ii, p. 234. 

25. EC. v. Ak. 102 (a) says that by order of the Calukya Cakra- 
varti he caused the Cola king to wear leaves: Colikar annaleyam tali- 
ram udisi. Also vii, Sh. 64. 

26. EC. vii, Ci. 33 calls him (Ra)j iga-Cola-manobhanga, and says, 
perhaps with exaggeration, that he was ruling Nulambavadi 32000. 

27. vi 90. 

28. See Biihler’s remarks cited in a previous note. 

30. nirvapya Colasya punah prat&pam kramena Kalyanam asau 
vivesa, vii 2. 

31. The pun on the verb kodutal in the original is untranslatable. 
I follow Hultzsch’s translation (SII. iii, p. 147) with slight changes. 
177 of 1919, (year 6), and 5 of 1914 (year 8) seem to be among the 
earliest inscriptions giving this version of the events. 

32. SII. iii, 73; 5 of 1914; 178 of 1919. 

33. 401 of 1896. 

34. BG. I, ii, p. 217. 

35. A pitched battle seems to have been fought there. Kalingattup- 
parani, xiii, 62. 

36. SII. iii, p. 144. 

37. xi, vv. 74, 75; xiii, 62. 

38. EL vi, pp. 69, 214-5. 

39. BG. I, ii, p. 445. 

40. xiv — w. 1-13. 

41. CV. ch. 60, v. 24, Codrington, A Short History of Ceylon, p. 57. 

42. xvii, vv. 43 If.; cf. BG. I, ii, pp. 452-3. 

43. El. xii, pp. 208 ff. R. D. Banerji (Haihayas of Tripuri, p. 26) 
identifies the Andhra king with one of the sons of Kulottunga. This is 
clearly wrong. 

44. JAHRS. v. pp. 208-9. 

45. PK. pp. 118 ff. 

46. Ante, pp. 253, 271. 

47. CV., ch. 58, v. 59; ch. 59. w. 8-9. EZ. ii. p. 207. 

48. Ch. 58, w. 18 ff. 

49. Geiger. CV. i, p. 204 n. 2. 

50. 600 of 1912, SII. iv. 1396, 1. 17. 



336 


KULOTTUNGA I 


51. Codrington, op. (At., p. 57. 

52. SII. iii. 68, 1, 2 and 69. 1, 10. An inscription from Palaiyasivaram 
(Ch.), 211 of 1922, though it is of the tenth year, gives only the general 
part of the pugal sfduda punari introduction, including the statement 
about the Pandyan king’s head, and makes no mention of the wars; 
this is perhaps because it gives the prasasti as it stood in the fourth 
year of the reign when the chief transaction recorded in the inscription 
took place. 

53. 186 of 1914. 

54. El. v, pp. 103-4; SII. i. pp. 168-9. 

55. SII. iii, p. 147. 

56. 11. 46-8. 

57. xi. vv. 70-2. The questions are addressed to Anantavarman of 
Kalinga by one of his ministers to show him that Kulottunga’s army 
was a tried force able to do great deeds even in the absence of Kulot- 

58. v. 10. 

59. Studies, p. 191. 

60. PK., pp. 120-2; 21 of 1927 of the tenth year of Jat. Srlvallabha 
mentions the 31st year of Kulottunga who took Kollam, doubtless 
Kulottunga I. Kulottunga’s reconquest of the south was over by his 
eleventh year. a.d. 1081. Srlvallabha’s tenth year is later than the 
thirty-first of Kulottunga, i.e. a.d. 1101. so that Srlvallabha’s rule did 
not begin earlier than a.d. 1091. This means that he could not have 
been among the Pandyas attacked and overthrown by Kulottunga’s 
forces. It also means that at the end of his campaign, Kulottunga had 
to allow the princes of the ancient Pandya line to continue their rule 
in full regal style though under the suzerainty of the Cola power. It 
is clear that the system of appointing Cola princes as Cola-Pandya 
viceroys was not resumed by Kulottunga. The Pandyan kingdom then 
seems to have stood in this period in the same relation to the Cola 
power as Vengl did between a.d. 1000 and 1070. 

61. Vilinam is called Rajendra-sdla-pattinam in an inscription of 
the 21st year (46 of 1927) The nilnippadai of Kottar is mentioned in 
the 39th year. (TAS. i. pp. 246-7) . 

62. ARE. 1927 II, 18. 

63. Studies, pp. 178 ff. 

64. It is not impossible, however, that Naralokavlra fought as a 
common soldier in the earlier war, that there was no second war at all, 
and that when, later on, he rose to a high position in the state, his 
earlier fights were painted in glowing colours. The point is that as 
Naralokavlra survived Kulottunga and held office under Vikramacola 
for six or seven years, he could not have been old enough to have 
attained high rank in the army in the early years of Kulottunga’s reign. 

65. Parana vitana says (El. xviii, p. 333) that the Tirukkaluk- 
kunram inscription (I A. xxi, p. 282) of Kuldttunga claims that he sent 
an expedition to Ceylon without any definite results. In saying this, 



NOTES 


337 


he overlooks the more reliable edition of the inscription by Hultzsch, 
SU. iii, 75, and in particular note 10 at p. 164. 

66. Inscription No. 509 of Ceylon dated A.D. 1114, that is some years 
after the suppression of the military revolt, mentions Sedarayan alias 
Malaimandala Nayakan, a Velaikkaram of Jayabahudevar. Ceylon 
Journal of Science — G. ii, p. 122. 

67. CV. i, pp. 216-8. 

68. 600 of 1912; El. xviii, pp. 330 ff. 

69. Ceylon Journal of Science, G. II, 2, pp. 105 and 116. 

70. Les Etats Hindouises d’Indochine et d’lndonesie (Paris 1948), 
pp. 250-1. 

71. JRAS. 1896, p. 490 n.; Chau Ju-kua, p. 100 n. 6; JA. xi: 20, 
(1922), p. 20; BEFEO. xxiii, p. 470. 

72. vi. v. 18. 

73. Journal of the Greater India Society. Vol. i, pp. 87-8. 

74. See p. 298 n. 26 ante. 

75. El. v, p. 105. 

76. BEFEO , xviii, 6, p. 8, cited by Coedes. 

77. Chau Ju-kua, pp. 96, 101. 

78. Cf. Krom — Hindoe -Javaansche Geschiedenis pp. 302-4. Vogel 
simply says that it is not clear what importance should be attached to 
tiie Chinese source quoted above — Bij dragen Deel 75 (1919), p. 637. 
Coedes (loc. cit.) is inclined to believe that as the Cola inscriptions 
exaggerate the sway of the Cola over Sri Vijaya, so the latter, ‘in its 
turn pretends to exercise its sovereignty over the Colas.’ Gerini is the 
only writer who accepts Ma Tuan-lin's statement at its face value. 
Researches, p. 624 n. 1. 

79. ASS1. iv, p. 224. 

80. ibid. 11. 6-7. 

81. ibid. 11. 39-40. 

82. This phrase which occurs often in the inscriptions is note- 
worthy as implying that the king heard petitions while he was bathing, 
though its rendering in the text avoids this implication. 
74 of 1932, 1. 39, gives the expression: vittin ullal kulikkum-idattu. To 
our notions it seems a strange mode of receiving a foreign embassy to 
hear them while you are bathing. See, however, p. 332 below for an 
abhiseka maiidapa. Cf. Ghusal Khana of the Mughals — Ibn Hasan, Cen- 
tral Structure pp. 77-8. 

83. SII. iii, p. 146. 

84. For a full discussion of this inscription, see my paper on ‘A 
Tamil Merchant-Guild in Sumatra’ tTijdschrift voor Indische Taal-. 
Land-.en Volkenkunde, 1932, p. 314). 

85. El. v. No. 10: vi. No. 35, ARE. 1922, II 6. 

86. Pithapuram plates (EL, v. No. 10), v. 21. 

87. vv. 25-26. 

88. El. vi. p. 335. 

89. Agrajam-Teki Plates, v. 21. 

90. El. iv, p. 36. 

C. 43 



338 


KUL6TTUNGA 1 


91. Aimbadaipparuvam simply means childhood, the period when 
amulets shaped like the five weapons of Visnu are worn. See Tamil 
Lexicon s.v. Aimbadaittali. (Cf. Kalingattupparani, x 8). This is of 
course an exaggeration of the youthful age of Vikrama Cola when he 
began his career as Viceroy. Contra Hultzsch SII. iii, p. 184 and n. 7. 

92. See ante, pp. 13-14. 

93. SII. iii, 72 and 304 of 1907; also 463 of 1911 (year 27). I see 
no justification for Sewell mentioning this event under a.d. 1090. 
HISI. p. 89. 

94. 608 of 1904, 44 of 1891. 

95. TAS. i, p. 22, 1. 8- 

96. ARE. 1917, II 27. 

97. Cunningham, Ancient Geography, p. 591. 

98. feki p l a tes 1. 83 — Manneti-Mahendra-madhya-vartino. El. 

vi, p. 335. 

99. 363 of 1899. Venkavya postulates a Kalinga invasion of Vengi 

which reached Ellore. The way in which Vikramacola’s conquest is 
described may (at least provisionally) be taken to mean that he pro- 
bably repelled a Kalinga invasion into Vengi. The invading army 
apparently advanced as far south as Ellore or some place near it, where 
the decisive battle seems to have taken place.’ ARE. 1905, II, 18. How- 
ever, he adds: ‘The earlier invasion which took place in or before 

ad. 1095-96 was perhaps against South Kalinga, in which Codaganga, 
who was lord of Tri-Kalinga, had apparently no direct interest.’ (ibid.). 

K. V. Subrahmanya Aiyar holds (El. xxii, pp. 140-2) 
that the Kalinga war which forms the subject of the Parani 
was fought against Rajaraja Devendravarman in the early years of 
Kulottunga’s reign. While the Draksarama inscription, 349 of 1893 of 
the 33rd year of Kulottunga records that Karunakara waged a war 
against a Devendravarman, there is nothing in it which implies the 
identity of this war with the one described in the Parani and the proba- 
bility of more than one war against Kalinga is conceded by K. V. S. 
Aiyar himself. See also JOR. x, pp. 295-301. 

100. 44 of 1891, (SII. iv, 445). The prasasti records the war as a 
personal achievement of Kulottunga. But the Parani is clear that the 
expedition was led, not by the king, but his generalissimo, Karunakara 
Tondaiman. 

101. IA. xix, p. 333. 

102. 181 of 1893; ARE. gives 6. 1002. 

103. The palace and the particular hall in it where Kulottunga 
held his darbar are mentioned so early as the reign of Uttama Cola- 
Museum Plates 1. 13. (SII. iii, p. 269). 

104. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar: Karunakarat-tondaiman, in his 
Kalingattupparani-yaraycci. has a good discussion of this expedition. 
From 11. 660-2 of the Vikramasolan-ula, Venkayya infers that Vikrama- 
cola took part in the expedition led by Karunakara against North 
Kalinga, (ARE. 1905 II, 18). Jayangondar makes no mention of Vik- 



NOTES 


339 


ramacola anywhere in his narrative, and his silence would be un- 
accountable even on the assumption that Vikramacola did not start 
from KaficI, but joined the expeditionary force somewhere in the Vengl 
province. On the other hand, there are other literary references to 
Vikrama’s war against North Kalinga, besides the one noted by Ven- 
kayya. These, which we shall discuss later, seem to imply that there 
was another expedition in Vikrama’s reign, and the lines of the uld 
cited above must be taken to refer to it. 

Venkayya (ibid) also argues that (i) Codaganga became strong and 
powerful only during the latter part of his reign, and (ii) Kulottunga’s 
invasion against North Kalinga was undertaken to help him against 
’some rebellious feudatory, whose territories were denoted by the term 
"Seven Kalingas.” ’ For (i) he depends on a comparison of the two 
Vizagapatam plates of a.d. 1087 (1081?) and 1118-19 (I A. xviii); but a 
perusal of the third set of plates dated a.d. 1135 shows that the points 
made by Venkayya cannot be true; he is dealing with differences due, 
not to a change in the political power or status of Codaganga, but to 
tlte two different types of prasastis employed in the two sets of plates. 
No. (ii) above is contradicted by the Kalingattupparani which says 
clearly that Anantavarman himself, and not any vassal of his, was the 
Lord of Seven Kalingas, and that Karunakara’s expedition was directed 
against Anantavarman himself. Anantavarman’s boast about Utkala in 
the east and Vengl in the west may be no more than a reference to 
his father Rajaraja’s achievements of which he enjoyed the results. 

105. 567 of 1925. 

106. 600 of 1907; 265 of 1905. 

107. 494 of 1911=EC. iv, Kr. 34. 

108. 29 of 1908. ARE. 1908, II. 58-60. 

109. ARE. 1927 II, 19-21. 

110. El. xi. No. 3, 11. 19 ff. 

111. 119 of 1888, El. v. p. 105, ante p. 317. 

112. ARB. 1918, paragraphs 41-2; 1919 paragraph 39; ARE. 1919, 
I, 9. Ep. Bir. i, pp. 164-5. 

113. TN. 44. For Hoysala history in general, see BG. I. ii, pp. 490 ff. 
and Rice, Mysore and Coorg, pp. 94 ff. 

114. EC. v. Bl. 199. 

115. Rice gives the period 1111-1141 to Visnu-Vardhana. A closer 
study of his records by A. Krishnamurti supports the dates adopted in 
tile text. 

116. Rice op. cit., p. 93 and n. 

117. EC. ii, 240, (90) 

118. Camunda-Raja according to R. A. Narasimhachar, EC. ii. 
Intr. p. 52. 

119. BG. I, ii, 495-98. 

120. This place is in the Chittoor district; it is not Coimbatore as 
Fleet (ibid, p. 496) thought. Cf. Rangachari i, p. 500. 

121. 35 of 1913; ARE. 1913 II. 46-7. PK. p. 129. 



340 


KULOTTUNGA I 


122. El. XV. pp. 101, 103. 

123. EL iv. No. 33, w. 22-4. 

124. Krishna Sastri says: ‘The later Eastern Calukya copper -plates 
excepting those of Cellur, mention the fact that the Vengl country be- 
came devoid of a ruler subsequent to Vikramacola’s departure to the 
.south, and Dr. Hultzsch surmised that this statement 
only suggested that the king’s absence resulted in political 
troubles brought about by the growing influence of the Velanandu 
chiefs and the ambitious invasion of the Western Calukya king Vikra- 
maditya VI. The political troubles could not, however, have been of 
a very serious nature, for we find that the Calukya-Cola kings continued 
to assert their sovereignty, though perhaps in a lesser and more limited 
degree. A large number of inscriptions dated in their reigns mention 
the Velanandu subordinates. Gonka and his son Rajendra.’ ARE. 1918, 
II, 25. By the Cellur plates, Krishna Sastri obviously means the plates 
of Kulottunga II dated 6. 1056 for 1065 as Kielhom rightly points out. 
I A. xiv. p. 56. El. vii— Appendix— Kielhom’s List No. 574. I am unable 
to discover what the other copper-plates are which Sastri had in mind. 
Mallapadeva’s inscription is a stone record. I think that in his impres- 
sionistic estimate of the political situation in this period in Vengl, 
K. Sastri has greatly underrated the effects of Vikramaditya's policy. 

125. 194, 341, 344 of 1893. 

126. 153 of 1897; 163 of 1897. 

127. 396 of 1893 bears the exceptionally early date 5, but does not 
contain any Calukya titles or the name of Vikramaditya. 

128. SII. ix (i) No. 193. 

129. 106 of 1902; El. ix, p. 256. 

130. 819 of 1922. SII. ix (i) No. 196. 

131. 158 of 1897, SII vi, No. 118. 

132. 330 of 1893. 

133. 335, 345 of 1893. 

134. 258 of 1905; El. ix, p. 261. 

135. 266 of 1893. 

136. Pd. 127. 

137. 376 of 1908; 3 of 1909; 35 of 1929. 

138. 268 of 1901: 425 of 1902. 

139. 197 of 1910. Contra SII. iii, p. 131. 

140. El. vi, pp. 220 ff. He is called Saptama Visnu-vardhana i.e., 
counting from Danamava, Eastern Calukyas. pp. 299-300. 

141. Kanakasabhai (I A. xix, p. 337). and after him, Hultzsch (SII. 
iii, p. 130). think that Karikala is also among these titles. I doubt this. 
For Akalanka see Parani, xiii. 89. 

142. TAS. iv, p. 130. 

143. 109 of 1892; 121 of 1912; 271 of 1929; 119 of 1888. 

144. 312 of 1901. 

145. 374 of 1908. 

146. See Takkayagapparani, ed. Swaminatha Aiyar, p. 247, v. 775 
and n. There are also gold coins with sung in Tamil characters. 



NOTES 


341 


147. Comment on Rural 756. 

148. 288 of 1907 — Sungamillac -colanadu Sorrumalai kandaruli. 

149. 440 of 1912; 132 of 1930. Also 87 of 1900 mentioning Sri-padakol. 
ARE. 1900, paragraph 25. 

150. Kalingattupparani, xiii, 61; Vikramanka-deva-carita. vi, 21. 

151. SlI. iii, 73; MAR. 1917, pp. 42-4. 

152. Leyden grant, ASSI. iv. p. 224, 1. 4. 

153. 231 of 1916. 

154. 93 of 1910; 61 of 1925. 

155. 247 of 1901. 

156. El. vi. p. 335. But see SI I. iii, p. 179. 

157. SII. iii. 72, 1. 5 where she is mentioned as chief queen along 
with two others; Elisai-vallabhi and Tyagavalli: also pp. 177-8. 

158. x, vv. 54, 55. 

159. 304 of 1907. The title alone without the personal name occurs 
again in 274 of 1927 in the forty-eighth year. 

160. 138 of 1923. 

161. 39 and 45 of 1921. 

162. 117 and 119 of 1888. 

163. ARE. 1912, II 25, suggests that she was his mother; but see 
121 of 1888. SII. iv. 226, 1. 4. 

164. 25 of 1922. 

165. See Studies, pp. 176 ff. for a detailed account of his life and 
achievement. The most noteworthy inscription discovered since is a 
Sanskrit inscription from Attur (Tinnevelly Dt.) recording the gifts of 
Manavatara to the local temple (405 of 1930). ARE. 1930 II. 21. 

166. 11. 118-138. See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar's Kalingattup- 
paraniyaraycci. 

167. xi 30. The reading of the third line should no doubt be 
‘marai molinda padi-marapin vanda kula'. not ‘podi’. 


169. Not Vandalur in the Chingleput Dt. cf. Raghava Aiyangar, 
op. cit. pp. 34-6; Contra SII. ii, p. 113, n. 3 and IA. xix, p. 340. 

170. Parani, xi, 53. 

171. 46 of 1914. 



Chapter XIV 


THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


Vikramacoja’s accession to the Cola thione took place 
on or about 29 June a.d. 1118. 1 He must 
Vikramac5la° f have ruled for some time jointly with his 
father, Kulottunga, whose latest inscriptions 
are dated in the fiftieth year, a.d. 1120. or even the fifty- 
second. 2 The asterism of Vikramacola’s birth was Uttirattadi 
in the month of Ani. 3 He inherited an attenuated empire 
confined to the Tamil country proper, and the seventeen years 
of his rule appear to have been on the whole a period of peace. 
A few inscriptions in the Ganga country, and a somewhat 
larger number from the Telugu area constitute the only proofs 
of the efforts made during the reign to recover lost ground — 
efforts crowned with better success in the north than in the 
western country. 


The prasastis in Vikramacola’s inscriptions take two 
forms, 4 both dating from his second year 
and employed throughout the reign. The 
shorter form commences pu madu ( magal in some versions) 
punara. and the longer one pu rrvdlai midaindu. Neither of 
these prasastis records any specific political event other than 
the war against Kalingam and Telinga Bhiman waged by Vik- 
ramacola in the early years of his Viceroyalty in Veng!. 5 The 
longer p rasasti undergoes, in the later years of the reign, 6 an 
important modification by the insertion in its middle of a pass- 
age recording the constructions and endowments made by 
the king in the temple of Nataraja at Cidambaram; this pass- 
age contains a definite date in the tenth regnal year, 15 April 
a.d. 1128. 7 The inscriptions of Vlkramacola sometimes repeat 
passages and titles from those of Kulottunga. 8 

Besides the extant Vikramasolan-ula, the poet laureate 
Ottakkuttan composed a parani on the 
Literature Kalinga war of Vikramacola. We learn the 

name of the work from the two other ulds of the same poet, 



RECOVERY OF VENGI 


343 


and its authorship from a gloss on his Takkayagapparani , 9 
This work is not now available; if it is ever recovered, it may 
add considerably to our knowledge of this period so rich in 
quasi-historical works of literature. 

With the recall of Vikramacdla to the south in a.d. 1118, 
the administration of Vengi passed into the 
Vengi. hands of the Velanandu prince Coda, the 

son of Gonka I. 10 Very soon, however, the Western Calukya 
king, Vikramaditya VI, took advantage of Vikramacola’s ab- 
sence from Vengi to extend his sway into that kingdom and 
reduce the Velanandu chief to subjection. Soon after the 
death of Vikramaditya in a.d. 1126, Vikramacola’s supremacy 
was re-established in the southern half, if not the whole, of 
the Vengi country. At Cebrolu in the Guntur district, in the 
heart of the region ruled over by Dandanayaka Anantapala 
some years before, the Mahamandalesvara Nambaya, Lord of 
the city of Kollipaka (Kulpak) and the Satsahasra country, 
acknowledged the overlordship of Vikramacola in a.d. 1127. 11 
From the same area, we have another inscription from Nidu- 
brolu dated &. 1054, the seventeenth regnal year of Vikrama- 
cola, in which the Velanandu chiefs and their dependents con- 
tinue to acknowledge the suzerainty of the Cola emperor of 
the South. 12 The steps by which this restoration of Cola 
supremacy in the north was effected are obscure, but the 
death of Vikramaditya VI, the effort put forth by Vikrama- 
cola and the readiness of the Telugu chieftains to prefer the 
overlordship of the Colas to that of the Western Calukyas 
must all have contributed in varying degrees to the 
restoration. 

In another direction also, Vikramacola seems to have 
made an effort, not so successful, to recover 
Gangavadi. territory lost at the close of his father’s 

reign. An inscription from Sugatur, dated in the second year 
of the reign, records the construction of a temple by an official 
of Vikramacola’s army. 13 Another inscription of the tenth 
year from the same region in the Kolar district records the 
construction of a vimana in Maddivala-becirak. 14 It is a 
natural inference that Vikramacola re-established the Cola 
power in the eastern part of Mysore. 



344 


THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA 1 


In the sixth year of the reign there was scarcity and 
distress consequent on a big flood which 
Scarcity ^ brought destruction to the villages and their 

crops. A fairly extensive tract of land in 
the North and South Arcot districts seems to have felt the 
effects of the visitation. An inscription 15 of a.d. 1125 from 
Tiruvottur (North Arcot) records a flood and the consequent 
destruction of crops leading to the sale of some land by the 
ur for raising money to pay the taxes of the year. In the 
same year, at Tiruvadi (South Arcot) , the Mahasabha had to 
sell some of the common land for the same purpose on account 
of difficulty experienced in the payment of the land tax 
( kadamaittattu ) for the sixth regnal year. 16 In a somewhat 
later record of the eleventh year from Koviladi (Tanjore 
district), the fact is mentioned that the village of Tirupper 
became deserted owing to the advent of bad times; 17 it is not 
certain, however, that this vague statement has reference to 
the same conditions as those noted in the two inscriptions 
cited above; if that be so, the area affected by the distress 
must have extended into the Tanjore district also. 

In a.d. 1128. Vikramacola signalised his devotion to his 
family deity, Nataraja of Cidambaram, by 
ba?am at Cldam ~ devoting the bulk of the revenue derived 
in the year to meet the cost of extensive 
additions to the structure of the Cidambaram temple and of 
sumptuous gifts to the shrine. The event is recorded in his 
inscriptions dating from the eleventh year in the following 
terms: 

‘ Out of the heap of pure gold which had been brought 
and poured out before him by kings as tribute due for 
the tenth year (after the time) when a gold leaf (set with) 
royal gems was engraved (with the words) : ‘May (the 
King) live long (and) protect this great earth’, 18 (he) 
covered (with) fine gold the enclosure, the gate towers, 
halls and buildings surrounding the shrine of pure gold 
where his family-God (viz. Natesa) practises the tandava 
(dance) , as if the splendid circular mountain surrounding 
the earth were combined with the Eastern mountain; 
covered (with) splendid gold the altar on which offerings 
abound, so that the light of heaven was reflected (by it) ; 
covered (with) pure gold and adorned with numerous 



VIKRAMA'S RELIGIOUS WORKS 


345 


strings of large round pearls the sacred car-temple, in 
order that, conferring long life on the delighted people, 
the miraculous dancer (viz. Natesa) who occupies the 
(golden) hall might be drawn in procession (at) the 
great festival called ‘the festival of the great name’ 
(Perum-peyar-viM) of the great (days of) Purattadi and 
Uttirattadi, so as to cause prosperity (on) the great earth 
(and) joy to the Gods; was pleased to build a long temple 
street of mansions covered with jewels (!) and called (it) 
after his royal prosperous name; and made numberless 
splendid insignia, beginning with dishes cut of fine gold, 
together with a Kalpaka (tree) of pure gold. Having 
been pleased to make gladly many such (gifts) in the 
tenth year of his reign, (in) the month of Sittirai, on a 
Sunday which corresponded to Hasta, (on) the thirteenth 
tithi of the fortnight of the auspicious waxing moon , 19 (he) 
covered the whole earth under the shade of a single 
parasol.’ 

We may not accept this high-flown account as literally 
true; but Cidambaram, the most celebrated of South Indian 
Saiva shrines, had attracted the devotion of Cola kings as 
early as the reign of Parantaka I, if not earlier; and after the 
foundation of Gangaikonda-colapuram and the transference 
of the capital of the kingdom from Tanjore to that place, Cidam- 
baram rose in importance on account of its proximity to the 
new capital and the possibility of frequent royal visits to it. 
Tanjore and Tiruvarur, which held the chief position in the 
days of Rajaraja I. now took a somewhat secondary place. 
It seems probable that Vikramacola’s buildings and gifts in 
Cidambaram were meant to complete an extensive remodel- 
ling of the temple, a remodelling begun by Naralokavrra in the 
closing years of Kuldttunga’s reign, and that this chieftain had 
much to do with the planning and execution of Vikramacola’s 
projects in the holy city . 20 Later inscriptions call the first 
prakara wall of the temple by the name Vikramasolan-tiru- 
maligai ; 21 and one of the main streets round the temple bears 
the name Vikramasolan-tengu-tiruvidi . 22 Though there is no 
epigraphical confirmation of the fact, the Srirangam Koyilo- 
lugu states that Vikramacola built the fifth wall surrounding 
the temple of Ranganatha at Srirangam, besides some other 
structures including a temple of Rama. 

C. 44 



346 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 

Some idea of the king’s share in the control of the adminis- 
tration is gained from a study of his per- 
Royal tours. sonal movements incidentally recorded in 
the inscriptions of the reign. That Gangaikonda-colapuram 
was the capital and therefore the normal place of royal resi- 
dence is seen from an inscription which mentions a senapati 
commanding at the outer gate ( puravayil ) of the palace at 
Gangaikonda-colapuram. 23 In a.d. 1122 the king issues an 
order from Mudikonda-colapuram, 24 another name for Palai- 
yaru near Kumbakonam. 25 The year after, he spent some 
time in a mandapa near a tank on the southern side of Vasaru 
alias Kunivalanallur in the Kaliyur Kottam. (Chingleput dis- 
trict). 26 In 1124 again, he was in the South Arcot district 
living in a palace at Viranarayana-caturvedimangalam, i.e.. 
Kattumannarkoyil. 27 Lastly, in the twelfth year, a.d. 1130, 
Vikramacola is found living in a palace in Cidambaram. 28 It 
is thus clear that the king was constantly touring his terri- 
tories and that there were palaces in the more important cities, 
besides mandapas and other structures all over the country, 
ready to be used as camping places by the sovereign in his 
tours. The importance of such royal progresses for ensuring 
efficient administration in an autocratic mediaeval state can 
hardly be overrated and in undertaking them, Vikramacola 
was no doubt following the regular practice of the Cola rulers 
of this period. 

The most characteristic title of Vikramacola is Tyagasa- 
mudra, ‘the ocean of liberality’ which oc- 
His titles and curs in the inscriptions and in the Vikrama- 
solan ula. 23 The Sevvelimedu Sanskrit in- 
scription of the sixteenth year gives him the titles Tyagava- 
rakara, only a variant of the above-mentioned title, and Aka- 
lanka, ‘the spotless one,’ 30 applied in the Kalingattapparani to 
Kulottunga I. 31 For the rest, we have seen, that some of his 
inscriptions exactly reproduce the titles of his father includ- 
ing even the Rajakesari title, though in reality Vikrama was a 
Parakesari. Two of his queens are mentioned prominently 
in the inscriptions, Mukkokkilan and Tyagapataka, of whom 
the former was the chief till about a.d. 1126-27. After her 
death, Tyagapataka became chief queen. 32 Possibly Nambi- 
rattiyar Neriyan-Madeviyar who is mentioned together with 
her agappariv<iram (personal retinue) in an inscription of the 



VIKRAMA’S MANDALIKAS 


347 


sixth year 33 from Tiruvidaimarudur was a third queen, of 
whom we do not hear elsewhere. 

A large number of feudatory chieftains and officers are 
mentioned in the Vikramasdlan-uld and in 
Feudatories. tthe inscriptions. The list of mandalikas 
given in the ula begins with the celebrated conqueror of Kalin- 
gam, Karunakara Tondaiman 34 Then there are mentioned in 
order: the chief of the Munaiyar, minister and warrior of 
Abhaya; Solakdn who distinguished himself in campaigns in 
the west against the Kongas, Gangas and Mahrathas; 35 the 
Brahmin Kannan of the great fortress; Vanan, dexterous in 
the use of his beautiful bow in battle, possibly the same as 
Suttamallan Mudikondan alias Vanakovaraiyar whose devi 
Elvar-kulali endowed a lamp a Tiruvadatturai in a.d. 1120; 36 
Kalingar-kon alias Naralokavira who fought with distinction, 
as already noted, in the southern wars of Kulottunga’s reign 
and was afterwards a great builder; the Kadava who rode a 
rutting elephant and was Lord of the Senjiyar of the strong 
embattled fortress; 37 the king of Venad (South Travancore) 
who banished Kali from the earth (by good rule) ; Anantapala 
whose charities were well-known from the Kumari to the 
Ganges, perhaps the same as the Senapati Sankaran Amba- 
lam-koyil Kondan alias Anantapalar who made a large en- 
dowment at Tiruvaduturai in a.d. 1121; 38 the Vattava whose 
fierce elephant battered down the three ramparts of Northern 
Mannai which belonged to hostile kings; 39 the lord of the 
sacred Cedi country who destroyed the fortifications of the 
Karnatas in a fierce fight; 40 the chief of Karanai (?) ever 
victorious in war; Adigan who cut to pieces the army of North 
Kalinga and compelled the proud kings who had vowed war 
to seek refuge in flight; 41 a Nulamba-Pallava who had earned 
distinction in fights at Kottar and Kollam belonging to the 
Pandyas; the Trigarta who subdued Kongu and Coorg, and 
others including the Pandya and Kerala of whom no details 
are given and some of whom like the Magadha and Malava 
are introduced with no apparent historical justification. From 
the inscriptions we can gather the names of the following 
feudatory chieftains and families of the Tamil country: Surai 
Nayakan alias Madhavarayan, son of Arumbakkilan Ponnam- 
balakkuttan alias Naralokavira; 42 the Sambuvarayas of the 
Sengeni line, afterwards an important dynasty of quasi-inde- 



348 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA 1 

pendent rulers in the region of North Arcot, the ancestors of 
the future Yadavarayas in the neighbourhood of Kalahasti, 
and several others. 

Kulottunga II must have been chosen as heir-apparent by 

his father Vikramacola some time in May- 
Kulottunga II. T . 

July a.d. 1133 as his regnal years are count- 
ed in his inscriptions from this date as the starting point; 43 
Vikramacola’s rule continued for a period of about two years 
thereafter. The prasastis in his inscriptions take many forms, 
all of them purely rhetorical and in hyperbolical praise of the 
excellence of his rule, but not vouchsafing a single fact of the 
history of the reign. 44 In one inscription he is described as 
'the king who wore the crown in such wise as to add lustre 
to Tillainagar.’ 45 This may mean that Kulottunga II cele- 
brated a coronation in the city of Cidambaram 46 or that in the 
reign of Kulottunga II the city of Cidambaram was vastly 
improved and beautified. The renovation of the temple and 
city of Cidambaram is, in fact, the best known event of the 
reign and is explicitly mentioned for the first time in an in- 
scription of the seventh year from Tiruppurambiyam 47 though 
a title based on this act occurs as early as the third year. The 
Kulottunga-solan-idd gives an elaborate account of the re- 
modelling of the Cidambaram temple carried out by Kulot- 
tunga. 48 It starts by saying that with his 
Cidambaram. 31 Peerless queen who had the right to share 

the honours of the throne with him, Kulot- 
tunga went and worshipped the Dancing Siva of Cidambaram, 
and that he removed the little God (Visnu) from the court- 
yard of the Sacred Hall of Tillai. 49 The new constructions 
undertaken and carried out by the king are then detailed. 
These include gopurams with seven tiers and the shrine of 
the goddess which delighted her heart so much by its size and 
its splendour that she did not think any more of the sacred 
mountain (Himalaya) that gave birth to her. Various parts 
of the temple and the city are also said to have been ‘covered 
with gold.’ The same facts are recorded more briefly in the 
Rajaraja-solan-uld 80 and the Taklcaydgapparani a by the same 
poet. It is not clear in what relation these works attributed 
to Kulottunga II stand to those attributed to Vikramacola in 
his inscriptions dating, as noticed above, from his eleventh 
year. We have perhaps to assume that the work started in 



THE KADAVAS 


349 


Vikramacola’s reign, if not earlier, was not completed till 
some years after the accession of Kulottunga II . 52 

The reign of Kulottunga appears to have been a period 
• of peace, good government and prosperity. 
Peaceful reign. There is no record of any warfare, and in 
fact, with the exception of the removal of the shrine of Govin- 
daraja from its place in Cidambaram indicating the growth 
of sectarian intolerance, we hear of nothing calculated to 
disturb the tranquillity of life in the Cola dominions. The 
extent of the empire was maintained as it was at the close of 
Vikramacola’s reign, and the Cellur plates show, if anything, 
that the restoration of Cola suzerainty in the north after its 
temporary eclipse by the spread of Western Calukya rule was 
complete and stable. The inscriptions of this reign from the 
Telugu country are more numerous than those of the preced- 
ing one. Some of the best work in Tamil literature was pro- 
duced in this period, and Ottakkuttan, Sekkilar and others 
were all patronised by Kulottunga II and his vassals. 

Gangaikonda-colapuram continued to be the capital of the 
kingdom 53 though Kulottunga, as we have 
Capital, titles, etc seen , h a( j a p ar tiality for Cidambaram. The 
king is stated to have been residing in his palace at Vikrama- 
sola-puram in the third year of his reign . 54 Two queens of 
Kulottunga are mentioned in an inscription of his second year 
from Tirumalavadi: the chief queen being Tyagavalli also 
called Bhuvanamulududaiyal, and the other Mukkokkilan, a 
princess of the family of Maladas (Malaiyamans) , 55 Of the 
titles borne by the king, Anapaya is the most characteristic 
and occurs not only in the inscriptions and in the uld on him, 
but is also borne by his secretary Anapayamuvendavelan who 
attests the king’s orders. In several places lands granted by 
the king were designated Anapaya-nallur . 56 He is also called: 
‘the Perumal who covered the Sacred Perambalam with 
gold ’, 57 ‘Tirunirruccola’, a title also borne by Kulottunga I 
and hence the cause of some confusion in regard to the date 
of Sekkilar , 58 Edirili-sola and Kalikadinda-sola . 59 The inscrip- 
tions of the reign of Kulottunga, like those of Vikramacola, 
record several gifts by his subordinates and feudatories among 
whom only the Kadavas need be noticed here. Mohan Alkkol- 
li alias Kulottunga-solak-kadavarayan was a chieftain of Pal- 



350 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 

lava extraction who had charge of the policing of a small area 
near Tir umanik uli in the South Arcot district about a.d. 
1136. 60 In the course of the next few years this Kadava chief- 
tain attained a more important position and his inscriptions 
appear in different places like Tirunamanallur, Tiruvadi and 
Vrddhacalam, and in them he is given many names and titles 
expressive of his growing importance; and his gifts and charit- 
able works also become more ostentatious. In 1140, he pre- 
sents gold ornaments and silver vessels to Tiruttondisvara at 
Tirunamanallur and he bears the names Kudalur Palli- 
Alappirandan Mohan and Kulottunga-solak-kacciya-rayan. 61 
About the same time he presented a jewelled necklace to the 
deity of Tiruvadi. 62 Five years later, he made over to the 
temple at Tiruvadi the perumbadikdval on some lands and 
properties, and he bears now the additional titles Pahnaka 
Muttaraiyan Alappirandan Arasanarayanan, 63 and Kudalur 
is stated to be situated in Perugalur-nadu of Tirumunaippadi. 
In 1146, he made over to the Tiruvadi temple some further 
taxes and dues from three devaddna villages located in his 
beat, and on this occasion he styled himself Kudalur Pannaka 
Muttaraiyan Alappirandan Elisaimohanana Kulottunga-sola 
Kadavarayan. 64 Lastly in a.d. 1148, he built a mandapa called 
Elisai-mohan for the mahasnapana of the deity at Vrddha- 
calam, and in recording this act he called himself Alappiran- 
dan Elisaimohan alias Kulottunga-sola Kadavar-Adittan. 65 
These records reveal to us the beginnings of the feudatory 
family from which sprang the celebrated Kopperunjinga whose 
boisterous career shook the Cola empire to its foundations 
and hastened its downfall. 

We may also note Madhurantaka Pottappiccola Siddha- 
rasa, one of whose inscriptions 66 found at Nandalur 
clearly attests the extent of the Cola empire in 
that direction. A curious inscription from Tirugo- 
karnam in the Pudukkottah state mentions a clan of 
Brahmins who exercised the right of crowning kings and who 
had been settled in the Ten-kavira-nadu by the king Killi who 
had a regard for their ancient connection with the great city 
of Tuvarai (Dvaraka). 67 The presence in the Pandya coun- 
try of Lambakarnas with special duties at the coronation of 
a king is noticed in the Mahdvavisa. 68 



PEACEFUL REIGN 


351 


The latest regnal year found in the inscriptions of 
Kulottunga II is the sixteenth or the seven- 
Rajaraja II. teenth ; this means his reign came to a 
close about a.d. 1150. Some four years before this date, he 
associated his son 69 Rajaraja II in the actual conduct of the 
administration, and in the inscriptions of Parakesari Rajaraja 
his regnal years are counted from some date after 6 April in 
a.d. 1146. 70 Of the reign of Rajaraja II many inscriptions 
have been preserved which contain a number of p rasastis 
attesting the extent of his kingdom and disclosing the names 
and positions of a number of feudatories. Judging from the 
silence of these inscriptions on the military transactions of 
the reign, one may infer that, like the reign of Kulottunga II, 
that of Rajaraja II was generally peaceful. The most com- 
mon prasasti of the reign is that commencing pu maruviya 
tirumadum which gives a high-flown account of the benefits 
of Rajaraja’s rule and appears for the first time in inscriptions 
of the third year. 71 This mentions one queen who is called 
Avanimulududaiyal and is said to have sat on the throne along 
with the king. Much longer, but equally unhistorical, is 
another prasasti, also dating from the third year; 72 this com- 
mences pu maruviya polil elum and, among other things, 
emphasises the flourishing condition of Tamil literature in the 
reign by calling the king muttamilkkut-talaivan, the patron 
of the three-fold Tamil; 73 three queens are mentioned at the 
end of this prasasti besides Avanimulududaiyal mentioned 
above, two of these being called by the almost identical titles 
Bhuvana-mulududaiyal and Dharani-mulududaiyal, and the 
third Ulaguclai Mukkokkilan, doubtless the same as the queen 
mentioned in two other inscriptions of the fourteenth and 
seventeenth years of the reign. 74 Two other p rasastis also 
occur in the inscriptions of the reign, and they begin puyal 
vayttu valam peruga 75 and kadalsulnda par madar. 76 The 
former occurring in a record of the fifth year of Rajaraja II 
was subsequently adopted by Kulottunga III in whose inscrip- 
tions an account of his Pandyan invasion is inserted in the 
body of this rather short introduction. Likewise the latter, 
occurring in a record of Rajaraja’s tenth year, becomes the 
chief prasasti of the reign of Rajadhiraja II, and it is note- 
worthy that the queen mentioned at the end of this prasasti is 



352 


THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 


called Ulagudai Mukkokkilan-adigal in the inscriptions both 
of Rajaraja and Rajadhiraja 77 a clear proof that this is a 
title, not the personal name, of the chief queen. 

The extent of the empire under Rajaraja’s rule is borne 
out by the provenance of his inscriptions. 
Extent of empire. inscription 78 of the seventh year from 
Kendatti recording the construction of a temple by a Kadu- 
vetti chieftain on a hill at Surur in Kuvalala-nadu, the men- 
tion in a fragmentary record 79 from the Salem district of 
Tagadur-nadu in Ganga-nadu, a sub-division of Nigarili-sola- 
mandalam, and a gift recorded at Perumber 80 in a.d. 1164 by 
a person who calls himself Tagadur Kilavan, show that in 
Kongu and the eastern part of the Ganga country, the Cola 
hegemony still contmued to be recognised in some manner. 
In the Telugu country, Rajaraja’s suzerainty is clearly attest- 
ed by a fair number of stone inscriptions found throughout 
the Vengi country up to Draksarama, 81 though it is clear that 
the feudatory chiefs of Velanandu were becoming more and 
more independent and overbearing. As a matter of fact, 
from the close of the reign of Kulottunga I 
Its growing when, as we have seen, great disasters befell 
the Cola empire, and its extent became 
greatly circumscribed by the successes of the Hoysalas and 
the Western Calukyas, the most remarkable phenomenon 
within the empire was the steady growth in the power and 
influence of local dynasties. The hold of the central ad- 
ministration over the outlying parts of the empire had always 
been less firm than in the districts nearer the capital; but by 
the end of Rajaraja II’s rule, the administrative system was 
betraying signs of weakening even at its centre. The monarchy 
is no longer the vigorous autocracy that it was, ever active in 
the pursuit of war and glory, in the maintenance of order and 
the promotion of costly and essential enterprises of public 
utility. The inscriptions give clear indications of the increas- 
ing helplessness of the king in the face of the growing turbu- 
lence of his vassals, who, while acknowledging the nominal 
suzerainty of their overlord, play a more prominent part than 
the suzerain or his government in the conduct of the affairs 
of the area under their control. The system of village ad- 
ministration with its autonomous local assemblies seems to 



WEAKENING CENTRE 353 

have been generally unaffected by the changed situation; but 
the strength of the centralised bureaucratic administration so 
laboriously planned and built up by Rajaraja I and his succes- 
sors was gone. 

Gangapuri no doubt continued to be the capital of the 
kingdom. The inscriptions of the reign say 
Capital, titles, etc. Q £ king’s movements or of his part 

in the administration. One record of the thirteenth year 82 
shows him residing at Ayirattali. Of the titles of Rajaraja, 
the most noteworthy as it occurs both in the inscriptions and 
in the Rdjaraian-ula is Colendrasimha 83 Another title com- 
monly applied to him in literature, but not traceable in epi- 
graphy, is Kandan 84 The concluding venba in the u la also 
calls him Vlradhara and Virodaya. From the inscriptions, it 
is clear that Rajaraja also took to himself the titles Raja- 
gambhira and Edirilisola, 85 and possibly also Neriyudaiccola. 

The Kadavas are represented in this reign by Kudalur 
Alappirandan Mohan alias Rajarajak-kadavariiyan 86 who is 
probably identical with Kuldttungasdlak-kadavarayan of the 
previous reign, and by Rajendrasola Pallavar-adittan, 87 who 
is called also the lord of Kahclpura. The former assigned to 
a temple at Elvanasur a considerable number of taxes and 
and dues for its expenses, while the latter built a stone tem- 
ple on a hill in the Kolar district. There was also Pallavarayar 
of Karigai Kulattur who built the stone temple of Rajarajes- 
varam Udaiyar in Pallavarayanpettai and, as we shall see, 
played a leading 88 part after the death of Rajaraja II. Two 
Sengeni chieftains are mentioned: a certain Nittavinoda 

Sambuvarayan, 89 whose wife, Sorudaiyal, endowed a lamp at 
Brahmadesam in South Arcot, and Rajanarayana Sambuva- 
rayan, also called Ammaiyappan Siyan Pallavandan whose 
gifts are recorded at Munnur and Accarapakkam. 90 The alias 
of Rajanarayana, it may be noted in passing, seems to imply 
a dynastic connection between the Sengenis and the Kadavas. 

The latest certain regnal year cited in Rajaraja’s inscrip- 
tions is 26. 91 One record from Tiruvorriyur 
End of the Reign seems (- 0 gj ve the twenty-seventh year, 
though the first figure in this date is not free from doubt. 
C. 45 



354 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 

Another inscription from Konidena gives 28, but the Saka 
date is missing. 92 The end of Rajaraja’s reign would therefore 
fall about a.d. 1173. The inscriptions of his successor. Raj adhi- 
raja II date the commencement of his reign from some day 
in the month of March a.d. 1163; 93 it is clear from one of 
these 94 that Rajadhiraja was not the son of Rajaraja, but like 
Rajaraja himself, a grandson of Vikramacola, and that he 
was chosen by Rajaraja to succeed him on the Cola throne as 
there was no one in the direct line suitable for the purpose. 95 
Within a few years of the choice of Rajadhiraja for the succes- 
sion, a great civil war convulsed the Pandya country in the 
south and the Colas were compelled to take sides in the war 
to check the growth of Ceylonese influence on the mainland. 
The war had practically closed by the time of Rajaraja’s death, 
but as its details are narrated in the records of Rajadhiraja II 
and Kulottunga III, they will be considered in the next chapter. 

Note C 

ON THE PALLAVARAYANPETTAI INSCRIPTION 
(433 of 1924). 

This inscription of the 8th year of Rajadhiraja II is noticed 
at some length in ARE. 1924, Part II, paragraphs 19-21. It 
has been edited by Somasundara Desikar ( QJMS . Vol. xix, 
pp. 57 ff.), who differs from the official epigraphist (Venkoba 
Rao) and holds that the inscription does not support the 
view that Kulottunga III was a son of Rajaraja II and a baby 
at the time of his father’s death. I think that Desikar is right 
on this point. But a careful consideration of this difficult 
record in the light of the data to be gathered from other con- 
temporary inscriptions has led me to conclusions different 
from those of the two writers cited above, and considering the 
importance of the inscription for the history of this period, I 
proceed to examine it in detail. V. Venkatasubba Aiyar has 
also edited this inscription in EL xxi, pp. 184-93. 

The text given by Desikar in QJMS. is inaccurate in many 
ways, particularly because he has introduced emendations not 
all of which have been explained in his notes. The text pub- 
lished in the EL is much more dependable, and agrees closely 



ANALYSIS OF INSCRIPTION 


355 


with the transcript sent me by S. K. Govindaswami who 
studied the inscription in situ. 

Lines 1 — 4 contain the usual parasasti of Rajadhiraja and 
the regnal year in words and call for no remarks. Lines 
5 — 14 deal with the official position held by Pallavarayar and 
the part he played in the choice and coronation of Rajadhi- 
raja, first as heir-apparent to Rajaraja and then as his suc- 
cessor after his death, and this section, which is unique in its 
account of the circumstances of Rajadhiraja’s accession, is 
also the most difficult to interpret on account of the gaps in 
the record. Lines 14 — 21 describe the part of Pallavarayar 
in the Pandya Civil War and the expulsion of the Ceylonese 
forces from the Pandya country. Then follows the statement 
(1. 21) that he died of some disease, and the rest of the 
inscription records the gift of forty veils of iraiyili land to his 
relations and dependents by king Rajadhiraja in his eighth 
regnal year (11. 21 — 28), the gift being attested by several 
officers of government (11. 28 — 30). If this analysis of the 
record is correct, it follows that this record is dated after the 
death of Pallavarayar which took place after that of Raja- 
raja II. 

The general construction of 11. 5 — 14 may now be indi- 
cated; Pallavarayar (5 — 6) , perru ninru (7) , parigarittu (10) , 
tiru abhisekam pannuvittu (13) 96 orupadiyum panni (14). 
All the actions indicated by the participles quoted were thus 
the acts of Pallavarayar, and this fact must be firmly grasped. 
Line 5 is simple and gives details of the name and title of 
Pallavarayar and the location of his fief. The words that fol- 
low and end with perru ninru explain the status of Pallava- 
rayar. Though this general sense is clear, the exact import 
of the phrases employed is somewhat obscure. The whole 
passage may be rendered thus: ‘having become the Captain 
(mudaligal) of the ten koyil-kottus 97 of Periyadevar Rajaraja- 
devar and of the departments ( turaigal ) including the ele- 
phant (corps) , cavalry and agambadi-niyayam, having duties 
similar to those of all mudalis, and being in receipt of all 
honours including mun eval due to mudalis.’ The ten koyil- 
kottus remind one of the passage in the Koyil-olugu describ- 
ing how Ramanuja amplified the temple-organisation at Sri- 



356 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA 1 

rangam by dividing the attendants of the deity ( parijanangal ) 
into ten groups (kottu), which took the place of the earlier 
and more restricted establishment of five kottus. The idea 
seems to be that Paliavarayar had the control of the entire 
palace ( koyil ) establishment. The term agambadinlydyam 
( nikdyam ) means the body of servants in immediate attend- 
ance on the king. 98 The meaning of mun-eval is more diffi- 
cult; literally it means ‘first command.’ 33 

The next part of the inscription ending with parigarittu 
(1. 10) begins with the mention of Rajaraja’s death, and nar- 
rates the action taken by Paliavarayar for the protection of 
the king’s children who were aged one and two years and 
of his harem and treasures. On account of the tender age 
of the children, Paliavarayar had to remove them from the 
cantonment (p adai-vldu) at Ayirattaii to another place, 
evidently to insure their safety; the gaps in 1. 9 render the 
drift of the passage extremely uncertain, but we may be sure 
that Paliavarayar succeeded in his main object (elld adaivu 
kedugalam varada idattu 1. 10). What the particular danger 
was to which the children and harem of the late king would 
have been exposed had they remained at Ayirattaii is by no 
means clear. 

We now come to the part of the inscription directly bear- 
ing on Rajadhiraja’s accession (11. 10 — 14). This part begins 

with the phrase iva periyadevar elundaruli ndlile. 

and in spite of the gaps, the phrase is a clear warning that, 
having so far dealt with what happened on the death of Raja- 
rajadeva, the inscription now proceeds to narrate something 
which took place in his life-time. There were no sons fit 
for succession — tiru abhisekattukku uriya pittaigal inriye 
i(ruk)kirapadiyai parttu — and something had to be done: 
enquiries were made into the rights of possible claimants — 
(a)nnaUle kariyam irundapaai vi(cdranai) 100 seyau, and in 
the end, there was chosen for the succession a grandson of 
Vikramacola, Ediriliperumal, the son of Neri-udai-perumal, of 
Gangaikonda-colapuram. Apparently Paliavarayar was com- 
missioned to fetch the heir-apparent so chosen to Rajaraja’s 
presence and to install him in his new place; four years later, 
he was anointed under the name Rajadhirajadeva with the 



ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS 357 

consent of the council of officers ( udan kuttam) and the nadu. 
A distinction is made between mandai kavippittu (1. 12) and 
tiru abhisekam pannuvittu (1. 13), two ceremonies in which 
Pallavarayar played a part. Edirilipperumal was a grandson 
of Vikramacola perhaps by a daughter, otherwise unknown. 

Another view of this succession, first suggested by 
T. N. Subrahmanyan, is quite probable. On this view the 
grandson of Vikramacola, named Edirilipperumal, was not 
Rajadhiraja II, but Kulottunga II who was crowned at the 
death of p eri(ya devar), i.e. Vikramacola himself, and this 
furnished a precedent for the coronation of Rajadhiraja II, 
ascertained by enquiry — munnalile kariyam irundapadi 
vi(caranai) seydu of 1. 11. So that mandat kavippittu (1. 12) 
and tirii-abhisekam pannuvittu (1. 13) apply respectively to 
Kulottunga II and Rajadhiraja. That Kulottunga II was well 
known as Edirila (i) pperumal is clear from the PiUaittamil and 
from the inscriptions of his reign. An objection to this view 
arises, however, from chronology. Kulottunga counts 
his reign from May-June a.d. 1133, and Vikramacola 
continued to rule till two years later. But for Kulot- 
tunga’s case to be an exact precedent, we may have 
to assume that, like Rajaraja II, Vikramacola saw that 
he had no heir in his direct line, and chose his grand- 
son perhaps by a daughter as his successor, made him 
yuvardja in 1133 and that the yuvardja was duly crowned 
king at the proper time. This may well have been so. But 
the contemporary poet Ottakkuttan calls Kulottunga the son 
of Vikramacola, and this T.N.S. explains away by assuming 
that the king adopted his daughter’s son. 

We may note further, that a Tamil inscription from Hema- 
vati (Anantapur district) — 117 of 1899, SII. vi. No. 553 — dated 
in Vijaya, Yr. 2 of Tribhuvanacakravartin Kulottunga — yields 
1166-7 as the date of Kulottunga Ill’s accession. One wonders 
if he too was brought from Gangaikonda-colapuram along with 
Rajadhiraja, and had to bide his time in exile, supported by 
feudatories like Mallideva Coda Maharaja till his position im- 
proved more than a decade later. The phrase: Gangaikonda- 
solapura (ttil elun)daruli irukkira piUaigalai (pira)yanam 
pannu ( vittu ) (1. 11) shows that two princes may have been 



358 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA 1 

involved. And 11. 13-14 show that Rajadhiraja’s accession was 
not smooth. But the matter is obscure and calls for more 
study in the light of many inscriptions of Rajadhiraja from 
Draksarama, SII. iv. Nos. 1074 — (where regnal year 61 is a 
mistake for 16), 1100, 1223, 1279, 1118 and 1330 — which carry 
his reign up to the 49th year i.e. a.d. 1212 or 1215. 

The rest of the inscription may be briefly dealt with be- 
fore taking up the chronology of the events of Rajaraja's reign 
as suggested by it. After Rajadhiraja’s anointment at the end 
of his four years’ probation, there followed the Pandyan Civil 
War. and Pallavarayar led the Cola forces to victory, and at 
the end of the campaign, he kept himself ready to carry out 
the further behests of his sovereign, (11. 14 — 21). Then he 
took ill and died, evidently some time after Rajaraja’s death 
already mentioned in the record, and Rajadhiraja gave 40 
veils of land, which had been the kdni of Pallavarayar and 
was now made tax-free for the benefit of his wives and rela- 
tions. This was in the 8th year of Rajadhirajadeva’s reign. 
Among the beneficiaries of this grant figures a Raj ara jade van 
(read as Rajadhirajadeva by Somasundara Desikar) whose 
relations and children get some land for themselves; I doubt 
if this Rajarajadevan can be identified with Raj ara j a II as has 
been done (ARE. 1924. II, 21, El. xxi, p. 185 n. 2). I am 
inclined to treat him as a son. otherwise unknown, of 
Pallavarayar. But the fact that the largest share (eight veils) 
goes to his wife ( virundangal ) and her children, and the 
leading part of Pallavarayar in the removal of Rajaraja’s 
harem and children to a safe place support the other view, 
and it is possible that Rajaraja’s children were by the daughter 
of Pallavarayar. 

Venkoba Rao says: ‘There seems to have been great 

opposition, both open and secret, to the coronation of Rajadhi- 
raja from many quarters, against which the minister carefully 
guarded the prince and firmly established him on the throne 
after imprisoning all the suspected enemies.’ (ARE. 1924 
II 20) . All this seems to be reading rather too much into 
the obscure and fragmentary thirteenth line in the record. I 
agree with Venkoba Rao when he says: ‘unfortunately, the 
inscription is much damaged in certain important portions and 
leaves much for surmise’ (ibid). 



CHRONOLOGY 


359 


To turn to chronology: Rajaraja’s reign began between 
6 April and 11 July a.d. 1146. The latest regnal year clearly 
cited in his inscriptions is 26, and the 26th year must have 
begun after 6 April a.d. 1171. Rajadhiraja’s accession was 
between 28 February and 30 March a.d. 1163, so that his 
eighth regnal year covers the period March 1170 to March 
1171. The twenty-sixth year of Rajaraja did not begin, ac- 
cording to this calculation, until the eighth year of Rajadhi- 
raja had closed, and it is difficult to see how to reconcile this 
with the present inscription which states that Rajaraja had 
died before Pallavarayar whose death occurred some time in 
the 8th year of Rajadhiraja. 101 We shall see that the chrono- 
logy of the Pandyan Civil War also requires that the reign 
of Rajadhiraja should be taken to commence somewhat later 
than was determined by Kielhorn. 

Some inscriptions of Rajadhiraja II are known which do 
not work out correctly for the accession date fixed by Kielhorn 
and seem to indicate a later date for the commencement of 
his reign — 19 of 1913, 571 of 1907, 428 of 1912; see Ind. Eph. 
I ii. p. 70 and El. x. pp. 126-7. It should be noted with regard 
to these inscriptions that Sewell’s suggestion that the regnal 
year in 571 of 1907 may be T5’ is held to be impossible by 
Venkayya, and that 428 of 1912 contains the kaclal sulnda 
introduction. These records point to a date somewhere in 1166 
a.d. for Rajadhiraja’s accession, a date which will fit in with 
the facts to which attention has been drawn above. On the 
other hand, 337 of 1914 (Pd. 138) clearly seems to imply an 
earlier date than Kielhorn’s. And there is a record 102 at 
Punganur which implies that one and the same regnal year 
of this king was described as either the twelfth or the 
fourteenth. 

In regard to copper-plate 23 of 1916-7 which couples 
£. 1091 with the 23rd regnal year of Rajaraja II, Venkata- 
subba Aiyar makes the following observations. ‘We know 
that Rajaraja II was not alive in a.d. 1169 and that the Cola 
country was then ruled by Rajadhiraja II. The period of 
regency was probably denoted here (Vengl) as a continua- 
tion of Rajaraja’s reign.’ These remarks seem to assume that 
no records of Rajaraja from the Tamil country are known to 



360 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 


be dated after the accession of Rajadhiraja (1163); if this is 
so, attention may be invited to 267 of 1901, 411 of 1909, and 
96 of 1920, though it is a fact that records of Rajaraja dated 
after the 19th year have not been traced in the Tamil districts. 
Moreover no other example of the practice postulated by 
Venkatasubba Aiyar of a regent or his vassals continuing to 
issue records in the name of a deceased king is known in the 
whole of Cola history. There is no evidence for the view that 
Rajadhiraja II ruled as regent for Kulottunga III during his 
minority. 

The exact date when Rajadhiraja was chosen for the suc- 
cession must depend on whether the regnal years of this king 
as counted in his inscriptions included the initial period of 
four years when he was on trial; seeing that the title Rajadhi- 
raja is said to have been conferred on him only at the time 
of his anointment at the end of four years and that inscrip- 
tions dated in the second year bear this title, the conclusion 
may be drawn that the period of probation preceded the date 
of anointment and that the tale of Rajadhiraja’s regnal years 
did not include this period. 103 If this is correct, the first choice 
must have been made sometime in a.d. 1159 or 1162 according 
as we adopt 1163 or 1166 as the initial year of Rajadhiraja’s 
reign. We have seen that the latter is the more likely. Raja- 
raja himself lived on some years after this date. 

It seems quite impossible that Kulottunga III was one of 
the children of Rajaraja said to have been one and two years 
old at the time of his death; for he came to the throne in 1178, 
within six years after Rajaraja’s death, and took an active 
part in the War of Pandyan Succession which had begun while 
Rajaraja was still living. The evidence of the Kulottungan- 
kovai and Sankarasolan idd also points to the same conclu- 
sion. Sen Tamil iii., pp. 164 ff., contra ARE. 1909 II, 48; 1924 
II. 21.: El. xxi. p. 186. 


1 El. VH. pp. 4-5. 

2. 284 of 1923: 520 of 1920: 139 of 1902 Ante, p. 330. 

3. 285 of 1912 

4. 408 of 1909 and 175 of 1911; 157 of 1925. 

5. Hultzsch (SI/, iii, pp. 179-81) is inclined to distinguish three 
periods in the career of Vikramacola. I think, that a careful study of 



NOTES 


361 


the syntax of the pu malat midaindu introduction warrants the view that 
the Kalinga war was waged in the period of the Viceroyalty of Vengi. 

6. 502 of 1922, (Yr. 11). 

7. EI. vii, p. 5. 

8. SII. ii, p. 308, n. 4; EI. vi, p. 224. 

9. V. 776. It must be noted that Ottakkuttan who mentions this 
parani thrice in his works does not state that he wrote it. Hultzsch con- 
siders this a reference to the Kalingattupparani of Jayangondar which, 
he says, describes the Kalinga war waged by Kulottunga before 
a.d. 1095-6, (SII. iii, p. 180) . In fact, Jayangondar 's work had reference to 
the second Kalinga war of Kulottunga’s reign in which Vikramacola 
seems to have had no part. The Parani on Vikrama’s war must have 
referred to the earlier occasion, (we have no evidence of any other 
war against Kalingam), and might have been composed by Kuttan 
some time in the reign of Vikramacola. 

10. EI. iv, p. 42, vv. 34-5. 

11. 153 of 1897. See p. 330 ante. 

12. 163 of 1897. Saka 1054 is a mistake for 1057, EI. vii, p. 5. 

13. 175 of 1911— EC. x. Sd. 9. 

14. 467 of 1911— EC. x. Sp. 61. 

15. 87 of 1900. 

16. 30 of 1903. 

17. 276 of 1901 — SII. vii. 496. Kalam po lladay nammur alindu kudi 
odip-poyk-kidandamaiyil. 

18. See SII. iii. p. 185, n. 2. It is possible that the benediction en- 
graved on a gold leaf or plate was repeated at the end of each regnal 
year as it was completed and a new year began. 

19. The date is: 15 April, a.d. 1128, Kielhom, EI. vii, p. 3. 

20. Studies, pp. 176 ff. 

21. 282, 284, 287 of 1913. 

22. 312 of 1913. 

23. 71 of 1926; ARE. 1926, II, 27. 

24. 168 of 19C6. 

25. 271 of 1927. 

26. 299 of 1910; ARE. 1911, II, 27. 

27. 63 of 1918. 

28. 163 of 1902. 

29. 272-3 of 1907; 49 of 1931. Via 11. 431, 662, etc. 

30. EI. vi. pp. 227-30. 

31. ix. w. 7, 16; xiii, v. 89. 

32. SII. iii, pp. 181-2. 

33. 136 of 1895. 

34. 11. 119 ff. 

35. Curiously enough the Kalingar are also included in the list. 

36. 229 of 1929. A certain Kulottunga-cola-Mahabali Banaraja of 
Tiruvarur claimed descent from the minister of the legendary Cola king 
Manu, (164 of 1894). 

C. 46 



362 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA 1 

37. This is perhaps the earliest mention of the fortress of ‘Gingee’. 
Senji is called a devadana of Tiruvekambam Udaiyar in 159 of 1930. 

38. 71 of 1926. 

39. Mannai is perhaps Malkhed. But we cannot say when this 
event took place. 416 of 1893 calls MucLkondan, whose elephant is 
specially mentioned, the king of the Vattar. 

40. By the Cedi country the poet means the land of the Cedirayas, 

the hilly area round about Tirukkoyilur, Kiliyur, etc. In the inscrip- 
tions there are three Malaiyaman chieftains mentioned: (1) Malaiyaman 
T.i ukkala Marundan AJvangakara Malaiyaman, (408 of 1909); (2) 

Ubaiyan alias Vikramacola-cediyarayan (286 of 1902: 371 of 19C8) ; and 
(3) Surriyan Raman alias Rajendrasoja Malaiyakularajan (177 of 1906; 
called Malaiyan Malian in 373 of 1908). 

41. Adigan’s part in the Kalinga war is not mentioned in the Kalin- 
gattupparani or the inscriptions. It should be remembered, however, 
that another Kalingapparani by Ottakkuttan is no longer accessible. 

42. 128 of 1930. 

43. El. x, p. 138; xi, p. 287. No 135 of 1934-5 of Yr. 9 works out 
correctly for March 24 a.d. 1142, ARE. II, 15. 

44. The beginnings of the chief forms of the prasastis with the 
time of their earliest occurrence may be noted: 

Pu mannu pdvai—55 of 1893 of the 2nd year; 

Pu maruviya puvi e[um — 85 of 1895 of the same year. 

Pu meya (mevi) v alar— 422 of 1904 of the same year; 

Pu mannu padumam— 255 of 1929 of the 3rd year; 

Pu mevu tirumagal— 572 of 1907 of the 8th year; and 

Pu mannu yanar— 83 of 1895 of the 15th year. 

See also ARE 1913, II, 35. 

45. 155 of 19C2. 

46. The Periyapuranam (Candelura v. 8)— mentions that five cities 
shared the honour of witnessing the coronations of Cola kings. 

47. 350 of 1927. ARE. 1927, II, 24. 

48. 11. 69-116. 

49. 363 of 1907 seems to open with a reference to this fact and this 
part of the inscription appears to have been wantonly damaged as the 
rest of .t is in excellent preservation. Perha;s the earliest reference to 
the relative positions cf the shrines of Govindaraja and Nataraja in 
Cidambaram is that of Manikkavasagar in his Tirukkovaiyar v. 88. 
Several anc : ent temples appear to have had shrines both of Siva and 
Visnu, and there seems to have been at one period a deliberate attempt 
t.i harmonise the relations between the followers cf the two deit : es, an 
attempt giv.ng rise to the cult of Sankaranarayana. The sectarianism of 
a later age proved itself intolerant of the eclectic arrangements of an 
earlier time. 

50. 11. 58-66. 

51. w. 777, 808-10. 



NOTES 


363 


52. ARE. 1913, II, 34; 1927, II, 24. 

53. Kulottungasolan u'a, 1. 118. 

54. 271 of 1915; 533 of 1921. 

55. 85 of 1895. 

56. 271 of 1915; 533 of 1921; 346 of 1911 and 531 of 1912 mention an 
officer Anapaya Muvenda Velan. 

57. 157 of 1902. 

58. 363 of 1911; 312 of 1901, and Sen Tamil xxv. pp. 271-5, ARE. 
1912, II. 27. 

59. 255 of 1929; 380 of 1308. 

60. 157 of 1902. 

61. 374 of 1902. 

62. 391 of 1921; see also 467 of 1921 (Tlruvennainallur) . At ARE. 
1922, II, 39 the former record is assigned to the reign of Kulottunga III 
with confusing results. 

63. 45. of 1903. 

64. 43 of 1903. 

65. 137 of 1900. 

66. 572 of 1907. 

67. 411 of 1902; Pd. 129. 

68. CV. ch 77. v. 28 and n. 1. 

69. Rajaraja-sdlan-ula, 11. 66-7. 

70. El. ix, p. 210. 

71. 465 of 1919. 

72. 243 of 1930. 

73. Iyal, Isai, and Nadagam — roughly prose and poetry, song and 
drama. 

74. 16 of 1993; 369 of 1911. Bhuvanamujududaiyal is also mentioned 
in Rajardj an uld, 1. 78. 

75. 165 of 19C8. 

76. 219 of 1901. ARE 1909, II, 48-50 discusses the relations between 
Rajaraja II, Rajachiraja II and Kulottunga III as seen from these pra- 
sast'.s. It is said there: ‘It must be noted that the titles Rajakesari and 
Parakesari are applied to these kings indiscriminately.’ I do not think 
this is correct; there are, of course, a few mistakes in some records 
where one title appears for another; but their number is not enough 
to warrant the general observation cited above. See also ARE. 1904 
para, 21. 

77. Cf. 219 of 1901 and 538 of 1904. 

78. 486 of 1911. 

79. 18 of 1900. 

80. 267 of 19"1. 

81. 216 of 1833. 

82. 163 of 19C6. 

83. 336 of 1917; uld 11. 252; 685. 

84. Takkavdgavparani. v. 549 and n. 

85. 128 of 1929; 45 of 1914. 



364 THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNCA 1 

86. 166 of 1906. ARE. 1937-8 II 39. 

87. 486 of 1911. 

88. 434, 435 of 1924. 

89. 168 of 1918. 

90. 52 of 1919; 244 of 1901. 

91. 703, 704 of 1920. 

92. 181 of 1899. 

93. El. ix. p. 211. But see p. 359 below. 

94. 433 of 1924, contra ARE. 1909, H, 48. 

95. 433 of 1924 is a difficult inscription and raises some problems 
in the chronology of the period. From Note C. that follows it will be 
seen that the gaps in the record greatly obscure its meaning. 

96. In 1. 13 V. V. reads sellumbadi panni [iuttaru!i] nar; my text 

has panni u nar. I think the word is not a finite verb, but a 

participle and a noun which should form the subject of the following 
verb migai seyydda padi. 

97. V.V. reads perttu kdyir-kottum, and translates ‘big household.’ 
Also dvark-kudirai ‘body of armed cavalry’, for my anai (Jc) -kudirai. 

98. ‘The body of armed men and women employed in the inner 
apartments of the palace.’ V.V. 

99. ‘Class of officers who first receive the royal commands and 
communicate them to others for execution.’ V.V. 

100. V. V. suggests vi ( nnappan ) jeydu.. 

101. The position is made worse by 7 of 1893 which implies an 
interval of 15 years between the 1 (9) th year of Rajaraja II and the 
8th year of Rajadhiraja. S1I. iii, p. 207. Perhaps the regnal year of 
Rajaraja mentioned in this record is 1(1) and not 1(9). 

1C 2. 209 of 1932. 

103. V. V. points out that 337 of 1914 (Pd. 138) giving date 
a.d. 1162, Dec. 3, Monday, may be a record of the probationary period. 



Chapter XV 


RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA ill 
A.D. 1163-1216 

In the absence of an heir in the direct male line Rajadhi- 
raja II, a grandson of Vikramacola by a 
Prasastis. daughter, was chosen by Rajaraja II 

as heir-apparent towards the end of his reign, and Rlja- 
dhiraja reigned as co-regent with Rajaraja for some 
years. 1 Rajadhiraja’s prasastis are found in three forms, 
all purely rhetorical and of no historical value. The 
form which begins kadal sulnda par magalum (midarum) 
and occurs as early as the second year 2 was obviously bor- 
rowed from Rajaraja’s inscriptions; the other forms are: pii 
maruviya tisaimugattdn which appears first in the fifth year 3 
and was adopted later by Kulottunga III, and kadal sulnda 
parelum , 4 found in inscriptions of the sixth and tenth years 
from the Tanjore district. While the prasastis of the king 
are thus of no use to history, several inscriptions of his reign 
give a fairly detailed account of the incidents of the war of 
Pandyan succession which, on a comparison with the story 
of the war given in the Mahdvamsa. is seen to be quite trust- 
worthy. 

From the re-conquest of the Pandya country by Kulot- 
tunga I, we hear almost nothing of its affairs 
^Pandyan Civil or Q f the fortunes of the ancient line of 
Pandya rulers until we reach the reign of 
Rajadhiraja II. The inscriptions of the Pandyas, which may 
with more or less certainty be assigned to this period, show 
that even after Kulottunga’s southern wars, the Pandyas suc- 
cessfully maintained a part of the freedom they had gained 
from the initial difficulties which beset Kulottunga I on his 
accession to the C5 ! a throne; they engraved inscriptions of 
their own with boastful prasastis. a thing which they did not 
or could not do when their country was ruled more firmly by 
the Cola-Pandya viceroys. They waged their own wars with- 
out reference to the central power to which their allegiance 



366 RAJADHIEAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


tended to become more and more nominal. Parantaka Pandya 
took part, as we have seen, in Vikramaco'a’s first Kalinga war 
and attacked Telinga Bhima of Kolanu; but this real subordi- 
nation to Cola suzerainty apparently gave place to a more 
grudging recognition of it in the years that followed the death 
of Kulottunga I, if not towards the end of his reign when the 
Cola power underwent considerable curtailment by the loss 
of Mysore and Vengi. Hardly any inscriptions of the Cola 
monarchs are found in the Pandya country proper after the 
close of Kulottunga’s reign. 5 

Towards the close of the reign of Rajaraja II, some years 
after Rajadhiraja had been chosen for the succession, a fierce 
succession dispute broke out in the Pandya country, and one 
of the rival parties appealed to the powerful Sinhalese ruler 
Parakramabahu I (a.d. 1153-86) and the other to the Co’ a 
monarch. The war soon resolved itself into a continuation 
of the old struggle between the Cola and Ceylon kingdoms. 
The intercession brought no good to either; out of the ashes 
of the civil war arose the Pandya power which in its renewed 
strength soon swallowed up both the kingdoms which had 
espoused the rival causes of the protagonists in the civil war. 

The early stages of the war are vividly described in the 
Mahavamsa. 6 In a.d. 1169 Parakrama Pan- 
The Mahavamsa ,jy a c f Madura sent an appeal for help 
account. __ , , , , , . 

against Kulasekhara who was investing the 

city of Madura. Before the Ceylonese army sent under Lan- 
kapura in response to this appeal could reach the mainland, 
events there had moved rather fast. Kulasekhara had cap- 
tured Madura and put an end to the lives of Parakrama, his 
wife and children at a place called Tirimalakke. On hearing 
this Parakramabahu sent word to Lankfpura that the war 
should be continued until the kingdom of Madura was taken 
from Kulasekhara and bestowed on a scion of the house of 
Parakrama. Lankipura effected a landing on the opposite 
coast in the face of opposition, and advancing by way of 
Ramesvaram, he strongly fortified himself at Kundukala, on 
the tongue of land projecting from the mainland into the sea 
near Ramesvaram. The war was marked by savage ill-treat- 
ment of the prisoners of war, the Tamils who fell into Lan- 
kapura’s hands being either impaled or transported to Ceylon 



RESTORATION OF VIRA PANDYA 367 

to labour at the restoration of the Buddhist Viharas of the 
island that had suffered during the Tamil domination. With- 
out entering into the minute details of the marches and 
counter-marches and the numerous battles of the campaign 
which are of no direct concern to us, we may note that Lan- 
kapura’s task proved more difficult than was anticipated. 
Kulasekhara long kept up a brave resistance, and Lanka- 
pura had to send for reinforcements to Ceylon and to placate 
the local chieftains of the Tamil country by means of pre- 
sents and honours. When he learnt that Parakrama’s son 
Vira Pandya who had escaped the massacre of Kulasekhara 
was living in the Malaya (mountain) country, Lankapura 
sent word to him to come and join him at a place not far 
from Madura. Kulasekhara put into the field army after 
army and a fierce war raged in the Ramnad and Madura dis- 
tricts, extending on either side to Pudukkottah and Tinne- 
velly. To judge from the length of the struggle and the way 
the Tamil chieftains repeatedly changed sides, the cause of 
Kulasekhara was apparently more popular in the Pandya 
country, and the support which Kulasekhara gained from his 
uncle in Kongu 7 and from the Colas may be taken also to 
confirm this estimate. However that may be, the next stage 
of the war as recorded in the Mahavamsa began with the 
return of Kulasekhara from the Co'a country with a Cola 
force commanded by Pallavarayar and others which he sent 
to Tondi and Pasi. In the battle of Kilenilaya that followed, 
victory was with Lankapura ‘who dyed the water of the 
ocean ruddy with the blood of the foe’. 8 Kilenilaya of the 
Mahavamsa is doubtless identical with the modern Kil-nilai 
in the Tirupattur taluq of the Ramnad district. After another 
fight at Ponnamaravati in which Kulasekhara was defeated 
and put to flight, Lankapura gave over the government of the 
kingdom to Vira Pandya (whose coronation he had already 
celebrated in accordance with the orders of Parakramabahu) , 
introduced the kahapana, the coin of Parakramabahu, every- 
where, and sent to Ceylon a vast amount of booty captured 
from the Pandya and Cola countries. 

This account of the Mahavamsa is on the face of it incom- 
plete. It does not say how Vira Pandya fared, or what hap- 
pened to Kulasekhara, and seems deliberately to avoid stat- 



268 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


ing that Lankapura returned to Ceylon. 9 One gains the im- 
pression that the Ceylonese author has drawn a veil over the 
ultimate failure of the effort after its initial success. 

That this is the fact becomes clear from a study of the 
Cola inscriptions bearing on the war and from some events 
recorded in the Mah5.va.msa under the reigns of the succes- 
sors of Parakramabahu I. 

The Arppakkam (Chingleput Dt.) inscription 10 of the 
fifth year of Rajadhiraja contains the earliest epigraphical 
account of this war. It says that the Ceylon army captured the 
_ , Pandimandalam and drove out Raja Kula- 

sekhara from Madura; the army then pro- 
ceeded against the samantas of Rajadhiraja, and made war 
in the region of Tondi and Pasi, and won victories which 
struck terror into the hearts of the people in the Solaman- 
dalam and other tracts (nadus) . Edirilisoja Sambuvaraya, 
when he heard of these occurrences, became greatly con- 
cerned about how it was all to end and sought divine inter- 
cession through Svamidevar, a holy man, also called Umapati- 
deva or Nanasivadeva, a native of Daksinalada in Gauda-desa, 
whom he besought to ward off by prayer, sacrifice and wor- 
ship the invasion of the Cola country by the wicked troops 
from Ceylon and the resulting harm to the Brahmins and 
temples thereof; Svamidevar said in reply that he knew that 
the Ceylon army had put an end to worship in the temple of 
Ramesvaram and had plundered its treasury; he would 
endeavour by occult means to bring down disaster on- the 
enterprise of the invaders who were Sivadrohis. With this 
object he performed piija for full twenty-eight days, and then 
came news from Pil'ai Pallavarayar that the pradhanis includ- 
ing Jayadratha and Lankapuri dandanayakas and the entire 
force from Ceylon had sustained defeat. And the Sambuva- 
raya in his gratitude presented the village of Arppakkam to 
Svamidevar. 

The Pallavarayanpettai (Tanjore Dt.) inscription 11 of the 
eighth year is more explicit in its details. Like the Maha- 
vamsa, it begins by stating that Kulasekhara Pandya was 
ousted from Madura by the advent of the Ceylon army, that 
thereupon he entered the Cola country, and appealed to the 



KULASEKHARA RESTORED: CEYLON INVADED 369 


Cola monarch for help in regaining the Pandyan throne; the 
Cola ruler then ordered that Kulasekhara was to be restored 
to his throne, and that Lankapuri-dandanayaka and others 
were to be killed and their heads nailed to the gates of the 
city of Madura, the Pandya capital. Pallavarayar alias Tiruc-( 
cirrambalamudaiyan Perumanambi, who was entrusted with 
these tasks, entertained Kulasekhara suitably during his stay 
in the Cola country, and having with his army, resources and 
zeal, brought about the reconquest of the Pandyan kingdom, 
he carried out his master’s orders to the letter by nailing the 
heads of Lankapuri-dandanayaka and others to the gates of 
Madura. Kulasekhara thereupon re-entered Madura, and 
thus was averted the conversion of the Pandyan country into 
a province of Ceylon (parulai-nadu Ila-ndddgddapacli pariha- 
rittu) . 

A third inscription dated in the twelfth year, four years 
after the last one, 12 and found in the North Arcot district, 
carries the account of the war a stage further. The record 
is unfortunately much damaged and many gaps in it greatly 
obscure its meaning. This inscription records a gift of land 
to one Palaiyanur-udaiyan Vedavanam-udaiyan Ammai- 
yappan alias Annan Pallavarayan, and narrates the war 
in recounting his services to the state. 13 After giving 
a brief account of the war up to the restoration of 
Kulasekhara to the throne of Madura, — an account which 
follows the earlier records summarised above and ascribes to 
Annan Pallavarayan a prominent part in these events, — the 
inscription proceeds to narrate an expedition against Ceylon, 
organized presumably by Annan Pallavarayan. He heard 
that the Sinhalese king, Parakramabahu, was preparing for 
another attack on the Cola king and his protege Kulasekhara 
and that, with this intent, he w r as concentrating his forces 
and building ships in Uratturai, Pulaicceri, Matottam, Valli- 
kamam, Mattival 14 and other places. To counteract this, 
Annan Pallavarayan, acting on behalf of the Cola monarch, 
employed Srivallabha, the nephew ( maru-magandr ) of the 
king of Ceylon and a claimant to his throne kept out of his 
rights 13 and now on the mainland ready to make common 
cause with the enemies of Parakramabahu. The expedition 
that was sent with Srivallabha at its head captured and des- 
C. 47 



372 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


the ruler of Ceylon had lost heavily in the fighting and his 
military and naval resources had been greatly damaged. The 
Cola king now assumed the surname; ‘who was pleased to 
take Madura and llam,’ {Maduraiyum Ilamum kondarulina) . 19 
While the capture of the Madura kingdom was a fact, the 
inclusion of Slam (Ceylon) in the title must be understood 
only as a claim to that kingdom like that set up by the 
English kings to the throne of France or as merely indicative 
of the military successes achieved by the Cola ruler against 
the Ceylonese. If we follow the chronology of the Mahavamsa 
and one set of Rajadhiraja’s inscriptions, the events of the 
war may be placed between say a.d. 1169 and 1177. 20 

That under Rajadhiraja the Cola empire continued to 
retain the same proportions as under Raja- 
Extent of Empire. r -j a jj ma y jj e inferred from the provenance 
of his inscriptions which are found in Nellore and Kalahasti 
and Nandalur. 21 Even a part of the Ganga country would 
seem still to have been included in the Cola empire, if the 
Cola-maharaja Ghatti-nulamba Bhujabala-vlra Ahdmallarasa, 
Titles described in a Kanclpuram inscription 22 as 

the Mahamandalika of Gangamandala, was 
in fact a feudatory of Rajadhiraja II. An inscription from 
Attur 23 in the Tanjore district is issued in the name of 
Tribhuvana-cakravartin Karikalacoladeva who took Madura 
and Ham, and obviously the inscription belongs to this period; 
it seems legitimate to infer that Karikala was a title of Rajadhi- 
raja II, an inference which is confirmed by another inscription 
(from Cidambaram) which couples the names Rajadhiraja and 
Karikala. 24 A damaged record from Tiruvilimilalai, 25 which 
bears no date, mentions the place Komaran Kulottunga-sola- 
caturvedimangalam in the Tiruvalundur-nadu; the village 
seems to have been named after prince Kulottunga, after- 
wards Kulottunga III, an inscription of whose reign 26 men- 
tions gifts made in the same village as early as the third year 
of Periyadevar, evidently Rajadhiraja II; the relation of 
Kulottunga III to Rajadhiraja, if any, is not clear. 

Among the officials and feudatories mentioned in the 

„ , records of Rajadhiraja’s reign, the following 

Feudatories. , , _ 

may be noted. The two most prominent 

were the two Pallavarayars whose successes in the Pandyan 



FEUDATORIES 


373 


civil war have already been dealt with in detail. The elder 
Pallavarayar of Karigai-kulattur, Tiruccirrambalam-udaiyan 
Perumanambi, was the trusted lieutenant of Rajaraja II and 
survived him only long enough to be of service to the widowed 
queens and the young children of Rajaraja alter the demise 
of the king. The other Pallavarayar, Palaiyanurudaiyan 
Vedavanamudaiyan Ammaiyappan alias Annan Pallavarayan 
came into prominence early after Rajadhiraja’s accession as 
he is found making a gift of land in Tiruvarur in the second 
year of the reign . 27 At the death of Perumanambi, it was 
Annan Pallavarayan who decided the proportion in which the 
lands belonging to the former were to be distributed among 
his relatives . 25 He also endowed three lamps in the temple 
of Tiruvalangadu, North Arcot, in the thirteenth year of 
Rajadhiraja. Vedavanamudaiyan Karunakaradevan alias 
Amarakon of Palaiyanur who endowed lamps in Tiruvalanjuli 
and Pattlsvaram 29 was perhaps a relative of Annan Pallava- 
rayan. 

The Sengenis and Kadavarayas are strongly represented 
in the region of the Arcot districts and elsewhere. A certain 
Sengeni Ammaiyappan Sambuvarayan made an assignment of 
some local taxes and dues to the temple of Tiruppulivanam 
towards the expenses of worship, offerings and repairs in the 
temple ; 293 as he could only have made over to the temple what 
was his own or within his power to dispose, it is clear that 
he must have either possessed a large assignment himself or 
been an important official of the central government with 
large powers devolved upon him. This Sambuvaraya was 
most probably the same as Edirili-sola who is called Sengeni 
Ammaiyappan Siyan Ammaiyappan in a Kahcipuram record , 30 
and who granted the village of Arppakkam as ekabhoga- 
iraiyili to Umapati-deva alias Nanasiva-deva for his celebrated 
worship of Siva and prayers to him to avert the disasters 
threatened by the invasion of the Ceylon forces . 31 Other 
chieftains of the same dynasty are mentioned . 32 

From the reign of Kulottunga I, the growth in the num- 
ber of feudatories and the extent of their 
Gr< dit th ° f fCUdal influence on the administration and policy 
of the central government is one of the most 
striking features of Cola history. The multiplication of these 



374 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


over-mighty subjects of the king naturally weakened the con- 
trol exercised by his government over the general welfare of 
the country and removed considerable areas from its direct 
purview and constituted them into more or less independent 
jurisdictions. So long as village-communities and other 
popular organisations, rural and urban, were the only 
machinery of local administration by the side of the central 
government, the latter had a firm hold not only on the general 
administration as a whole but on the manner in which the 
various corporations carried on their affairs. It was not to be 
expected that powerful chieftains, who, though in the 
beginning they might have risen with the support and favour 
of the king, subsequently found themselves at the head of 
armed forces, would stand the same amount of interference 
as the humbler popular organisations, the assemblies and the 
guilds. Such chieftains often found themselves in possession 
of considerable areas of territory allotted to them by the king 
partly in recognition of their past services and partly with 
a view to enabling them to add a contingent of soldiers to the 
forces of the king in times of need. The growth in the num- 
ber of such chieftains had two consequences. The first was 
to weaken the prestige of the king’s government by in- 
creasingly restricting the sphere of its effective operation, and 
thereby to loosen its hold even on the rest of the administra- 
tion. The inscriptions of the later Cola rulers do not give 
rise to the same impression, as do those of the earlier 
monarchs, of a powerful central government ever active in 
restraining, correcting, advising and guiding the more or less 
autonomous local organisations in the various parts of the 
empire. The popular organisations seem to be for the most 
part left to themselves, and when they have anything to do 
with outside authorities, it is generally with the local chief- 
tains who have come up in their neighbourhood that they 
have to deal. It is more often to them rather than to the 
king that they begin to look for large gifts or the permanent 
assignment of local taxes and dues for charitable purposes. 
Another consequence of the new situation was that the local 
chieftains began to enter into political compacts calculated to 
regulate their conduct towards the emperor. These compacts 
seem to have had an important role in effecting the transition 



FEUDAL CONDITIONS 


375 


by which the class of official nobility, which had at first grown 
with the growth of the Cola empire, converted itself into a 
number of petty local chieftaincies of a hereditary character. 
It is remarkable that the binding power of these compacts is 
often sought to be secured by the most fearful imprecations 
some of which are too shocking to be reproduced here. The 
earliest of these compacts are those found in the Ramnad dis- 
trict towards the close of the reign of Kulottunga I and in the 
beginning of Vikramacola’s reign. In the forty-second year 
of the reign of Kulottunga I, as we learn from an inscription 
from Sivapuri (Ramnad Dt.), 33 Kandan-Mangalattevan alias 
Tuvarapati-velan swore a vow of alliance and fealty to 
Sundarattolan Kandan alias Rajendrasola Tuvarapati-velan 
saying: T, Kandan Mangalattevan alias Tuvarapati-velan do 

hereby swear that I shall remain true to (your) life, wealth 
and honour, and that, if I fail, I shall incur the sin of him 
who becomes the husband of his mother and of consuming 
liquor (surd) and beef (go-mamsam ) About ten years 
later, in the same place is registered another compact 34 between 
Rajendrasolan alias Nisadarajan and Kandan Sundarattolan 
alias Tuvarapati-velan by which the former swore fealty to 
the latter in similar terms. Another instance comes from 
North Arcot and belongs to the reign of Rajadhiraja II; an 
inscription from Madam dated in the eleventh regnal year of 
the king 35 registers a similar compact among three chieftains 
of the Sengeni family. It will become clear presently that 
under Kulottunga III this tendency became much more 
general, and there can be no doubt that we have here un- 
mistakable evidence of the approach of the end. The empire 
is dissolving into a number of warring principalities before the 
eyes of the king, now no longer powerful to enforce his will 
on his vassals who, though they still own allegiance to him, 
generally act very much by themselves and as best suits their 
divergent interests. 

The latest regnal year traced in the inscriptions of Rajadhi- 
raja II is sixteen, 36 so that his reign extended 
KiJ6ttanga HI U P to AD - or H82 according as we adopt 
a.d. 1163 or 1166 for the commencement of 
his reign. The inscriptions of Kulottunga show that his rule 
commenced between 6 and 8 July, a.d. 1178. 37 It is thus clear 



376 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


that Kulottunga III had come to be recognised as the next 
sovereign before the death of Rajadhiraja. It has been shown 
above that Kulottunga could not have been one of the tender 
children of Rajaraja 38 for whose protection the Pallavarayar 
took effective steps at the time of Rajaraja’s death. If the 
assumption is correct that Kulottunga is identical with 
Kumara Kulottunga mentioned in the inscriptions of Rajadhi- 
raja II, 39 then it would seem that he was not of the direct 
line of the Imperial Colas any more than his predecessor. The 
Kuldttungan-kdvai i0 gives the pedigree of Kumara Kulottunga 
thus: 

Sangamaraja 

I 

! I i 

Kumara 

Kallaman Kulottunga Sankarasolan 

There is an ula on Sankarasolan which seems to mention his 
elder brother under the slightly different name Kumara- 
mahidhara. It must be noted, however, that as neither the 
kovai nor the ula mentions any historical events specifically 
traceable to Kulottunga III of the inscriptions, 41 the identifi- 
cation of this king with Kumara Kulottunga of literature is 
still open to doubt. There is no means available at present of 
ascertaining the exact relation of Sangamaraja to the Cola 
line. 

The records of Kulottunga’s reign are very numerous, and 
p . t . the chief prasasti that appears in many of 

them begins puyal vdyttu (or vuykka) 
valam peruga. a formula which is borrowed from the inscrip- 
tions of Rajaraja II and is first found in this reign in a record 
of the third year. 42 Though at first this form is repeated 
almost exactly as it occurs in Rajaraja’s reign and furnishes 
no data for the historian, by the ninth year of the reign an 
account of the Pandyan war of Kulottunga is incorporated 
in it. 43 and this account is reproduced in almost all the 
subsequent editions of the prasasti with significant variations 
which will presently be discussed. The other prasastis of the 
reign, less frequently employed and of little historical im- 
portance, may be more briefly noticed. The formulas com- 
mencing malar mannu polil-elilum and pit mevi maruviya both 



LAST GREAT COLA 


377 


appear first in records of the fifth year; 44 a record from 
Magaral, dated in the eleventh year, 45 has the prasasti begin- 
ning pu mevi valar of Kulottunga II and cannot be distin- 
guished from the inscriptions of that monarch except by the 
Parakesari title of the sovereign. Some records of Kulot- 
tunga III begin pu maruviya tisai mugatton, a form which 
first appears in the fifth year and of which only the first words 
are mentioned in a record of the seventeenth year. 46 

The inscriptions of Kulottunga very often exhibit, besides 
the prasastis, some descriptive titles of the monarch which are 
a great help in the identification of his inscriptions and in the 
study of the history of the reign. In one record 47 of the second 
year, and more frequently from the fourth year 48 onwards, 
the phrase ‘Maduraiyum Pandiyan mudit-talaiyum konda- 
ruliya,’ meaning ‘who was pleased to take Madura and the 
crowned head of the Pandya,’ is employed to distinguish the 
king from his earlier namesakes. This shows that the Pandyan 
campaign of which we get a detailed account for the first 
time in the ninth year, must have commenced, if not actually 
been completed, some years earlier. The descriptive title 
quoted above is revised from time to time by the addition of 
ilam (Ceylon) in the tenth year, 49 Karuvur in the sixteenth. 50 
and of Kancipuram in the twenty-fourth year. 51 The city last 
mentioned is not included in many inscriptions; Kulottunga is 
also stated to have celebrated a vtrabhiseka and a vijaydbhi- 
seka. 52 

The reign of Kulottunga III is a remarkable example of 
the triumph of the personal ability of the 

Disruption monarch against the forces of disruption 

delayed. , 

that were steadily increasing in their num- 
ber and in the intensity of their action. Pandyan affairs had 
not reached a settlement when Kulottunga came to the throne; 
and much active fighting was still needed; and though Kulot- 
tunga succeeded for the best part of his reign in enforcing 
Cola suzerainty over the Pandyan kingdom, it became clear 
by the end of his reign that the southern kingdom, after its 
recovery from the effects of the civil strife, was being ruled 
by able and ambitious monarchs who were prepared not only 
to assert their independence of the Cola power, but to embark, 
in then - turn, on a career of aggressive warfare and territorial 


C. 48 



378 RAJADH1RAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


aggrandisement. We shall see that Kulottunga lived long 
enough to experience the first shock of the newborn im- 
perialism of the Pandyas. Elsewhere, the numerous feudatory 
dynasties were preparing to break otf from the centre when 
opportunity occurred, and some of them like the Siddharasas 
of Nellore caused no end of anxiety to the emperor by their 
restless activity directed not seldom against the central power 
itself. All the energy and the strength of Kulottunga was 
taken up in counteracting the machinations and undoing the 
mischief resulting from the actions of such overgrown vassals. 
In spite of everything, however, until towards the close of the 
reign of Kulottunga, the Cola empire suffered no visible 
curtailment, and the period of his rule marks the last great 
epoch in the history of Cola architecture and art. Literature 
did not fail to get its meed of encouragement. Kulottunga 
himself must be counted as the last of the great Cola monarchs. 
Under his weak successor, the empire went to pieces and its 
ruler suffered personal humiliation at the hands of one of his 
feudatories who was in alliance with the newly risen power 
of the Pandyas, and it was only the intercession of the Hoysala 
ruler Narasimha that restored the Cola monarch to the 
semblance of sovereignty, though not to real power. 

We have seen that Kulasekhara, on whose account Raja- 
p ^ dhiraja II fought the powerful ruler of 

" Ceylon, Parakramabahu I, and his protege 
Vira Pandya. the son of Parakrama Pandya, ultimately made 
his peace with the Ceylonese king, turned against his Cola 
benefactor, and paid for his treachery by being driven out 
of Madura by Annan Pallavarayan who sought out Vira Pan- 
dya and restored him to the throne of Madura. A solitary 
inscription of Vira Pandya comes from Suclndram; 53 it begins 
pumadandaiyum jayamaclandaiyum and records a gift of 
seven velis of land to the local temple on the occasion of the 
king’s coronation; it seems more likely that this grant was 
made by Vira Pandya when he was installed by Annan Pal- 
lavarayan, rather than on the earlier occasion when the Cey- 
lonese generals secured for him a temporary hold on Madura. 
How long Vira Pandya occupied the throne can only be sur- 
mised; there is no doubt, however, that in a short time he 
too succumbed to the blandishments of the king of Ceylon 



DEFECTION OF VIRA PANDYA 


and went over to his side. The fact was that the traditional 
alliance among the southern powers — Venad, Pandya and 
Ceylon — against the Cola monarchy was too firmly established 
to be shaken by considerations of gratitude for help received 
at a critical juncture. We shall see that Vira Pandya at a 
later stage sought refuge in Kollam when he was driven out 
of Madura. It will be recollected that when Parantaka I 
extended the Cola dominion to the south, the conquered ruler 
of the Pandya country, Rajasimha, found sympathy and sup- 
port in Ceylon and Kerala. That the general relations of these 
powers among themselves and towards the Colas remained 
constant in the long interval that had elapsed up to the acces- 
sion of Kulottunga III must have become clear from the 
account that has been given in the preceding pages. Hence 
it was that both Kulasekhara and Vira Pandya, though they 
were ready to seek Cola assistance against each other, could 
not maintain that friendship after their object was attained, 
and drifted into the diplomatic situation normal to the ruler 
of the Pandyan kingdom. 

The further stages of the war as recorded in Kulot- 
tunga’s inscriptions, all of them commenc- 

Kulottunga’s in" puijal vayttu vnlam veruoa, may now 
inscriptions. , ' _ ' , " 

be briefly summarised. An inscription 

from Cidambaram dated on the 88th day of the ninth year 54 
records the coronation of the king at his accession, and then 
states that the king despatched an army when Vikrama Pan- 
dya sought his aid and in the campaign that followed, the 
son of Vira Pandya fell, 55 Elagam was subdued, and the army 
of the maravas ( marapnaclai ) was beaten, while the tsingala 
soldiers had their noses cut off and rushed into the sea. 56 Vira 
Pandya was attacked and compelled to turn back; Madura and 
his throne were seized from him and handed over to the 
Pandya (Vikrama) who had sought the aid of the conqueror; 
a pillar of victory was also set up. Another inscription, also 
from Cidambaram, dated on the 118th day of the eleventh 
year, says: 57 

‘By a single army, (Kulottunga) had the nose of the 
son of Vira Pandya cut off before he was captured, bes- 
towed on Vikrama-Pandya the great city of Kudal. and 
returned. After this, he took the crowned head of Vira 



380 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


Pandya who had returned to the attack because of 
the disgrace (of his former defeat) , and erected a pillar 
of victory at the end of the fight.’ 

Two records from Tirukkadaiyur 58 dated in the fifteenth (?) 
and sixteenth years repeat the events recorded in the last 
preceding inscription in identical words and add the 
following: 

'Having finished the fight, he (Kulottunga) caused 
the best of his (Vira Pandya’s) women to enter (his 
own) velam; 59 (he) set his foot on the crowns of the 
Tennan (Pandya), who had entered the Western Kollam 
with his relatives as he had no (other) refuge, and of 
the powerful Cera, when they made obeisance at his lotus 
feet; (he) was pleased to confer on the Tennavan (Pan- 
dya) the sovereignty of the land of Sen-Tamil (Madura 
country) and (its) crown; (he) put on the anklet of 
heroes and raised the banners of heroism and of libera- 
lity; (he) was pleased to be present when the chief of 
Kaikayas named his son after him (Kulottunga) and 
gave him many robes; having bestowed a living, such as 
kings seldom got, on the minava (Pandya) Vira Kerala 
whom he had compelled to turn his back on the battle- 
field, whose finger he had cut off, and who had since 
surrendered himself into slavery; (he also) gave him to 
eat by his side from vessels given by him. 60 

A record from Tiruvidaimarudur, also dated in the sixteenth 
year, 61 states that the warriors of Kulottunga began to guard 
all places in response to the order: ‘Capture Ilam in the 

South, so that the tennavar (southerners — Pandya, Kerala, 
and Singala ?) may come and prostrate themselves, and the 
head of the Singalavan may be cut off; fill the wavy sea (to 
make a causeway).’ Then we have an inscription of the 
nineteenth year from Srirangam 62 which repeats the inci- 
dents of the Pandyan war almost in the same words as the 
Cidambaram inscription of the eleventh year stating also 
that Vira Pandya’s second attempt to resist Kulottunga was 
made on the field of Nettur, and adds that, at the end of the 
battle, he took into his velam the young queen ( madakkodi ) 
of the Pandya ruler, and proceeds: 



PANDYA AFFAIRS 


381 


‘When the Tennavan (Pandya), who had lost his 
fortune, and the Seralan (Cera) came (to the Cola), 
bowed (to him) and sat down at the foot of (his) throne, 
(he) placed (his) feet on the crown of the former, 
granted (him) land, granted (him) a crown, and gave 
the Pandya permission (to go) ; and to him on whose flag 
was seen the bow (the Cera ), 63 he granted a fortune 
which (other) kings could not obtain.’ 

The inscription then mentions the defeat of Pandya Vira 
Kerala, whose finger was cut off and who was forced to turn 
back , 64 and the gifts made to him, as also the gift of much 
treasure, robes, and bejewelled vessels to the Pandya who 
bore the glorious name of ‘chief of the family of the Sun’. 
From Tiruvorriyur 65 we have an inscription of the nineteenth 
year which says, in the midst of much sham history, that 
Kulottunga cut off the heads of Tennavan and Vikkalan; these 
statements, it is certain, deserve no credence and may be 
ignored. Another record from Tirumanikuli 66 of the twenty- 
first year follows the Srlrangam inscription of the nineteenth 
year except that it omits the gifts of land and crown to the 
Pandya and of wealth to the Cera when they both sat at the 
feet of Kulottunga’s throne and he placed his foot on the 
crown of the Pandya; it also adds at the end that Kulottunga 
adorned with his feet the crown of the Ceylonese king 
(Ilattan) in order that it may prosper. 

Lastly, there are two records from the Pudukkottah state 67 
with a unique form of the prasasti not so far traced in any 
other inscriptions of Kulottunga. From one of these records, 
the date has been lost; the other is dated in the thirty-fourth 
year. This prasasti mentions the Pandyan campaigns of 
Kulottunga at two points in a manner that clearly implies 
that the facts recorded in the other inscriptions cited so far 
do not take us to the end of the story and that there was 
another expedition some years later. Though we must reserve 
to a later stage a discussion of the events recorded in the 
prasasti but having no bearing on Pandyan affairs, it may still 
be useful to give here an analysis of the entire prasasti. It 
opens in the usual manner by recording the benevolent 
effects of the king’s coronation; it then records the gilding of 
parts of the Cidambaram temple, the construction of Tribhu- 



£82 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


vanlsvaram, the gilding of Rajarajisvaram and the institution 
of festivals in these temples; next follows a brief narration of 
a northern campaign culminating in the recapture of KancI; 68 
what follows, on the subjugation of Vadugu and the annexa- 
tion of Vengimandalam, the shower of gold (in the form of 
gifts) and the entry into Urangai, is evidently a record of 
further details of the same campaign not found in other 
inscriptions. Then begins the story of the Pandyan war, nar- 
rated in almost the same words as those of the Srirangam 
inscription cited above. 69 Kulottunga is then stated to have 
conquered !lam (Ceylon) . waged a fierce war against Kongu, 
entered Karuvur and worn the ‘great crown of victory’ 
(vijayamdmudi) , assuming the title Sola Kerala. Then he set 
out to wear the ‘crown of heroism’ ( vira-mudi ) , fought against 
the warlike army of Malaya, 70 besieged Mattiyur and Kalik- 
kottai, defaced some of the Pandyan troops by cutting off their 
noses and took captive the marap-padai and elagap-padai; he 
then surrounded Madura with his troops, drove the Pandya, 
his younger brothers and his mother into the forests, demo- 
lished the coronation mandapa of the Pandyas, and after 
ploughing its site with asses, sowed kavadi on it, and then 
wore the ‘crown of heroism’ after taking the title of Cola- 
Pandyan. He then put on the anklet of heroes, assumed the 
title Tribhuvanavira and went on a triumphal march round 
the city with the banner of heroism raised aloft; at the end 
of it, he worshipped the God of Madura 71 and presented many 
fine jewels to the deity. He then proclaimed that the name 
of Pandi-mandalam was thenceforth to be Cola-Pandiyan- 
mandalam, and that of Madura was to be Mudit-talai-konda- 
sola-puram; he then inscribed the name ‘Lord of the Cera and 
Pandya’ (Cera-pandiyan-tambiran) on the mandapa in which 
he had been camping, changed the name of the Pandiyan and 
conferred the title Pandya on the bard ( pdnan ) who celebrat- 
ed the prowess of his arms that took Madura to the dis- 
comfiture of the Tennavan (Pandya). He then opened a 
broad street in his own name for the procession of the God of 
Madura, instituted a new festival and stayed to worship the 
deity during the procession (in the new street) . He then 
covered the Madura temple with gold so that it resembled a 
golden mountain, and distributed the tribute of gold and 



VIKRAMA PANDYA INSTALLED 383 

iraiyili (lands) levied from the country of the Cera (and) 
Pandya among the temples of Cidambaram, Tiruvarur and 
Tribhuvanam. He also planted pillars of victory carrying the 
praise of his arms in every direction. 72 He finally restored the 
kingdom to the Pandya together with his regalia and assured 
him of his friendship. 

From these records, the Pandyan wars of Kulottunga are 
seen to comprise three separate campaigns. 

Three Cam' The first of them began at the request of 
Vikrama Pandya and led to the deposition 
of Vlra Pandya and the appointment of Vikrama to the 
throne of Madura. It is to be noted that the inscriptions are 
silent on some important points. How did Vira Pandya incur 
the displeasure of Kulottunga ? This question has been 
examined above, and an answer has been suggested which 
must be held to be only tentative, till it is confirmed by direct 
evidence. Again, what happened to Kulasekhara after his 
expulsion from Madura ? How was Vikrama Pandya related 
to him? What were the circumstances under which Vikrama 
Pandya persuaded Kulottunga to undertake an expedition for 
aiding him against Vira ? In the absence of direct testimony, 
we can only assume what seems most probable, viz., that 
Kulasikhara was dead by the time this war began, that 
Vikrama Pandya was some near relative of his, if not his son, 
who inherited his rights to the Pandyan throne, and that he 
used very well the opportunities offered to him by the intri- 
gues of Vira Pandya with the natural enemies of the Cola 
ruler. Though this campaign is not described in detail till 
after the commencement of the ninth regnal year (June a.d. 
1186) , it is possible that it was actually fought before a.d. 1182, 
the time when the title Madiiraiyum Pandiyan-muclittalaiyum 
kondamliya began to appear regularly in the inscriptions. If 
that was so, the campaign was fought in the last years of 
Parakramabahu I of Ceylon, and the ‘Singala soldiers’ who 
fought and suffered wi + h Vira Pandya must have been troops 
furnished by that king. The divergent accounts of the fate 
of Vira Pandya’s son or sons render it difficult to decide what 
actually happened to them. 

When the Cdla forces had gone back after installing 
Vikrama Pandya on the throne of Madura, Vira Pandya made 



384 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


another effort to retrieve his fortune, and this led to the 
second campaign in which Vira Pandya’s attempt was crushed 
on the battle-field of Nettur. This battle must have taken 
place before a.d. 1189 when it is briefly mentioned, though 
not by the name, for the first time. Later inscriptions 
embellish the account by the addition of fresh details. The 
main feature of this part of the struggle was the co-operation 
of the ruler of Kerala with Vira Pandya. After the defeat 
at Nettur, Vira Pandya apparently sought refuge in Quilon 
(Kollam) with the Kerala ruler of Venad; but the latter had 
no desire to harbour his dangerous guest for long, and they 
both made up their minds to surrender themselves to Kuldt- 
tunga and thus put a stop to further fighting. Vira Pandya 
seems on the whole to have been treated better than he had 
a right to expect; he had to eat the humble pie in the open 
durbar of Kulottunga and naturally lost his kingdom and the 
insignia of royalty including the harem; but his life was 
spared and possibly he got some land and other forms of wealth 
suited to his new situation. 73 Who the chief of the Kaika- 
yas was who named his son after Kulottunga, who the Pandya 
Vira Kerala and who 'the chief of the family of the Sun’, we 
seem to have no means of determining. Again, though the 
Tirumanikuli inscription states that Kulottunga placed his foot 
on the crown of the king of Ceylon, this can hardly be ac- 
cepted as true. Of the date of the second campaign, we can 
only say that it must have taken place before a.d. 1189; 
whether it came to an end in the life-time of Parakramabahu I 
of Ceylon who lived to 1187, or dragged on to the reign of 
Nissankamalla, separated from that of Parakramabahu I only 
by the short reign of Mahinda VI, is therefore uncertain; it 
may be noted, however, that Ilam first figures in the tenth 
year (a.d. 1188) 74 among the countries taken by Kulottunga 
and that, in his numerous inscriptions, Nissankamalla claims 
to have led three successful expeditions to the Pandya coun- 
try and to have renovated a temple at Ramesvaram. 75 The 
last claim is borne out by a Sinhalese inscription in Rames- 
varam engraved on a stone which, according to the inscription 
itself, was the seat ( asana ) on which Nissankamalla used to 
sit witnessing theatrical performances and listening to music. 
The inscription also records that the king spent vast treasures 



WAR ON KULASEKHARA 385 

in renovating the temple which came thereafter to be called 
Nissankamallesvara. The Pandyan expeditions of the Ceylon 
ruler were not by any means so brilliant as these inscriptions 
make out, and this may be the reason for the silence of the 
chronicle on the subject. 76 

The third campaign of Kulottunga in the Pandya country 
is described, as we have seen, in the Pudukkottah records 
dated in the thirty-fourth year of the reign. This inscription 
states definitely that after celebrating a Vijayabhiseka in 
Karuvur, Kulottunga started on an expedition against the 
Madura country in order to wear the crown of heroism, that 
is, to celebrate a Vtrdbhiseka. If account is taken also of the 
fact that the Vijaya- and Virabhisekas seem to be mentioned 
first only about the twenty-ninth regnal year, we may not 
be far wrong in assigning some date about a.d. 1205 to this 
campaign. If this is correct, the expedition must have been 
directed against Jatavarman Kulasekhara who came to the 
throne in a.d. 1190, and was the first great ruler of the period 
of Pandyan revival that followed the close of the Civil War 
in which Rajadhiraja II and Kulottunga III had espoused the 
cause of one or the other of the rival claimants to the throne. 
It seems probable that Kulasekhara was the son and succes- 
sor of Vikrama Pandya who had been supported by Kulot- 
tunga. His inscriptions are found in the Madura, Ramnad and 
Tinnevelly districts. 77 They contain elaborate prasastis, one 
of which sets up the proud claim that before the Pandyan 
fish, the fierce tiger of the Cola and the bow of the Cera hid 
themselves (in fear). This claim and the desire of Kulot- 
tunga for a Virabhiseka after his Vijayabhiseka at Karuvur 
are the only indications that remain of the probable causes 
of the war between Kulasekhara and Kulottunga III; the 
inscriptions of the former ruler do not mention the war or 
any of its incidents. We may not accept literally everything 
mentioned in the inscriptions of Kulottunga; but there is no 
doubt that Kulasekhara paid a heavy penalty for his contu- 
macy. As the war ends with the restoration of Kulasekhara, 
the success of Kulottunga was certainly not so absolute, and 
the statement that the Pandyan ruler and his relatives 78 sought 
refuge in the forests is mere rhetoric. The sieges of Mattiyur 
and Kalikkottai — places not yet identified — the defeat of the 
C. 49 



386 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


army of the Maravas and the specific act of vandalism, the 
demolition of the coronation-hall of the Pandyas, may well 
be accepted as facts. This harshness on the part of Kulot- 
tunga proves his consciousness of the increasing weakness of 
his own position in contrast to the growing strength of the 
Pandyas. It also accounts for the retaliation that followed 
some years later when Maravarman Sundara Pandya, who 
must have suffered along with his brother on the occasion 
of Kulottunga’s invasion, assumed the role of aggressor and 
carried fire and sword into the Cola country, and performed 
a Virabhiseka in the coronation hall of the Colas at Ayirattali 
alias Mudigondasola-puram . 79 


The wars 


Wars in the 
North. 


waged in the north by Kulottunga are men- 
tioned for the first time in the Srlrangam 
inscription of the nineteenth year in the 
following terms : 


‘ (He) despatched matchless elephants, performed 
heroic deeds, prostrated to the ground the Kings of the 
North, entered Kacci when (his) anger abated, and 
levied tribute from all the kings there.’ 

The Pudukkottah inscriptions, dated more than ten years 
later, add the following : 

‘having subdued the Vadugu (Telugus) who were 
fierce in war and (thus) brought Vengai-mandalam under 
his sway, he was pleased to shower gold and enter the 
golden city of Urangai.’ 


The incidents thus recorded in Kulottunga’s inscriptions 
cannot be understood without a brief 

Political condi- resume of the political changes that were 
tions. 

taking place outside the Cola Kingdom. 
Towards the close of the life of Rajaraja II, the Velanandu 
kings felt themselves equal to the task of asserting and main- 
taining their independence against their Calukya-Cola suze- 
rains. This was the period when the Kakatiyas were com- 
ing up in the north, while in the west the Calukyas, having 
suffered a defeat from Kakatlya Prola, were thrown into the 
shade by the usurpation of Bijjala. The consequent weak- 
ness of the W. Calukya kingdom gave the occasion for the 
Hoysalas to rise to the rank of an independent power; at the 



POLITICAL CHANGES 387 

same time the Telugu-Codas and the Velanandu rulers, who 
had till then been either subordinate to the Calukyas or hed 
lived in fear of them and therefore in subordinate alliance 
with the Colas, breathed more freely and soon began to enter- 
tain plans of aggrandisement. It is remarkable that few 
inscriptions of Rajadhiraja II have been found in Nellore or 
the Circars. And it appears that perhaps Gonka II at the 
close of his reign, and certainly his son Rajendraccda, assumed 
the titles and insignia of independent status. 80 In fact with 
the close of Rajaraja’s reign we have come to that interval 
in the history of the Telugu country in which the Cola power 
was withdrawn, and the Kakatiya power had not yet taken 
its place — a period of about a generation in which many 
minor dynasties like the Kdtas, Cagis, Konas and others 
divide the country and owe no allegiance to a common power. 
About the same time the Telugu-Codas rise into prominence 
farther south in the districts of Nellore, Cuddapah, Chittoor, 
North Arcot and Chingleput, and it is,to them that the Colas 
lost Kancipuram and from them that Kulottunga III recovered 
the city. 

The history of the Telugu-Codas of this period presents 
Tel gu Codas some difficult problems of chronology and 
genealogy, and though there is no lack of 
evidence, epigraphical and literary, attesting their power and 
importance, all attempts to evolve a consistent history of the 
dynasties that comprise this group of kings have met only 
with limited success. 81 All these rulers called themselves 
Codas and their sway extended over a considerable portion 
of the Telugu country; all of them claimed to be descended 
from Karikala and to come of the solar race and Kasyapa 
gotra. The presence of members of these dynasties as feuda- 
tories of Kulottunga I and his successors in different parts 
of the Telugu country is attested by the inscriptions of each 
reign. We have now to trace in some detail the relations 
between the Nellore branch of the Telugu-Codas and Kulot- 
tunga III in order to explain the necessity for Kulottunga’s 
recovery of Kancipuram. 

The genealogy of the family starts with two shadowy 
figures. The first of them was Madhurantaka Pottappi Cola. 



388 RAJADH1RAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


so called because he is said to have conquered Madura and 
founded Pottapi, which has been identified with a village of 
the same name in the Pullampet taluq of the Cuddapah dis- 
trict. 82 The other king was Telugu Vidya (Viccaya of the 
Tamil Cola inscriptions) , who erected a pillar of victory with 
a Garuda on its top at a place called Ujjapuri (Ujjini, Kud- 
ligi tq„ Bellary Dt.). The historical part begins with Beta, 
the feudatory of Vikramacola. 83 Beta’s son was Erasiddhi 
who had in his turn three sons — Nallasiddha alias Manmasid- 
dha, 84 Beta and Tammusiddha. Some inscriptions 83 of Tam- 
musiddha state that the younger Beta had no mind to rule 
and that, on the death of Manmasiddha, he gave up his rights 
in favour of his younger brother Tammusiddha who 
crowned himself at Nellore in 1127 or a little before that 
date; 86 on the other hand, another inscription from Kavali, 
dated §. 1129. 87 omits all mention of the younger Beta, and 
states that while Nallasiddha 88 was the crowned king ( abhi - 
sikta), his younger brother, Tammusiddha. was ruling the 
kingdom by his grace — tat kataksad.eva rdjyam kardti. It is 
therefore difficult to say whether Tammusiddha ruled only 
after Manma’s death, or coniointly with him. A review of 
the inscriptions of Kulottunga III which mention the kings 
of this line will show that the Kavali inscription seems to be 
nearer the truth; it will also bring out clearly the relations 
in which these kin pc stood to Kulottunga in the different 
stages of his reign. 89 


In the ninth year of Kulottunga III, a.d. 1187. Nallasid- 
dharasa. the ruler of Nellore acknowledges 
TW relations to t he suzerain tv of Kulottunga ITT. 90 Three 
ga years later, a.d. 1190. a Siddhi. called also 

Madhurantaka Pottapnio-cola. makes a gift to the temole at 
Nellore. citing the twelfth regnal year of his Cola overlord, 
Kulottunga. 91 Then we have a number of gifts, registered in 
the name of Nungama. the oueen of Nallasiddha. to the tem- 
ples at Tiruonalaivanam fChinglepufl . Kalahasti (Chittoor), 
and Nandalur ( Cuddapah): these records are dated in the 
eighteenth, nineteenth and twentv-fourth regnal years of 
Kulottunga III. 92 It mav be noted in passing that a record 
of Kulottunga himself, dated in his nineteenth year, is found 
in the town of Nellore. 93 In another inscription from Nan- 



TELUGU-CODA VASSALS 


389 


dalur, 94 Nallasiddha, the son of Madhurantaka Pottappic-cola 
Eramasiddha, acknowledges the overlordship of Kulottunga 
in his twenty-sixth year, a.d. 1204. The latest record in which 
Nallasiddha recognises Kulottunga’s suzerainty is dated nine 
years later, a.d. 1213. 95 But in the interval between 1204 
and 1213, we have two records of his brother Tammusiddha 96 
from the Nellore and Chingleput districts, one of his son Beta- 
rasa 97 at Kahcipuram; another from Nandalur of probably 
the same prince or another, who is here called Tirukkalatti- 
deva, the Tikkanrpa of literature, and who makes an endow- 
ment for the benefit of his father Manumasittarasan and of 
( alias ?) Nallisiddha; 98 and in all these inscriptions, the 
princes concerned take good care to define in an unmistak- 
able manner their vassal position in relation to Kulottunga. 
And this relation is continued almost up to the end of Kulot- 
tunga’s reign by another record of the Tirukkalattideva men- 
tioned above 99 dated in the 36th year of Kulottunga, and yet 
another 100 from Tiruvorriyur, dated two years later and men- 
tioning an agent of Sittarasan in that place. 

This survey of the relations between the Telugu-Codas 
and Kulottunga throughout his reign shows clearly that the 
Telugu-Codas did not once find themselves 
wM^n'The North stron § enou gh to defy Kulottunga for any 
length of time. And the statement in the 
Srlrangam epigraph that ‘Kulottunga entered Kanci with his 
anger abated’ shows that the campaign was of the nature of 
a punitive expedition directed against vassals who had raised 
the standard of revolt. The Cola supremacy was certainly 
still maintained in its full vigour up to Cuddapah and Nellore 
at the time of Kulottunga’s accession. 101 And, except for the 
short interlude now engaging our attention, Kulottunga’s in- 
scriptions do not give a contrary impression. There were many 
indications, to which we have drawn attention in the course 
of the narrative, that the feudatories of the empire were 
increasing in their strength and that the moment the central 
government passed into incompetent hands, the empire would 
go to pieces. But Kulottunga III was by no means a weak 
ruler and on the whole he succeeded, in the midst of many 
troubles, in maintaining the integrity of his inheritance. The 
temporary loss of Kancipuram in this reign and the need that 



390 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 

arose for recovering it after a fight were the first clear indi- 
cations of what was coming in the future. 

There are some inscriptions of Nallasiddha which seem to 
throw some light on the period when he declared independ- 
ence, but as often happens in Telugu-Coda history, the evi- 
dence of these records raises more questions than it helps us 
to answer. The earliest of these inscriptions is a Kannada 
record dated S. 1114 (a.d. 1192-3) and describes the ruler as 
Bhujabalavira Nallasiddhanadeva Cola Maharaja ruling at 
Vallurapura, already familiar to us as the capital of Maha- 
rajapadi 7000 and eight miles to the N. W. of Cuddapah. This 
chieftain boasts that he levied tribute from Kanci. 102 Except 
the fact of Kulottunga undertaking a campaign which he 
closed by entering Kanci in force, there is no evidence in 
support of this claim of the Telugu-Coda chieftain. And here 
we should not omit to notice that in the inscriptions of Tam- 
musiddhi, the conquest of Kanci is ascribed, though only by 
a metaphor, 103 to his uncle, an earlier Nallasiddha, the brother 
of Erasiddha. Perhaps this claim on the part of Nallasiddha 
to have levied tribute from Kanci implies only that for some 
time he stopped the usual tribute to the Cola monarch and 
was still left in undisturbed possession of Kanci. However 
that may be, Nallasiddha’s career as an independent ruler was 
soon cut short by Kulottunga’s occupation of Kanci about 
a.d. 1196, and the success of Kulottunga’s enterprise is attested 
not only by his inscriptions which state that he entered Kanci 
with his anger abated, but by the series of dated inscriptions 
of Nallasiddha which have been cited above and are dated 
in the regnal years of Kulottunga III. 

For the rest of his reign, Kulottunga had no trouble from 
the Telugu-Codas, though in the last few years, when the 
Cola monarch had to meet a powerful enemy in Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya, they seem to have made another and a more 
successful effort to assert their independence. But Kulot- 
tunga is seen fighting once more in the north some time about 
a.d. 1208. In this campaign he claims to have subdued the 
fierce Vadugas (Telugus), established his supremacy over 
Vengl and entered Urangai. Who were the fierce Vadugas 
and where was Urangai ? Is there any reason to suppose that 
Vengl was regained for the Cola empire by Kulottunga even 



WAR IN KONGU 


391. 


for a short while? In the absence of a single Cola record of 
this period to the north of Nellore, it is not difficult to answer 
the last question in the negative. And if we recall the fact 
that the power of the Kakatiyas had been growing for some 
tune and spreading over the ancient kingdom of Vengl, im- 
posing a new suzerainty over the chieftaincies that had 
emerged there after the withdrawal of Cola power from the 
region, and that the greatest monarch of this line, Ganapati, 
had come to the throne by a.d. 1199, the most natural way of 
interpreting Kulottunga’s claim seems to be to suppose that 
he warred with that Kakatiya ruler and entered Warangal, 
his capital, sometimes called Orungallu, 104 a name which is 
easily Tamilised into Urangai. But of such a war ending so 
favourably for the Cola monarch, we have no indications 
except the vague statements of the two Pudukkottah records. 
No details of this campaign are forthcoming, and the Cola 
entry into Warangal, if that is the real meaning of these 
inscriptions, must be held to be a case of fabrication. In the 
present state of the evidence, we could not even say if there 
was any basis in fact for the tall claims set up on behalf of 
the Cola monarch in the records of his reign. 

The campaign against Kongu culminating in the 
^ ^ triumphal entry into Karuvur and the 

celebration of the Vijayabhiseka in that 
city constitute another obscure episode of the reign. The 
entry into Karuvur is, as we have been, mentioned for the 
first time in the sixteenth year, of the reign, 105 and Kongu 
bears the name Vira-sola-mandalam in a record of the twenty- 
sixth year. 106 If the Pudukkottah inscriptions, the only ones 
that contain a direct account of this war, may be taken to 
have arranged the events in the order of their occurrence, 
this campaign may be assigned to the years following the 
close of the second Pandyan war, to the years, say a.d. 1190- 
1194. The Kulottangan-Kovai also repeatedly mentions the 
war against the Cera and Kongu; but neither the inscrip- 
tions nor the poem contain any clue to the causes or the inci- 
dents of the war. A number of inscriptions of the reign are 
also found in Karuvur. Others are found elsewhere in the 
Kongu country, including Tagadur, and in parts of Mysore, 
and clearly point to a recovery of Cola dominion in this quar- 



RAJ ADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 





PANDYAN REVENGE 393 

ter, and a partial reversal of Hoysala expansion that began at 
the end of the reign of Kulottunga I. We shall see that the 
Adigaimans once more acknowledged the Cola suzerainty in 
this reign, and the inscriptions of the Adigaiman who styles 
himself Vidukadalagiya Perumal suggest that he might have 
had a share in the restoration of Cola dominion in this 
quarter. 107 

Towards the end of Kulottunga’s reign, the Pandyan 
throne passed to Maravarman Sundara Pan- 
Pandyan Inva- dya (1216) , possibly after the demise of his 
brother Jatavarman Kulasekhara, and the 
new ruler lost no time in starting a war against the old Cola 
monarch who had, more than ten years before, deeply humi- 
liated him and his elder brother in their own capital and 
perhaps also demolished their coronation-hall in Madura. 
For the successes of Sundara Pandya against KulSttunga III, 
we have to depend solely on the inscriptions of the former. 
The Cola inscriptions of the period observe a total silence 
which will cause no surprise when it is recollected how the 
inscriptions of the reign of Somesvara I, W. Calukya, omit 
all reference to the battle of Koppam. But the records of 
Sundara Pandya are quite specific and full. And their 
account of the misfortunes of the Colas is by no means less 
trustworthy than the record of Pandyan defeats in the inscrip- 
tions of Kulottunga himself. 

In an inscription of the third year 108 (a.d. 1218-19) of 
Sundara Pandya, he is described by the title: -Sdn&du valan- 
giyaruliya, ‘who was pleased to give (back) the Cola country.’ 
Another inscription of his fifteenth year 109 states specifically 
that he gave a crown and Mudikonda-sola-puram to Kulot- 
tunga-Cola. Sundara Pandya’s inscriptions are actually found 
in the Cola country, though none of them seems to fall within 
Kulottunga’s reign. 110 But the two inscriptions of Sundara 
Pandya just cited leave no room for doubt that the last years 
of Kulottunga turned out disastrously for him and that in 
his old age, he had to taste the bitter fruit of the Pandyan 
policy of his earlier years. We must now let the prasasti of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya I describe the course of events: 
‘In order that the authority of the tiger (seal) might 
recede to the land of Ponni (Cola country) and that of 
C. 50 



394 RAJADH1RAJA 11 AND KULOTTUNGA III 


the carp might gain the upper hand in the land of Kanni 
(Pandya country), (he) spread (over the land) horses 
and elephants, fierce (in war), and consigned to the red 
flames (of fire) (the cities of) Tanjai and Urandai; 
destroyed the excellence of the crystal water in the wells 
and rivers, so that the kavi and mlavi (flowers) lost their 
beauty; razed (to the ground) many pavilions, high 
ramparts, great enclosures, towers, theatres, palaces, man- 
sions and mandapas; drew tears in streams from the eyes 
of the women belonging to the kings who did not come 
to make their submission; ploughed (the enemy country) 
with asses and sowed kavadi (coarse millet) ; fought the 
Sembiyan (Cola) till his anger abated, and drove him 
into the wilderness; seized (his) crown of fine gold, and 
was pleased to give it to the Bana; 111 spread his fame by 
performing a virabhiseka in the coronation hall of the 
Cola Valava at Ayirattali, which was too good for verse 
and had a golden enclosure which touched the sky 
(traversed by) the Sun; mounted the strong rutting 
elephant which returned each day after plucking the fear- 
ful heads of enemy kings; accompanied only by his fair 
arms and (his) sharp disc which abolished common 
(ownership) of the whole earth surrounded by the water 
(ocean), he entered the sacred precincts of the divine 
Puliyur, where dwelt the Brahmins whose knowledge of 
the excellent Veda was free from doubts, and (there) 
rejoiced in his heart at the sight of the sacred form of the 
(god) who, with the goddess on his side, so danced that 
the golden hall increased in lustre, and made obeisance 
to the flower-like red feet, unattained alike by Brahma 
(seated) on the beautiful flower and Visnu (wearing) 
the cool basil; and seated in the shining crystal mandapa, 
resembling the high Meru, the support of the world, 
brought and fixed in Pon-Amaravati surrounded by lotus 
ponds, in which the humming of bees roused from their 
sleep swans with curved wings, he invited (the Cola) 
saying (that he would) restore (to him) the Co 1 a land 
rich in gardens and fields, and the garland and crown he 
had lost; the Valava, who had got beyond the Valagiri 
after he had lost (his) high estate, now entered with his 
relatives, presented his son (to the Pandya) saying: 



COLA VASSAL OF PANDYA 395 

‘Your name', and prostrated himself, a suppliant beneath 
the victorious throne; (then the Pandya) made a gift 
(to the Cola) with water which cooled the heat caused 
by his earlier loss, and sent him back after restoring to 
him what he had once lost, viz., the title of Co\apati and 
the old city, together with a (royal) letter ( tirumugam ) 
marked by the beautiful carp which shone by being wor- 
shipped by the kings of the sea-girt earth and (setting 
forth that it was) the agreement witnessing for all time 
the restoration of the wide land at an auspicious 
hour (?)’. 

The main incidents of the campaign were thus an invasion 
by Sundara Pandya of the Cola country reaching as far north 
as Cidambaram and marked by considerable damage to life 
and property along the route of the march; the inability of 
Kulottunga to resist the advance of the Pandya ruler and his 
seeking refuge in flight; finally, the restoration, possibly after 
some negotiations, of the kingdom and crown to Kulottunga 
on condition that he acknowledged Sundara Pandya as 
suzerain. The tables were thus completely turned; in almost 
every detail, Sundara Pandya followed the example set by 
Kulottunga during his third campaign against the Pandya 
country. At one stroke the Pandya king not only destroyed 
the overlordship of the Cola and declared his own indepen- 
dence, but actually compelled his quondam superior to do 
homage to him in turn. This was in 1216-17. We shall see 
later that the attempt of the Cola ruler to regain his indepen- 
dence led to another Pandyan invasion with more disastrous 
results. 

Now why did the Pandya, if he was so successful against 
Co]a as his inscriptions assert, not annex 
f Res fi^ s of the the Cola country to his kingdom? One 
would expect that after all that they had 
suffered from the Colas since the days of Rajaraja I, if not 
earlier, the Pandyas, when they got the chance, would put a 
final end to the power of their ancient rivals. But that is not 
the way of Indian monarchy. In its code, respect for an ancient 
and established line of royalty was a more abiding sentiment 
than irritation due to transient political occurrences. Never 
to disestablish an old line of kings is the rule of honour and 



396 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 

principle of policy laid down in the sastras. However drastic 
their treatment of individual Pandyan kings might have been, 
the Colas did not venture to displace the Pandyan line alto- 
gether. Sundara Pandya could not act differently towards 
the Colas now. And this no doubt is part of the answer to 
our question. But there was more. The subsequent course 
of history shows that the Pandya did not reap the full benefit 
of his victory on this occasion and that the Cola kingdom 
suffered less damage than it might have done. 

There was a third power at this tune in South India which 
seems to have interfered to redress the 
Hoysala inter- balance in favour of the Colas. This was 
the power of the Hoysalas which had been 
growing steadily for a century since the time when Visnu- 
vardhana started the policy of expansion and put an end to 
Cola power over a great part of the Mysore country. By the 
time of Maravarman Sundara Pandya’s invasion of the Cola 
country, the reign of Ballala II was drawing to a close. 
Among his queens is mentioned a princess, Cola-mahadevi, 
probably of Tamil Cola origin, and it is likely that the Cola 
ruler turned to Ballala for help in his trouble. At any rate, 
there is a Hoysala inscription which clearly implies that when 
Ballala was still living, his son Vira Narasimha marched 
against Srlrangam in the South. 112 The date of this inscrip- 
tion presents some difficulties; but it corresponds in all 
probability to 12 September, a.d. 1217. 113 Another inscrip- 
tion describes Ballala himself as the establisher of the 
Cola kingdom and the lion to the Pandya-elephant (CoZa- 
rajyapratisthacaryam, Pandya gaja-kesari ) , calls his son 
Narasimha Colakulaikaraksa Magadhorvipala-nirmulaka (the 
sole protector of the Cola line, uprooter of the Magadha King, 
i.e. the Bana ruler of Magadaimandalam) , and implies 
that Ballala II must have assumed his titles before the begin- 
ning of a.d. 1218. 114 An inscription from Govindanahalli 
describes with great force the valour of Narasimha in the 
campaigns he undertook for the restoration of the Cola. A 
still later grant from Belur (S. 1184) states that he rescued 
the Cola hidden behind the dust, viz., the crowd of his ene- 
mies, and earned for himself the titles Colasthapana and 
Pandyakhandana. 115 It can be seen from the names of Nara- 
simha’s enemies that this campaign is different from the one 



END OF KULOTTUNGA 


397 


recorded in the Tiruvendipuram inscription of Rajaraja Ill’s 
reign, and is perhaps the earlier one with which we are here 
concerned. And though the Kannada campu , the Jagannatha- 
vijaya identifies the Cola king protected by Ballala II with 
Rajaraja (rajaraja-pratisthdnirattam) , 116 this does not neces- 
sarily mean that Kulottunga III was no more at the time; 
for the Pandyan invasion and the Cola restoration alike fall 
within the short period of the joint-rule of Kulottunga and 
Rajaraja (1216-18) ; Rajaraja who had a long reign before him 
was the real beneficiary of the Hoysala intervention, and this 
must be the reason for his name being chosen by the Kannada 
poet. On the other hand, Sundara Pandya’s inscriptions men- 
tion Kulottunga III where they specify the name of the Cola 
monarch, and this is equally intelligible; for there was glory 
in having defeated a glorious monarch who had fought many 
wars with success, and no point in mentioning a young prince 
who had just been made heir-apparent and of whom little 
was yet known. It is thus clear that the Hoysala intercession 
on behalf of the Cola must have had something to do with 
the generosity of Sundara Pandya towards his vanquished 
enemy. 

Kulottunga III must have died soon after the Pandyan 
invasion. The latest regnal year found in 
tunga^IH* Kulot ” h is inscriptions is the fortieth, 117 a.d. 1217- 
18. Kulottunga III was also called Vira- 
rajendradeva, and a whole series of inscriptions containing 
this title, though not the name Kulottunga, undoubtedly 
belong to this reign and are dated in regnal years ranging from 
the second to the thirty-sixth. As already noted, the king 
seems to have had also the title Komara or Kumara Kulot- 
tungan. 118 A new street formed in Tiruppugalur in the tenth 
year of the reign was called Rajakkal-tambiran-tiruvidi, 119 
possibly after another surname of the ruling king. One 
inscription from Tiruvannamalai 120 is dated in the eleventh 
year of Tribhuvana-Vlra-Cola-deva; but considering the fact 
that the astronomical details preserved by this record were 
found by Kielhorn 121 not to work out correctly for this reign, 
it may be doubted if this title was assumed by the king so 
early in his reign. The earliest genuine record containing this 
title seems to be dated in the twenty-fourth year; 122 the name 



3S8 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


recurs thereafter in several later inscriptions and in the great 
temple, Tribhuvanisvara, in Tribhuvanam, in the Tanjore 
district. The form Tribhuvanacoladeva is also known. 123 The 
town of Karuvur was renamed Mudivalangu-sdlapuram; 124 
there is also mentioned, in another inscription, a village of 
the name of Mudi-valangu-sola-caturvedimangalam; 125 these 
facts show that Mudi-valangu-sola was one of the titles of the 
king, assumed, doubtless in commemoration of the restitution 
of the Pandya crown to the rulers of that country. 126 An insc- 
ription of the twenty-third year gives the characteristic titles 
of Kulottunga III and calls the ruler Tribhuvanacakravartin 
Sola-Keraladeva, 127 thus confirming the statement of the 
Pudukkottah inscriptions that after the conquest of Karuvur, 
he assumed that title. Kongu came to be called Sola-Kera’a- 
mandalam. It is doubtful, however, if some inscriptions with 
no other titles in them than Sola-Kera’adeva can be ascribed 
to Kulottunga III. 128 Lastly, as can be seen from a record of 
one of his feudatories, the king seems to have also had the 
title Karikala-Cola. 129 

Gangaikonda-cdlapuram is mentioned in the inscriptions 
of the reign rather less frequently than one might expect. 130 
but there is no doubt that it was the capital of the kingdom. 
The more ancient cities of Tanjore and Uraiyur still occupied 
a prominent position and, together with Ayirattali, constituted 
subsidiary capitals, the capture of which gave Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya I the practical mastery of the Cola kingdom. 
Vikramasolapuram is mentioned early in the reign as another 
royal residence. 131 A record of the thirty-fifth year casually 
mentions the king’s stay at Madura, perhaps a reference to 
the third Pandyan campaign of Kulottunga. 132 

KulSttunga III was a great builder and his reign is a 

„ .... noteworthy epoch in the annals of Cola 

Buildings. 

architecture. The public buildings, mostly 
religious structures, undertaken and completed in the reign 
are enumerated in the Pudukkottah inscriptions cited earlier 
and in a Sanskrit inscription 133 engraved round the central 
shrine of the temple of Kampaharesvara (called Tribhuvana- 
vlresvara in the inscription) at Tribhuvanam, the most 
magnificent monument of the reign. Though its general 
design recalls in many ways that of the Tanjore temple, it 



BUILDINGS , FAMINE— RELIEF 


399 


has still several significant features that distinguish it from 
the earlier model and mark the growing desire to fill the 
entire wall space with sculpture panels and decorative designs. 
The temple contains also an excellent series of Ramayana 
reliefs that await detailed study. It was consecrated by the 
king’s spiritual guru, Isvarasiva, the son of Srikantha Sambhu 
and the author of a theological treatise, the Siddhdnta- 
ratndkara. 13i 


Besides constructing this fine temple, the king claims to 
have erected the mukha-mandapa of Sabhapati, the gopura of 
goddess Girlndraja (Sivakami) and the verandah round the 
enclosure ( prnkdra harmya ) in the temple at Cidambaram; 
he also improved the temples of Ekamresvara at Kancipuram 
and of Halahalasya at Madura; the great Siva temples at 
Tiruvidaimarudur and Tiruvarur besides the Rajarajesvara 
temple, perhaps of Darasuram, were the recipients of the 
king’s devoted attention. At Tiruvarur, he built the sabhd- 
mandapa and the big gopura of Valmikesvara. 


In the twenty-third and twenty-fourth years of the reign. 

there was apparently a wide-spread scarcity 
famine f°°d-grain resulting in acute famine. 

The inscriptions record nothing of state ac- 
tion by way of famine relief; but it would not be safe to con- 
clude that the state did nothing in such a situation. It should 
not be forgotten that the inscriptions are the records of a 
narrow range of transactions and are by no means the Moral 
and Material Progress Reports of the times. It is therefore 
not a little remarkable that an inscription from North Arcot 
(Tiruvannamalai) 135 records that during the famine, when 
rice was selling at one-fourth of a measure per kdsu. two 
persons started relief works in the form of an embankment 
for the river and the construction of a fresh tank, and paid 
the labourers in gold, paddy or any other form that they 
desired. The idea of organised famine relief was therefore 
quite well known, and it is only reasonable to presume that 
when private charity undertook such relief when required, 
the government would not have omitted to exert itself like- 
wise. On the other hand, it is clear that the relief afforded 
by such measures did not go far enough, and unfortunate 



400 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


individuals who were the victims of famine were sometimes 
forced to seek other remedies. A Tanjore (Tiruppamburam) 
inscription 136 of the twenty-third year states, for instance, that 
owing to bad times and the high price of food-grains, a vellala 
and his two daughters sold themselves as slaves to the local 
matha for 110 kasus, in order to escape death by starvation. 137 

The difficulties that Kulottunga faced and, for the most 

part, overcame, did not result in the break- 
Administration . ...... , 

and extent of the up of the administrative system or in the 
empire. diminution of the extent of the empire, at 

least, up to the invasion of Sundara Pandya and the subver- 
sion of Cola authority. The repeated references to officials 
like Kalappalaraya, Nulambadhiraja and Pandya-raja, 138 and 
the part they take in conducting local enquiries on important 
affairs that came on appeal to the central government, 139 to- 
gether with the careful watch they maintain over the consti- 
tution and functioning of rural assemblies, 140 form sufficient 
proof that the system of administration developed in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries was still functioning with tolerable 
efficiency at the beginning of the thirteenth. That a partial 
resurvey of land must have been undertaken in Tanjore be- 
comes clear from some inscriptions of the reign of Rajendra III 
from Kovilur 141 which mention a survey of the thirty-eighth 
year of Periyadevar Tribhuvanavlradeva. The extent of 
Kulottunga’s sway is attested by the presence of his records 
at Tinnevelly in the south, 142 at Hemavati, Avani and 
Yedurur in Mysore, 143 at Tadavur, Tagadur and Karuvur in 
the Kongu country, 144 and in the north, at Nellore and Reddi- 
palem in the Nellore district and at Nandalur and Pottappi 
in the Cuddapah district. 145 It is remarkable that one of the 
inscriptions of Kulottunga from Mysore states that Vallaladeva 
was ruling that earth in the twelfth year of Kulottunga III 146 
doubtless a reference to Ballala II, the Hoysala ruler, whose 
queen was a Colamahadevi, clearly a Cola princess. 147 

The relations between Kulottunga and his Telugu-Coda 

vassals of the north have been discussed 
Feudatories. . , TI7 . 4 

already. We may now proceed to enume- 
rate the feudatories of the emperor in other parts of the 
dominion, and also notice some Telugu chieftains not men- 
tioned already. A mahamandalesvara Tribhuvanamalla Malli 



FEUDATORIES 


401 


Coda of Hemavati acknowledges Kulottunga’s supremacy very 
early in the reign. 148 The Ganga chieftain of Kolar, Amara- 
bharania Slyaganga, is represented by 
Gangas. inscriptions ranging from the third to the 

thirty-fourth year of Kulottunga’s reign. He had also the 
name Sura Nayaka, and one of his sons endowed a lamp at 
Kalahasti in the third year (a.d. 1181). 149 This chieftain was 
the patron of the Tamil grammarian Pavanandi, a Jaina 
writer, whose Nannul has practically displaced all other 
manuals of Tamil grammar. Other chieftains of Ganga extrac- 
tion are also known. 150 

The prominent Bana chieftain of the period was the ruler 
of Magadai-mandalam represented in several inscriptions of the 
reign, some of them in good Tamil verse, as the hero of several 
battles and the builder of many temples. He is often called 
Ponparappina Magadesan in commemoration of his having 
gilded the roof of the temple of Tiruvannamalai. 151 One of his 
ministers ( sandhi-vigrcthi ) is said to have constructed a 
mandapa in Kilur. He himself endowed some lamps at 
Tiruvannamalai and assigned some dues as revenue to the 
Kilur temple. One of his agambadi mudalis also endowed 
lamps in Aragandanallur. He is also called Aragalurudaiyan 
and Rajarajadevan; Aragalur in the Salem district was his 
headquarters and it would seem that being bom in the reign 
of Rajarajadeva, he was named after the r uling sovereign of 
the time. One other chieftain, perhaps of the same family, is 
mentioned as enjoying the kdni of Kugaiyur in South Arcot 
where he constructed a stone temple, Sri Kailasa, with 
mandapas, prakaras and gopuras, and set up an image called 
Ponparappina-lsvara. 

The Sengenis or Sambuvarayas, the Kadavarayas and the 
Cedirayas form three clans of powerful feudatories in the 
region comprising the two Arcot districts, and portions of 
Chingleput and Chittoor. There were also the Yadavarayas. 
Omitting details regarding these princes let us turn to 

_ „ , the Kadavas. The role of this im- 

The Kadavas. ' , _ , , . 

portant line ot feudatories in the history 

of this period has been briefly pointed out already. 152 
C. 51 



402 RAJADHIRAJA 11 AND KULOTTUNGA III 


The ins criptions of the reign of Kulottunga III attest 
the increasing power of these chieftains who claimed 
descent from the ancient Pallavas. The central figure among 
the Kadavas of this reign was Kudalur Arasanarayanan 
Elisaimogan alias Jananatha Kacciyarayan. 153 He was, as his 
name implies, the son of that Arasanarayanan who flourished 
in the reign of Kulottunga II, and this fact is expressly men- 
tioned in a record of a.d. 1184. 154 There is an inscription found 
in two places, Vrddhacalam and Tiruvennainallur, 155 which is 
a prasasti in Tamil verse, recounting the deeds of some mem- 
bers of the Kadava line. The chief last mentioned in this 
prasasti is called Alappirandan Virasekharan alias Kadava- 
rayan, and is described as the son of Arasanarayanan Kacciya- 
rayan alias Kadavarayan. This fact together with the date 
of the prasasti. Saka 1108 (a.d. 1186) , leads us to identify 
him with Elisaimogan. the son of Arasanarayana. 156 If this is 
correct, he must have inherited the title Kacciyarayan from 
his father. Inscriptions mentioning Vlrasekhara and giving 
him the titles Alappirandan, Kadavaraya, etc., or mentioning 
his connection with Kudalur occur also, as we shall see, in 
the later regnal years of Kulottunga III; this fact also tells in 
favour of the identity proposed above. The Kadava prasasti 
gives the genealogy of the line for four generations. After 
Vlrasekhara, however, there is a break. The next name we 
come to is that of Kiidal Alappirandan Alagiya Pallavan 
Kadavarayan who figures in an inscription of the thirty-third 
year of Kulottunga III. The inscription says that he confirm- 
ed the gifts made by his grandfather, 157 whose name is un- 
fortunately not stated. Another inscription of the thirty- 
fifth year mentions that the mother of Kopperunjinga, the son 
of Alagiya Pallavan, set up an image of the goddess in the 
temple at Tiruvennainallur. 158 The name of the lady is given 
as Silavati in other records. 159 If we assume, what is most 
likely, that Alagiya Pallavan and his son were in the main 
line of the Kadavas, and that it is this line that is represented 
in the prasasti mentioned above, then we may assume further 
that Alagiya Pallava was the son of Vlrasekhara, and that the 
grandfather whose gifts he confirmed in a.d. 1211 was no other 
than Arasanarayana of the time of Kulottunga II. The genea- 



KADAVAS 


403 


logy of the main line of the Kadavas thus reached is as 
follows: 

Valandanar 
Atkolliyar 


Arasanarayanan Kacclvaraya, 

C. 1140 A.D. 

Alappirandan Ellsalmogan Jananatha 
Kacciyarayan Virasekhara, 
g 1108, a.d. 1186 

Alaglya Pallavan (Sly an) 
Sadumperumal 161 
m. Sllavati. 

Alagiya §Iyan Kopperrunjinga. 

We see thus that this family worked its way up more or 
less steadily from the days of Vikramacola, if not from the 
latter part of the reign of Kulottunga I. And the Vrddha- 
calam prasasti is extremely interesting from this point of view. 
It says that Valandanar fought against the Sinhalese and the 
Gangas, and this may well be true as his age would fall in 
the later part of Kulottunga I’s reign when there was much 
fighting in the Ganga country, though there is no definite 
evidence of a war against Ceylon or even the Pandya country 
at the time. The verses on the next two chiefs, Atkolli and 
the ‘conqueror of the four quarters’, contain no data of his- 
torical value. To Arasanarayanan is attributed an expedition 
against the enemy stronghold Vadavi, muran irattar temmalci 
Vaddvi senrerinday. which is by no means easy to explain. 
His humbler, and certainly less apocryphal, achievements have 
been noted under Kulottunga II. There are three verses, 
mostly of empty rhetoric, on Virasekhara; the only fact men- 
tioned of him is that he started from the western side of 
Gandaradittan Vasal on an expedition against Kudal of 
Karkataka-marayan and the land of Adiyaman and that he 
devastated both the territories named. Evidently these are 
local conflicts among the feudatories of Kulottunga III. But 
the capture of Kudal appears to have marked a definite stage 
in the rise of the Kadavas who thereafter style themselves: 


Elisaimogan who 
conquered the 
four quarters, 

I 

Atkolli (?) 160 



404 RAJADHIRAJA 11 AND KULOTTUNGA III 

‘born to rule the land of Kudal’ — Kufal-avani-yalappiranda, 
Vlrasekhara himself being the first to do so. Kudal or 
Kudalur cannot be identified with certainty, though we learn 
from an inscription that it formed part of Perugalur-nadu in 
Tirumunaippadi. At this point, we may note the existence of 
another prasasti , 162 which bears no date and relates to the 
wars and conquests of a certain Tondaimandalangonda Palla- 
vandar alias Kadavarayar, the son of Kudal-alappirandar alias 
Kadavarayar. It appears quite likely that this is a prasasti of 
Alagiya Pallavan, the father of Kopperunjinga; the events 
mentioned in the prasasti admirably fill the gap in the story 
of the rise of the Kadavas between Vlrasekhara and Koppe- 
runjinga. And if our view of this prasasti is right, Alagiya 
Slyan must have also had the name Pallavandar and must 
have carried forward the work of aggrandizement begun by 
Vlrasekhara and thus paved the way for the greater achieve- 
ments of his son on a wider stage. The prasasti of Palla- 
vaiidar states that he gained success in a hard-fought battle 
at Sevur; 163 the enemy against whom he fought is not specified, 
but the result of the battle seems to have been his mastery 
over Tondai-nadu. This is implied by the titles, ‘ruler of the 
land of the Pennar,' ‘ruler of the northern Vengadam hill 
(Tirupati) ,’ ‘the Pallava of Kanci,’ applied to him later in the 
same prasasti. 

We may now consider the other references to the Kadavas 
in the inscriptions of the reign. Vlrasekhara Kadava, also 
called Arasanarayanan Alappirandan, presented a necklace 
( ekavalli-vadam ) of precious stones to the deity at Tiruvanna- 
malai in the thirteenth year of Kulottunga (a.d. 1191) 
twelve years later, he bears the title Adigaiman of Kudalur, 
evidently assumed after his expedition against Kudalur and 
Adigaiman mentioned before, and endows a lamp at Tiru- 
vennainallur. 165 Two inscriptions of the third year (a.d. 1181) 
from the same place mention Kudal Mohan Alappirandan and 
Udaiyar Kadavarayar, 166 perhaps names of one and the same 
person; one of his agambadi mudalis is said to come from 
Sendamangalam, the fortress city which held an important 
place under the Kadavas; there is thus clear indication that 
Kudal and Sendamangalam were already in the possession of 
the Kadavas. Whether Mohan Alappirandan or Udaiyar 



OTHER FEUDATORIES 


405 


Kadavaraya is the same as Vlrasekhara, and whether, if that 
be so, we must assume that the expedition against Kudal and 
Adigaiman had taken place before a.d. 1181 are questions 
which cannot yet be answered with certainty. Another de- 
tail, equally uncertain, relates to the identity of Kudal Elisai- 
m5gan Manavalapperumal Vanilaikandan Rajaraja Kadava- 
rayan mentioned in two inscriptions from Tiruvennainallur 
and Vrddhacalam. 167 

The princelings of the line of Malaiyamans apparently 

„ , . adopted in this period the two titles Cediya- 

Malaiyamans. , , , , 

raya and Kovalaraya. The former title is 

evidence of the new tradition that was growing by which 
these chieftains sought to establish a connection with the 
Haihayas of Cedi at a time when all ruling chieftains were 
busy finding a Puranic pedigree for themselves. One of them 
is even called Sisupalan. 168 The other title indicates that the 
power of this group of feudatories centred round Koval, 
Tirukkovalur on the bank of the Pennar in the district of 
S. Arcot. Some of the names and titles imply close dynastic 
connections among the different feudatory rulers: such names, 
for instance, as Vana-kula-rayan borne by a Kiliyur Malaiya- 
man; 169 Vana-kovaraiya Malaiyaman; 170 and, strangest of all 
Sola-Ganga-Pallavaraiyan, a surname of the Sisupalan already 
noticed. 171 There is also a Pon-parappinan among the Malaiya- 
mans of Kiliyur; 172 the origin of the title is not explained. 
The mention of a Malaiyan Narasimha-varman, also called 
Karikala Sola Adaiyur Nadalvan, in inscriptions from Cen- 
gama and Tiruvannamalai, 173 shows that the Narasimha title, 
which first occurs in the name of Narasinga-munaiyadaraiyar, 
a contemporary of Sundaramur ti , and again in that of a con- 
temporary of Rajendradeva II, 174 still survived in the family 
of Malaiyamans in the days of Kulottunga III. 

The ancient line of Adigaimans of Tagadur rise into 

. prominence again in this reign as the sub- 

Adigarmans. , 

ordmate allies ol the Cola monarch. It 

seems probable that, as has been observed already, the Cola 
power regained in this period, with their assistance, part of 
what had been lost in consequence of the wars of Hoysala 
Visnuvardhana. The mention of Ballala II in an inscription 



406 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 

of Kulottunga and the name Cola-mahadevi of Ballala’s queen 
also imply a more friendly relation between the Colas and 
Hoysalas, perhaps the result either of a successful campaign 
or diplomatic mediation undertaken for the Colas by the 
Adigaimans. Rajarajadevan alias Adiyaman of Tagadur 
in Ganga-nadu made a gift to the temple of Tiruvannamalai 
of the entire village of Malaiyanur on the north bank of the 
Pennar in Tagadur-nadu. 175 His title Rajarajan shows that 
the friendly relations between the chiefs of Tagadur and the 
C5las had been resumed in the life-time of Rajaraja II, if it 
had been at all completely broken off before. Rajarajadevan’s 
son was the more celebrated Vidugadalagiya-Perumal 
(vyamuktasravanojivala ) , who describes himself as of the 
family of Elini, famous in Sangam literature, and has left many 
interesting inscriptions. The Samantan Adiyaman who gave 
a golden zone to the deity of Tirumanikuli in the nineteenth 
year of Kulottunga III 176 might have been either the father 
or the son. The inscriptions of the son are found in Salem, 
North Arcot and South Arcot. Only some of them are dated 
in the reign of Kulottunga; but as most of them are in verse, 
the absence of the suzerain’s name need not necessarily mean 
that the chieftain declared his independence. 177 In an inscrip- 
tion dated in the twenty-second year of Kulottunga, he calls 
himself lord of the three rivers Palar, Pennar, and Kaveri, 
and states that he built a stone temple at Sirukottai on the 
banks of the Pennar and called it after his own name. 178 
Another inscription from Tirumalai says that he renovated 
the images of a Yaksa and Yaks! near the Jain settlement on 
the Tirumalai hill originally set up by the Cera king Elini, 
one of his ancestors. 179 Yet another inscription from Cen- 
gama, North Arcot, 180 engraved at his instance, shows how 
very influential he was in reality among the feudatories of 
the Cola in this part of the country. It mentions an earlier 
compact concluded by him, in the twenty-first year, perhaps 
of Kulottunga III, with two chiefs, and renews the terms of 
the alliance. The two chiefs are Karikala-sola Adaiyur- 
nadalvan and Sengeni Ammaiyappan Attimallan alias Vikrama- 
sola-nadalvan. The terms of the compact include the provision 
that, so long as this mutual alliance holds, the Adigaiman 
should contract no alliance with certain other chiefs, Slya- 



DISRUPTION 


407 


gangan being one of them. These local compacts of a political 
and diplomatic character with no reference whatever to the 
suzerain ruler furnish clear proof of the growing disruption 
of the Cola kingdom. 

Attention has been drawn, earlier in this chapter, to the 
effects, on the central government, of the 
control of central progressive multiplication of quasi-inde- 
pendent local chieftaincies. The long list of 
Kulottunga’s feudatories, some given above, and the rest to 
be gathered from the inscriptions of the reign, shows how 
rapidly conditions were changing for the worse from the 
stand-point of the central administration. It was a movement 
in which cause and effect reacted on each other. The growing 
weakness of the centre rendered necessary new arrangements 
of a more or less feudal character for local regula- 
tion and defence: these arrangements in their turn 
stood in the way of the centre regaining its former 
ascendancy when it attempted to do so. Political com- 
pacts among local rulers attest the growth of imperia in imperio 
until the local imperia burst the shell of the central imperium 
under whose protection they had at first begun to take shape: 
and these compacts are now seen to become even more 
numerous in the reign of Kulottunga III than under his pre- 
decessor. If it is remembered that no Cola inscriptions of 
this period are forthcoming from the Pandya country and 
that, apparently, the authority of the Cola ruler was not felt 
in the day-to-day administration of this area, it will be seen 
that the sphere of these compacts among local rulers is 
co-terminous with the territory under the direct rule of 
Kulottunga. It is needless to detail the compacts or their 
terms here . 181 It should, however, be noted that for every 
such recorded agreement to which we have access at present, 
there must have been many others which were unrecorded or 
of which the records have either perished or are yet to be 
recovered. By these local alliances, therefore, the regular 
functioning of the king’s government must have been very 
seriously hampered. It is true that, as we shall see, under 
Kulottunga III and even under his unlucky successors Raja- 
raja III and Rajendra III, the forms of administrative pro- 
cedure present the same appearance as in the best days of 



408 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


the empire under Rajaraja I and Rajendra I; but the spirit 
behind these forms could no longer have been the same. 


1. Accession dates from 28 Feb. — 30 Mar., aj>. 1163, Kielhom, El. 
ix. p. 211. But see note C. ante. 

2. 558 of 1904 (Yr. 2); 43 of 1922 (Yr. 3). 

3. 262 of 1902. 

4. 172 of 1908 (Yr. 6); 540 of 1904 (Yr. 10). 

5. Only two inscriptions of Vikramacola from Sivapuri (Rd.)— 47 
and 55 of 1929; none of Kulottunga II and Rajaraja II; one of Rajadhi- 
raja II from Tirukkalakku(li (Rd.) — 43 of 1916. 

6. CV. ch. 76, v. 76— ch. 77. v. 103. 

7. 336 of 1928, a record of the Kongu-cola ruler Kulottunga, fur- 
nishes striking epigraphical confirmation of this fact mentioned in the 
CV. It also gives some clue to dynastic and political relations in 
S. India in this period. 

8. CV. Ch. 77, v. 85. Geiger (n. 3) doubts the accuracy of this 
description apparently because he understands Madhura in v. 83 to 
mean the city. I think it is the kingdom that is meant. Kilenilaya is 
on the n. border of the old Pandyan kingdom in the present Ramnad Dt., 
and the fight which raged over four gavutas might have extended from 
this village to the sea. We shall see that the Cola inscriptions confirm 
this view. 

9. Cf. Geiger CV. ii, p. 100, n. 1. 

10. 20 of 1899 SII. vi. no. 456, ARE. 1899— paras 23-38. 

11. 433 of 1924. 

12. 465 of 1905. 

13. 261 of 1925 is another similar gift of land and contains a frag- 
mentary copy of the fame account of the war and is useful in filling some 
of the gaps. 

14. Uratturai is Kayts on an island to the W. of Jaffna. Matottam 
is Mahatittha, Mantota. Vallikamam is called Valikagama in the CV. 
(ch. 83, v. 17) and is about 5 miles SfE. of Mannar. Mattival is perhaps 
the same as Mattuvil, 10 miles east of Jaffna. Venkatasubba Aiyar, 
El. xxi. p. 187, nn. 

15. This prince had once (c. 1154) been taken prisoner by Para- 
kramabahu and forced to march in front of his triumphal procession. 
CV. ch. 72. vv. 291. 299. Ceylon was rent by a protracted civil strife 
before P. succeeded in uniting the whole of the island under his sway. 
CV. Ch. 70—2. 

16. The expression employed is; ilattanudan sambandam pannavum, 
and this may mean a matrimonial alliance. 

17. ‘People of Elagam,’ perhaps identical with Edagam in the 
Madura taluq. SII. iii, p. 212, n. 1. The phrases marappadai and 
Elagappadai may. however, imply two sections of the Pandyan forces; 
if that be so, Elagattar here must also be a reference to the troops, 
which shows that some among them had gone over to the enemy, while 
the rest remained loyal to the suzerain power. 



NOTES 


409 


18. The general was rewarded by the grant of ten velis of iraiyili 
land in Palaiyanur. 

19. 36 of 1906; 731 of 1909 etc. Some records, e.g., 474 of 1905, com- 
bine the usual prasasti and this surname. 

20. See ante, pp. 359-60. 

21. NI. N. 108, 105 of 1922; 571 of 1907. 

22. 48 of 1893. 

23. 129 of 1927. 

24. 263 of 1913. See ARE. 1927 II, 27. The Cidambaram inscription 
was understood to refer to a grant made in the reign of Kulottunga III 
and the titles Karikala and Rajadhiraja were both assigned to that 
ruler in ARE. 1914 II, 17. It seems to be really a case of a grant of 
Rajadhiraja being confirmed by his successor. 263 being the original 
grant, and 262 the confirmation in the reign of Kulottunga. Another 
possibility is that 262 is a record of Kulottunga II, the Parakesari title 
in it being a mistake. 

25. 420 of 1908. 

26. 259 of 1925. 

27. 538 of 1904. 

28. 433 of 1924. 

29. 619 of 1902; 270 of 1927. 

29a. 393 of 1923 (Yr. 4). 

30. 7a of 1893. 

31. 20 of 1899. 

32. 195 of 1904; 202 of 1902; 71 of 1919; 222 of 1904. 

33. 65 of 1929. 

34. 55 of 1929. 

35. 252 of 1919. Other instances at ARE. 1934-5 II 16; 1937-8 II 41; 
1939-40—1942-3, II. 40. 

36. 389 of 1921. 

37. E.I. viii, p. 260— Kielhom. See p. 357 ante for the Hemavati 

Tamil inscription giving a date pointing to 1166-7 as the 
year of Kulottunga's accession. There are on the other hand 

several inscriptions of Rajadhiraja in the Telugu dist- 

ricts (Draksarama in particular) to show that he lived there many 
years after his rule ended in the Tamil country. In the Pallavarayan- 
pettai inscription, there is a hint of some trouble at the time of Raja- 
dhiraja El’s coronation after the death of Rajaraja II; this may have 
occurred in 1166. one of the starting points of the chronology of Raja- 
dhiraja’s reign, and the year in which Kulottunga also claims to have 
begun his reign (Hemavati record). It may be suggested that Kulot- 
tunga never gave up his rivalry, and brought about the exile of Raja- 
dhiraja to the Telugu country in 1178 when he seized the Cola throne- 
with the aid of his partisans. The relations between Rajadhiraja II and 
Kulottunga III obviously need closer study in the light of the records 
briefly noticed here and of future discoveries 

38. 229 of 1917 of the second year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Kulot- 
tungacoladeva mentions the ‘nineteenth year of Periyadevar Rajaraja- 
cleva’. This does not necessarily imply a filial relation as it is employed 
also of Rajadhiraja II in 37 of 1925 (Yr. 28). 

C. 52 



410 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


39. Ante, p. 372. 

40. This work is sometimes ascribed to Ottakkuttan by mistake. 
Pandit R. Raghava Aiyangar has shown that it is later than the ulds 
oi that poet, and contemporary with the Sankara-solan ula. Sen Tamil, 
iii, pp. 164—70. 

41. The author of the Kovai is more keen on identifying his hero 
with Visnu and attributing to him the legendary achievements of that 
god, than on treating him as a human ruler and mentioning the incidents 
of his career. In this respect, this Kovai compares unfavourably with 
the Pandikkovai, which furnishes most of the illustrative stanzas in 
the commentary to the Iraiyanar Ahapporul. Even so, attention may be 
drawn to the following expressions of the Kovai which, by alluding to 
victories against Kongu and Pandya and mentioning specially the King’s 
devotion to Siva, may be taken to support in some measure the identi- 
fication of the hero of the Kovai with Kulottunga III— especially as there 
is nothing traceable in it against such an identification: 

Kong-ottum vengaik-kodiyon (v. 82). 

Pattiyal-urugi naga-parananai-yettum Kulottungan (88); 

Malu-valiyaip-poyt-tan sultaru-tirut-talan Kulottungan (103) ; 

Min poda ven-kanda (114) ; 

Kongodak-kuttun-galirran (133); 

Adi ninra minamun-Japamum-moliyadavi-pugak-kodi-ninra 
vengai-yuyartton (170). 

Mlnavar Serarai venkanda vlram viluk-kavinara-navar padum- 
Kuldttungan (195); 

Tangum-aranam pirid-onrilad-andac-cdvagramum-kowgMra- 
irainjum kumara-Kulottungan (270). 

The mention of Savakam (Zabag) among the countries acknow- 
ledging Kulottunga’s supremacy deserves to be particularly noted. 

42. 165 of 1902— SII. iii, 85. 

43. 457 of 1902; SII. iii, 86. The Tirukkollambudur inscription (1 
of 1899) has the same form, but its exact date is uncertain, as yr. 4 
mentioned in 11. 14 — 15 is obviously not the date of the record. Contra 
Venkayya, ARE. 1899. 

44. 173 of 1918; 196 of 1901. 

45. 215 of 1901. 

46. 176 of 1908: 313 of 1902. 

47. 190 of 1904. 

48. 24b of 1903. 

49. NI. N. 85. 

50. 397 of 1925. 

51. 2 of 1905. 

52. First mentioned in the twenty-sixth year — 120 of 1912. As 
this record mentions year 37, the eailiest reference is in 008 of 1902 
(Yr. 29). A solitary record from KancI (517 of 1919) seems to mention 
these abhisekas in yr. 1(3), which may be a mistake for 30, the figures 
ib. and iO being reversed by a mistake of the engraver. 

53. TAS. ii. pp. 18 IT. The record is valuable as showing the partial 



NOTES 


411 


survival of the Cola administrative system through all the disturbances 
and rebellions in the south. 

54. 547 of 1902, (SII. iii, 86); 1 of 1899 is similar. 

55. 1 of 1899 has ‘sons’. Hultzsch translates: ‘the son of Vira 
Pandya was subdued’, SII. iii, p. 212 (1. 2); but pada as applied to men 
implies loss of life. 

56. 94 of 1918 (yr. 14) has a more picturesque phrasing which in- 
cludes also the Marava forces: ‘Singalappadai marappadai vettundalai 
kadal pukkalari vila.’ 

57. 458 of' 1902, (SII. iii, 87). 

58. 254 of 1925; 42 of 1906. 

59. This word does not seem to mean ‘harem,’ but the female part 
of the palace establishment. 42 of 1906 omits this fact. 

60. The text relating to Vira Kerala, as I read it from the two 
inscriptions mentioned above, is: Minavandm Vira-keralan ve(nai ) — 
kondu viral tanttut-tan adimai pugudalal taradipar p era valyalittu pak- 
kamirundunna parikala-pariccinna-nalgi. The last phrase has apparently 
the same meaning as the corresponding expression in SII. iii, 88 1. 6, viz., 
parikalattil-amudalittu. 

61. 288 of 1907. 

62. 66 of 1892— SII. iii, 88. 

63. This seems to be the real meaning of: ‘Kodivalangu-villavan’ 
which Hultzsch translates: ‘the Villavan (i.e., the Cera king), who 
formerly had) distributed crores.’ Valangudal means ulavudal, Tamilc- 
collagaradi. cf. S. K. Aiyangar, S. India and her Muhammadan Invaders, 
p. 14, n. 3. 

64. In this inscription the phrase read as 've(nai) kondu’ and 
corrected into ‘venai kandu’ by Hultzsch occurs after ‘viral tarittu’ and 
not before it as in the Tirukkadaiyur inscriptions noticed before; the 
Pudukkotah records to be noticed later follow the Srirangam reading. 
The phrase ‘tanadimai-pugududalaV is omitted in the Srirangam and 
Pudukkottah records. 

65. 404 of 1896. 

66. 170 of 1902. 

67. 163; 166 of Pudukkottai Inscriptions : (Texts). Both the records 
are in a bad state of preservation, and the published text is full of gaps 
and possibly some misreadings. 

68. The words employed here are the same as in SII. iii, 87. 11. 2 — 3 

69. Ibid., 88. 11. 3—6. 

70. I have to omit some obscure expressions at this point. 

71. I must not omit to reproduce the beautiful words of the original 

here: ‘Mdmaduraiyai valangondu Tiruvalavay uraiyum ten-malark- 

konraivar-sadaic-celuhjiidaraittoludiraihii.’ 

72. An inscription of the thirty-fourth year from Tirumalavadi 
(74 of 1895) gives yet another variant of the puyal vayttu introduction 
which describes the achievements of the armies of Kulottunga in the 
different quarters of the world — a description of no value to history. 

73. Cf. padi-valangi mudi valangi of SII. iii. 88, 1. 5. 

74. NI. N. 85. 

75. CV. ii. 128, n. 6. 



412 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 

76. Ceylon Journal of Science, G. II, pp. 105 — 6. Also CV. ii, p. 128, 
n. 6. The inscription mentioned above is 90 of 1905 wrongly noted as 
Vatteluttu and damaged in ARE. 1905. S. Paranavitane, JRAS— Ceylon 
Branch — xxxi, pp. 384—387, postulates three invasions of Ceylon by the 
Colas before a.d. 1200 on the strength of a statement regarding Kitti in 
the Sinhalese poem Sasadavata and the old commentary ( sanne ) on it. 
The details of the invasions are given only in the commentary, and it 
may be doubted if, without more evidence, we may connect the rather 
vague statements in the commentary with the equally vague references 
to Ceylon in Kulottunga’s inscriptions. P. also says: ‘It seems there 
was a state of chronic warfare between the Colas and Sinhalese from 
the closing years of the reign of Parakramabahu I to the end of Polon- 
r.aruwa period, in which there were invasions and counter-invasions 
with varying fortune.’ I doubt if the evidence of the CV. can support 
this statement; there was strife in Ceylon and one party or other always 
sought and gained aid, perhaps mercenary, from the continent. Anl- 
kanga, Lokissara, and Magha himself came to Ceylon with armies re- 
cruited on the mainland. Lokissara II (1210-11), however, rewarded 
‘Loka Arakamena for valour shown in disposing of the Colas for His 
Majesty’ (EZ. iv. p. 88). 

77. PK., pp. 142—3. 

78. Note that younger brothers are specially mentioned among 
these; I have pointed out elsewhere, PK. pp. 143 — 4, that Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya, the successor of Jat Kulasekhara, was his younger 
brother. 

79. Among Kulottunga Ill’s inscriptions from the Pandya country 
may be: two from Tiruklcalakkudi (Rd) — 39 and 40 of 1916 (Yr. 14), 
one from Tinnevelly, 28 of 1927 (Yr. 18), one from Caturvedi-mangalam 
(Rd)— 311 of 1928 (Yr. 21), and one from Tenur (Md)— 606 of 1926 
(Yr. 39). 

80. 49 of 1909: 670 of 1920; ARE. 1921, II, 64. 

81. 1A. xxxviii, pp. 7—10; NI. pp. 1430 ff. 

82. El. vii, p. 121, n. 5; ARE. 1908 II 79. 

83. 583 of 1907. 

84. 578 of 1907 says that Nallasiddha was the son of Erasiddha; 
other inscriptions call the eldest son Manmasiddhi. (El. vii, pp. 153 ff). 
Hence the identity of Manmasiddha and Nallasiddha may be accepted 
pace Venkayya, JA. xxxviii, p. 10, n. 56. Cf. Sewell, HIS I. p. 130, n. 

85. 104 of 1892; 35 of 1893; 407, 408 of 1896— all in El. vii ed. 
Liiders. 

86. El. vii, p. 155. 

87. NI. KV. 39. 

88. Venkayya would read Manmasiddha here, I.A. xxxviii, p. 10, 
n. 56. 

89. Sewell has suggested that Beta II was Nallasiddha. HISI, 
p. 395. But the number of Nallasiddha’s inscriptions and their pro- 
venance. together with the claim of levying tribute from KancI (483 of 
1906; NI. R. 36. G. 1), imply such an active life for Nallasiddha as to 
falsify completely the statement in the Tammusiddhi inscriptions re- 
garding Beta’s exclusive devotion to religious austerities. On the other 



NOTES 


41? 


hand, if we identify Manmasiddha with Nallasiddha, the other statement 
in the Tammusiddhi records, that Manma was dead in a.d. 1205 must 
be declared to be wrong. And it must be acknowledged that the Kavali 
inscription ( KV . 39) mentions only Nallasiddha (Venkayya would read 
Manmasiddha here, and if this is correct, it directly contradicts the 
Tammusiddhi records) and Tammusiddha, and states that though the 
former was the anointed sovereign, still Tammusiddhi carried on the 
affairs of state by his grace, and thus supports Sewell’s suggestion. But 
if Beta was Nallasiddha, and was anointed after Manma’s demise, who 
was the author of the Nallasiddha inscriptions, of which there are 
several, dating from a.d. 1192, if not earlier, some of which doubtless 
precede the death of Manma, c. a.d. 1205? There seems to be no 
means of reconciling all the statements in the Tammusiddhi records 
with the data furnished by the Nallasiddha records. It must be noted 
also that NI. G. 86, dated a.d. 1214, mentions Bacaladevi, the queen of 
Manmasiddha, in a manner that implies that Manma was still alive. 

90. NI. N. 85. Venkayya says rightly that the inscription is muti- 
lated and the date is lost. I A. xxxviii, p. 10, n. 58. But the 'padavadu 
with which the second line begins, and the dates in the other inscrip- 
tions cited above, make it probable that the regnal year is the ninth 
of Kulottunga though it might also be the nineteenth or twenty-ninth. 
However that may be, it is not easy to accept Venkayya's statement: 
'As the former (Nallasiddha) appears to have been a contemporary of 
Kulottunga III from his 27th to 35th year, it is clear that he must 
have come after Tammusiddhi,’ when there is no mention of Tammu- 
siddhi earlier than 6. 1127 i.e. roughly the 27th year of Kulottunga III. 
while Nallasiddha figures in many earlier inscriptions. 

91. NI. N. 40. Venkayya thinks that the name of the Nellore king 
was Manmasiddha (ibid. n. 54). This is very likely; for, seeing that 
Tammusiddha is invariably so styled in Sanskrit, the Siddha of the 
Sanskrit part of No. 40 may be the elder of the Siddha brothers. 

92. 317 of 1929; 198 of 1892; 601 of 1907. 

93. 197 of 1894. 

94. 578 of 1907. 

95. NI. A. 18. Another similar inscription (205 of 1894) is dated 
A.D. 1209 (Yr. 31). 

96. 195 of 1894; 120 of 1930. 

97. 456 of 1919, cf. NI. G. 76 (Yr. 27 of Kulottunga III) which says 
that Betarasa was the son of Nallasiddha. 

98. 582 of 1907; NI. N. 101. 

99. NI. R. 8. 

100. 201 of 1912. 

101. ARE. 1905, II, 19; 571 of 1907: 195 of 1892; NI. N. 85, etc. 

102. 483 of 1906. Venkayya was inclined to distinguish between 

the Bhujabalavlra Nallasiddhanadeva Cola Maharaja of this inscrip- 
tion and Nallasiddha, the son of Erasiddha (I A. xxxviii, p. 10). The 
former is represented also by other inscriptions from the Nellore area. 
NI. G. 1 is dated S. 1.05, which may be 1105, (a.d. 1183) and contains 
the expression kappam konna.... KV. 13 also mentioning the levy- 

ing of tribute from Kanci is dated S. 1136, and R. 36 with the same 



414 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 


titles as 483 of 1906 is dated three years later A.D. 1217. The Bhuja- 
balavira records are few and extend over practically the whole of 
Kulottunga’s reign; I think that Nallasiddha, the son of Erasiddha, is 
himself the author of these records, the titles in which are indicative 
of his claim to independence. Such pretentious records could not be 
issued every day and were published whenever, in the estimate of 
Nallasiddha, Kulottunga was too preoccupied to notice his action. 
Some such assumption would explain the facts so far known. But this 
means, once more, that we set aside the testimony of the Tammusiddhi 
records on the death of the eldest son of Erasiddha. If these assump- 
tions are correct, we may distinguish two periods when Nallasiddha 
found it possible to act like an independent king: (1) a.d. 1183-1192, 
when Kulottunga was engaged in the Pandyan campaigns. (2) from 
a.e. 1214 towards the close of Kulottunga’s reign when that monarch 
was, as we shall see, once more drawn into an encounter with the 
Pandyas. It may be noted that in this second period, we get records of 
a Bhujabalavira Errasiddha (Nf. A. 38, R. 38, G. 59, G. 58) who rules 
in the early years of Rajaraja HI, and like Nallasiddha, sometimes 
acknowledges the Cola suzerainty and sometimes does not. Was this 
Errasiddha the son of Nallasiddha? There is a record in Tiruppukkuli 
(Ch.), 192 of 1916, of the fifteenth year of a Nallasiddharasa of the 
family of Mukkanti Kaduvetti. It is engraved in very faulty language 
and gives the usual Pallava titles. Its date and relation, if any, to the 
Telugu-Coda Nallasiddha cannot be determined. 

103. EL vii, p. 150 — dik daksina galita-Kancigund babhuva (1. 17). 

104. 163, 169 etc. of 1913. 

105. 397 of 1925; 18 of 1925 which is doubtfully dated (1)5 also 
mentions it. 

106. 227 of 1917. 

107. ARE. 1907 II, 67. 

108. 322 of 1928. 

109. 9 of 1926. ARE. 1926, II, 32; 1928 II, 18. Contra PK. pp. 152, 
n. 1. 

110. PK. ibid. 

111. Cf. 481 and 482 of 1908 on a Sundara Pandya’s grant of 
the Cola country to the Bana-pati. No. 196 of 1938 1 9 records division 
of Kaviri-nadu by Sundara between the Valava (Cola) and the 
Magadar-kon (Bana); no. 197 the demolition of the Cola palace, ex- 
cepting the 16-pillared mandapa where Pattinappdlai of Kannan had 
been published of old. ARE. 1938-9 II 27. 

112. Hoysana Sri-Viraballala-devana magam Vira-narasimha- 
devanu tehkalu-Rangana mele nadavandu. EC. vi, Cm. 56. 

, 113. JIH. vi. p. 205. Contra El. vii. p. 162 and n. 10. See p. 420, 
n. 15 below. 

114. EC. iv. Nl. 29; JIH. vi. p. 201. 

115. EC. iv, Kr. 63; also Bl. 74. PK. p. 150; JIH. vi, pp. 203—4. 

116. JIH. vi, p. 200. 

117. 162 of 1926; 273 of 1914 etc. 

118. 259 of 1925; ante, p. 376. 

119. 80 of 1928. 



NOTES 


415 


120. 522 of 1902. 

121. El. viii, pp. 7 — 8. 

122. 554 of 1904. Contra Hultzsch SII. iii, p. 205 and n. 5. 

123. 316 of 1909 (n.-d.) 

124. 61 of 1890 (Yr. 23). 

125. 659 of 1902 (Yr. 37). 

126. Maravarman Sundara Pandyal also took the title: Mudi- 
valangum-perumal, PK. p. 153. 

' 127. 75 of 1925. 

128. ARE. 1925, II, 22. 

129. 538 of 1902 (Yr. 27). 

130. 454 of 1912. 

131. 114 of 1919. 

132. 339 of 1914. 

133. 190 of 1907. Acdrya PuspdnjaU (1940), pp. 3-7. 

134. ARE. 1908 II, 64-5. 

135. 560 of 1902: irupattu-ndlavadu panjattile kasukku ulakku 
ariH virkka ponnum tedina arttamum nellum adaiya ittu tirunadi- 
yaik-katti eri kan-kaiyalvm. 

136. 86 of 1911. 

137. The price of paddy mentioned in 86 of 1911 is 3 ndiis per 
kasu; this would mean, in terms of rice (converting at the ratio of 
rice to paddy, the usual rate quoted in inscriptions), 1% measures of 
rice per kasu. 560 of 1902 of the next year from North Arcot gives the 
rate Vt measure per kasu. If the kasu was the same coin in both instan- 
ces, the famine must have prevailed over a somewhat wide area, and 
become very much more acute in the second year of the scarcity than 
in the first. If this surmise is correct, 86 of 1911 would be the case 
of a man whose resources gave way at an early stage in the famine, 
when measures of public relief either by state authorities or by private 
individuals were not yet thought of. 

138. 457 of 1902. 

139. 83 of 1926. 

140. 113 of 1928. 

141. 188, 216 of 1908. 

142. 28 of 1927. 

143. 117 of 1899; 460 of 1911; 473 of 1911. 

144. 461 of 1913; 563 of 1902; 60 of 1890; 141 of 1905. 

145. 193 of 1894; NI. G. 86; 601, 602 of 1907; 435 of 1911. 

146. 460 of 1911— EC. x. Mb. 44 (b). 

147. ARE. 1912 II 30. PK. p. 148. 

148. 117 of 1899 (Yr. 2). See n. 37 ante. 

149. 195 of 1892; also 10 of 1893; 116 of 1922; 303 of 1897. 

150. 546, 558 of 1902; 559 of 1906 (Yr. 14): 546 of 1912 (Yr. 34). 

151. 24 b of 1903 (Yr. 4); 557 of 1902 (Yr. 35). See also 291 of 
1902 (Yr. 20), 532 of 1902 (Yr. 21); 283 of 1902 (Yr. 33); 388 of 1902 
(Yr. 31) and n. Ill ante. 93 of 1918 (Yr. 6). 

152. Ante, pp. 349-50. 

153. 157 of 1906. 

154. 413 of 1909. 



416 RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III 

155. 74 of 1918; 463 of 1921. 

156. He is said to be of the Kattuk-kudi, Kadava line in 381 of 
1921, n-d. 

157. 63 of 1919. 

158. 487 of 1921. 

159. 197 of 1905. 

160. 486 of 1921, of the eleventh year of Kopperunjinga, from Tiru- 
vennainallur, records the re-engraving of an older inscription of the 
12th year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Rajarajadeva recording a gift by 
Atkolli Kadavaraya for the birth of a son. 

161. No. 488-a of 1902, 508 of 1902; ARE. 1937;8 II 41 (496 of 1937-8). 

162. 296 of 1912 of which v. 3 forms 178 of 1921. The theory of 

two Kopperun j ingas ( SII . xii Intm. p. viii and no. 130) is both unneces- 
sary and unwarranted by the sources. 

163. ARE. 1913, II 66 says that Kakatiyas were expelled from the 
south as a result of this battle by Kadava n. There is no basis for this 
statement unless it be one stanza in the prasasti which has reference to 
vadamannar, northern kings. This verse stands in no relation whatever 
to the 6evur fight, and it gives us the precious historical information 
that the ‘northern kings’ who did not come and make obeisance to the 
Kadava, could not find even a hill or a forest to which they could fly 
for refuge! 

164. 531 of 1902. 

165. 312 of 1902. 

166. 477. 479 of 1921. 

167. 313 of 1902 (Yr. 17). 133 of 1900 (Yr. 28). 

168. 73 of 1906 (Yr. 38). 

169. 390 of 1902 (Yr. 11). 

170. 534 of 1902 (Yr. 25). 

171. 73 of 1906 (Yr. 38). 

172. 414 of 1909 (Yr. 6). 

173. 114 of 1900 (Yr. 3); 538 of 1902 (Yr. 27). 

174. Ante p. 266. 

175. 536 of 1902 (Yr. 10). 

176. 161 of 1902. 

177. Cl. the undated inscriptions of Naralokavira — Studies vii; 
ante p. 333. 

178. 8 of 1900. 

179. SII. i. 75; El. vi. pp. 331 — 3. 

180. 107 of 1900; SII. vii. 119. 

181 See in particular 440 of 1913; 223 of 1904; 56 of 1922 (Yr. 13) : 
483 of 1908 (Yr. 18): 115 of 1900 (Yr. 20); 516 of 1902 (Yr. 27); 435 
of 1913 (Yr. 35); 489 of 1912 (Yr. 40). Also n. 35 ante. 



Chapter XVI 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, 
THE END 1216-1279 


The date of Rajaraja’s accession falls between June 27 
and July 10, a.d. 1216. 1 This date no doubt 

Accession of marks, not his accession to the throne in 
Rajaraja in. , , , , , , 

his absolute right, but his recogmtion by 

his predecessor as heir apparent. It must have been some 
time after this that Sundara Pandya’s invasion of the Cola 
country and the intercession of Vira Narasimha to secure a 
respite for the Cola power occurred. And Kulottunga III 
died soon after. The reign of the third Rajaraja began badly, 
and these initial misfortunes were but the precursors of much 
greater calamities; again the Hoysalas had to come to the 
rescue. 


What was the relation of Rajaraja to Kulottunga? Was 
he the son whom the Cola monarch (Kulottunga III) on his 
return from exile, presented to the Pandyan conqueror who 
sent for him in order to give him back his kingdom? This may 
have been so, but we lack definite evidence. Rajaraja’s in- 
scriptions call Kulottunga III periyadevar (the elder lord); 2 
so do the inscriptions of Rajaraja’s successor Rajendra III. 3 
But this is not enough to sustain the inferences that Rajaraja 
was a son or nephew of Kulottunga III or that Rajendra was 
his brother. 4 Periyadevar does not seem to signify anything 
more specific than priority in succession; Rajendra III des- 
cribes Rajaraja III also by the same term. 5 There seems to 
be no reason why we should not suppose that Rajaraja was 
the son of Kulottunga, and Rajendra of Rajaraja; but this 
cannot yet be proved. 

The most common prasasti of the reign is a relatively 
short description of the glories of Cola rule 
under Rajaraja III; it begins sir manni iru 
nangu tisai, 6 and does not contain a single historical fact, and 
it is not worth studying the minor variations in the words 
of the prasasti. Two inscriptions containing the prasasti 
C. 53 



418 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA 111 


call for some remark. One of them comes from Tiruvorriyur 7 
and is dated in the third year of a Parakesari alias Tribhu- 
vana Cakravarti Ulaguyya-vanda-perumal. Now the expres- 
sion Ulaguyya-vanda-perumal, the lord by whose coming the 
world was saved, is a title rather than a name, and is found 
in the inscriptions in relation to Kulottunga III 8 and Raja- 
raja III. 9 The title Parakesari in this inscription points to 
Kulottunga III; but no other inscription of that king is known 
to contain the prasasti now being considered. On the other 
hand, the prasasti itself and the contents of the record which 
have reference to the punishment of some persons for treason, 
a recurring feature of the reign of Rajaraja, point to the 
successor of Kulottunga III. This record is, therefore, best 
assigned to the reign of Rajaraja, the Parakesari title given 
in it being held to be mistake for Rajakesari. 10 The same expla- 
nation holds also with regard to the second of the inscrip- 
tions mentioned above, a record from Tiruverumbur with sir 
manni introduction and Parakesari title. 11 Such chance mis- 
takes can hardly justify the assumption, sometimes put for- 
ward, that, in this period, the Rajakesari and Parakesari titles 
were applied rather indifferently to one and the same king. 

Another much longer prasasti of a high literary quality, 
also of little use for purposes of history, begins with the words 
sir mannu malarmagal. 12 The state of the country, the per- 
sonal appearance and the character of its ruler, and the sub- 
ject races paying tribute to him, are all described in this 
prasasti; but the description is so hyperbolic and conven- 
tional that we learn from it more of the ways of court-poets 
than of the subjects they handle. Two queens are mentioned, 
the senior, a Bana princess who is said to have shared equal 
authority with the king and to have been consecrated with 
him, 13 and the junior having the title Buvana-mulududaiyal. 

The reign of Rajaraja was a period of continuous trouble. 

It coincides with an epoch of great changes 
chang es^ “ the Political map of the South, and Raja- 

raja was obviously no great warrior or 
statesman. The Colas were exposed to assaults from within 
and without. The Pandyas in the south and the Hoysalas 
in the west had by now risen to the rank of great powers led 
by rulers of exceptional merit, and the one chance of survival 



WEAKNESS OF COLAS 


419 


for the Co]as was the rivalry between these two new powers 
neither of which would let the ancient Cola Kingdom fall a 
prey to the other. In the north-west the Calukyas of Kalyani 
had given way before the newly risen power of the Seunas. 
In the north-east, the Telugu-Codas of Nellore held an im- 
portant place and their relations with the Hoysalas on the 
one side and the Kakatiyas on the other formed another 
remarkable chapter of the history of the time. Nearer home 
the Kadava chieftains of Kudalur and Sendamangalam were 
not slow to take advantage of the growing weakness of their 
suzerain. 

For two centuries and a half after the invasion of 
Krsna III, in the middle of the tenth century, the Cola empire 
had grown in strength and prestige, and the set-back it 
suffered at the close of the reign of Kuldttunga I had no vital 
consequences and had left the somewhat diminished empire 
quite as strong and influential as ever. And it took a lead- 
ing part in settling the succession dispute in the Pandyan 
Kingdom. But the disaster that followed not long after, the 
invasion of Maravarman Sundara Pandya in the closing years 
of the reign of Kulottunga III, exposed the hollowness of the 
Cola power in this period. For the first time in many gene- 
rations, the Cola capitals were sacked by an enemy and the 
Cola king reduced to the position of a wandering refugee, a 
fate that the Colas had often inflicted on their enemies. The 
Cola king indeed regained his position, but after begging for 
it from his conqueror and on terms that no longer left him 
an independent ruler. And even this mercy was due to Hoy- 
sala aid. This was the signal for the overgrown vassals of 
the Cola Kingdom to disregard the authority of their suze- 
rain, and at the earliest opportunity that offered itself, either 
to transfer their allegiance or to declare their independence. 
This was the state of affairs when Kulottunga III died, and 
the reign of Rajaraja III began. 

Inscriptions from the Tanjore district mention that 
there were great disorders in the fifth year 
Disturbances in c f the reign resulting in loss of security 
the fifth year. and damage to property . 14 These disorders 

are only vaguely characterised as duritangal (troubles) and 
ksobham (agitation) , and there is no more indication of their 



420 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


exact nature. It is clear from the inscriptions, however, that 
they led to the temporary desertion of one temple, its images 
and movable property being carried elsewhere for safety, and 
the permanent destruction of the records and title-deeds of 
two villages which had subsequently to improvise fresh 
records after inquiry. These disturbances might have been 
purely local; at any rate there is no clear evidence of their 
being due to war or foreign invasion. 15 

There were other conflicts going on in what was still 
nominally Cola territory, conflicts of which 
Other con cts. wg k ear on iy f a int echoes in the records of 
the time. An inscription dated a.d. 1223-4 from the North 
Arcot district, 16 mentions a fight between Viranarasingadeva 
Yadavaraya and the Kadavaraya at Uratti, perhaps Oratti of 
to-day in the Chingleput district. The fight is mentioned inci- 
dentally in commemorating the heroism of a soldier, who 
fought in the army of the Yadavaraya and lost his life in an 
attack on the Kadavaraya himself. Both these chieftains 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Cola ruler. We have no 
information concerning the occasion for the conflict and we 
cannot say if the Kadavaraya was Kopperunjinga him- 
self or, what is perhaps more likely, his father. 17 The 
Kadavaraya also came into conflict with the Hoysala 
about the same time if not earlier. In an inscription 
which from its cyclic year may be dated about a.d. 1218, 18 
VIra Narasimha styles himself Kahci-Kancana K&davakulan- 
taka and Kadavarayadisdpatta. If the date of the inscription 
were not uncertain, we may even suppose that the Kadava 
had taken advantage of the invasion of the Cola country by 
the Pandya king or entered into league with him, and that, 
in order to save the Cola kingdom, the Hoysalas had to deal 
with the Kadava as well as the Pandya himself. 19 Whatever 
that may be, there are other inscriptions which bring Nara- 
simha into definite relation with Kanci in this period. One 
of them, a.d. 1230, 20 states that Vira Narasimha was ruling 
from Kanci. and another inscription, undated, mentions that 
some of his troops ( bhemndas ) were stationed at Kanci. 21 
These references to local disturbances and wars among 
feudatories and to the supervening of Hoysala influence in 
different directions give a measure of the disintegration of the 



SUNDARA PANDYA’S INVASION 


421 


Cola Kingdom and the helplessness of its ruler in the midst 
of growing difficulties. This impression is strengthened by 
the unusually large number of trials for treason reported in 
the inscriptions of the reign. 

Rajaraja was evidently not only weak but foolish. For. 

if we may trust the Pandyan inscriptions 
Pandyan 0 f the time, he deliberately broke the terms 

of the treaty with his Pandyan overlord 
and thus contrived to bring about the capital disaster 
of the reign. ‘The Cola’ says the prasasti of Maravaraman 
Sudara Pandya I, 

‘no longer considered it the proper course to own alle- 
giance to the ruler who had bestowed the crown on him 
on a former occasion. He began once more to feel that 
his security lay in his own fertile country, and declined 
to do the usual honour to the commands (of the Pandya) , 
refused to pay the usual tribute, and (instead) despatched 
a large army ( perani ) preceded by an advance guard 
(tusi) 

The events that followed this attempt to throw off the Pan- 
dyan allegiance are described in the Pandya prasasti, in a 
unique historical inscription from Tiruvendipuram , 22 and in 
the historical romance, Gadyakarnamrta of Kalakalabha, 
composed not many years after the events. The reference to 
the events of the time by the last author is very brief, but 
illuminating. Without his assistance, the proper sequence 
of events must have remained a matter of conjecture, and not 
the certainty that it now is. 

To begin with the Pandyan side of the story . 23 The expe- 
ditionary force sent by the Cola was rolled back and a pitched 
battle fought in which the Colas suffered heavy loss in men, 
horse and elephants; the enemy country was irrigated with 
the blood of fallen foes and sowed with kavadi, the whole body 
of women in the enemy’s harem including the chief queen of 
the Cola monarch were taken captive, and made to carry the 
water-jar and other auspicious objects before the Pandyan 
ruler on the occasion of his triumphal entry into the Cola 
capital, Mudikonda-solapuram, where a vijayabhiseka (the 
anointment of victors) was performed . 24 The Gadyakarrui- 



422 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


mrta takes up the story at this point and connects it with the 
events recorded in the Tiruvendipuram inscription. It says: 25 
‘Defeated in battle by the Pandya ruler, King Raja- 
raja abandoned his capital and together with his retinue 
( saparivdram ) sought to reach the side of his ally, the 
ruler of Kuntala; while on his way, he was overtaken by 
the Kadava king— who had a vanguard of forest troops 
and had grown strong by the accession of the troops from 
foreign lands (mlecchadesa) and together with his fol- 
lowers was taken captive after a fight. By this enemy 
who had descended on him like a bolt from the blue, who, 
by his many stratagems, seemed a partial incarnation of 
Sambara, who was the very embodiment of guile in the 
cunning devices he adopted, — by this enemy, the King (RI- 
jaraja) was dragged to his own city Jayantamangala. When 
he heard this painful news, (Narasimha) started (from 
his capital) in a few days, reached the northern bank of 
the Kaveri and encamped in the neighbourhood of Sri- 
rangam. and despatched his dandavAtha to punish all the 
enemy samantas, brought about the release of his friend, 
the Cola king, and levied tribute from the Pandya 

The Tiruvendipuram inscription narrates the campaign 
of the Hoysala Dandanathas in consider- 
jinga^part" able detail, and establishes the identity of 

Kadava chieftain, who attacked and impri- 
soned Rajaraja and subsequently released him, with the cele- 
brated Kopperunjinga (Maharaja-simha in Sanskrit) who 
fills a rather large place in the annals of the period. Other 
inscriptions from the Tamil and Kannada country confirm 
these facts. 

That Kopperunjinga had come of age and was already 
prominent among the Kadava chieftains, and that these chief- 
tains still acknowledged the overlordship of the Cola, at least 
in name, may be inferred from an inscription 26 found in Vrd- 
dhacalam. dated in the 14th year of Rajaraja (a.d. 1230) and 
recording an endowment by one of the agambadi mudalis of 
Kopperunjinga. The Tiruvendipuram inscription opens with 
a statement of the facts mentioned in the Gadyakarnamrta, 
adding piquancy to the reports of Kopperunjinga’s misdeeds 



HOYSALA AID 


423 


that reached Narasimha; for here he is said not only to have 
imprisoned the Cola emperor ( sola-cakravarti ) at Sendaman- 
galam, but to have employed his troops to devastate the 
Cola country and desecrate its temples including Visnu- 
sthanas— the Hoysalas were staunch Vaisnavas. Narasimha 
left Dorasamudra, continues the inscription, saying that he 
would not allow his trumpet ( halam ) to be blown until after 
he had re-established his name as the Defender of the Cola 
monarchy (Cdla-mav^alapratisthdcdrya); he uprooted the 
Magara kingdom, 27 doubtless an ally of the Pandya and 
Kadava, on his way, and encamped at Paccur, two miles to 
the north of the Coleroon opposite Srlrangam. From his camp, 
Narasimha despatched two dandaTiayakas, Appanna and 
Samudra Goppayya, with orders to carry destruction into the 
country of Kopperunjinga and re-instal the Cola emperor in 
his place. Accordingly, the two commanders sacked Elleri 
and Kalliyur-mulai held by Kopperunjinga, and Toludagaiyur 
held by Sola-kon, evidently one of his lieutenants, killed 
some of the mudalis of the king (Rajaraja) and Parakrama- 
bahu, the king of Ceylon, who had joined the enemy, and, 
after worshipping the God of Cidambaram, they devastated 
many places such as Tondamanallur, Tiruvadi and Tiruvak- 
karai, to the south of the river Varanavasi (Gadilam) and 
east of Sendamangalam, and struck terror into the hearts of 
the inhabitants by burning crops, 28 capturing women and 
plundering people; finally they made preparations to invest 
Sendamangalam, when Kopperunjinga sent word to Nara- 
simha that he was ready to restore the Cola emperor to liberty 
and his throne, and Narasimha transmitted the offer to his 
commanders. Then they received the Cola emperor with 
honour and accompanied him back to his country. 

So far the Tiruvendipuram inscription. The suggestion 
has been made that the inscription is found engraved in this 
village, because it was here that the Hoysala generals took 
leave of the Cola king Rajaraja III, after his restoration. 29 
All the villages mentioned in this inscription have been traced 
in the South Arcot district. It is not clear, however, who 
the Ceylon ruler Parakramabahu was. He cannot be iden- 
tical with Parakramabahu II of Ceylon who came to the 
throne in 1236, 30 for here Parakramabahu is said to have lost 



424 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


his life in the year 1230. He was perhaps some other prince 
of the Ceylonese royal family and may be taken to correspond 
to the mleccha and vaidesika help which Kopperunjinga com- 
manded in this fight, according to the author of the Gadya- 
karnamrta. 

Other inscriptions confirm these facts and in one im- 
portant respect supplement the Tiruvendipuram record. One 
of them states that Appanna and Goppayya earned the praises 
of Narasimha by attacking the Kadavaraya and releasing the 
Cola. 31 Another inscription dated a.d. 1232 states that the 
country round Nidur in the TanjOre district was formerly 
ruled by Kopperunjinga, and records a revision of the rules 
of tenancy cultivation rendered necessary thereby. 313 An un- 
dated inscription from Vayalur (Vailur, N. Arcot) 32 men- 
tions that Kopperunjinga alias Alagiya Slya defeated the Cola 
King at Tellaru (30 miles south of Kanci), a fact mentioned 
nowhere else, and having cast him and his ministers in prison, 
occupied the Cola country. After the brief prose passage 
recording these facts, there occur five verses in different 
metres in praise of Kopperunjinga’s heroism in which, of 
course, we hear nothing of the release of the Cola or of the 
success of the Hoysala generals, but only of the defeat of the 
Karnatas and the glories of Kopperunjinga, also called by 
the titles Avani-Narayana, Nrpatunga, and ruler of Tondai 
and Mallai. The same features recur in other inscriptions of 
his in the Sanskrit language. 33 That Kopperunjinga and the 
Hoysalas continued their fights becomes clear from the fact 
that Vira Somesvara is said to have encamped at Mangalam 
in the course of a campaign against the Kadava in the year 
Durmukha (a.d. 1236) . 34 

While his generals were carrying out his instructions 
regarding Kopperunjinga and the Cola 
Pandya* ° f ^ king, Narasimha himself conducted opera- 
tions against the Pandya. The Gadyakar- 
■namrta asserts that Narasimha levied tribute from the Pan- 
dya ruler, and it seems that the decisive encounter between 
the Pandya and Hoysala troops took place at Mahendraman- 
galam on the Kaveri river. 35 An inscription at Haranahalli 36 
mentions that Narasimha was encamped at Ravitadanakoppa 



BALANCE OF POWER 


425 


with the object of leading a campaign against the Pandya 
king and states that the sea was roaring out its advice to the 
latter to give up everything to the Hoysala and live in peace 
as his servant. Other Hoysala inscriptions state that Rame- 
svaram was reached in the course of this campaign or soon 
after. 37 We hear nothing of all this from the Pandya inscrip- 
tions. In the prasasti of Maravarman Sundara Pandya I, the 
account of his second campaign against the Cola stops with 
the vijaydbhiseka, and this is obviously not the whole truth; 
for it leaves unexplained the restoration of Rajaraja to the 
Cola throne after he was forced to relinquish it to the Pan.- 
dyan invader. There can be no doubt that for a second time 
the Hoysala maintained the balance of power among the 
southern kingdoms by preventing the abolition of the inde- 
pendent Cola monarchy and the annexation of its territory to 
the Pandyan kingdom. The political settlement reached at 
the close of these campaigns in aid of the C5la seems to have 
been sealed by dynastic marriages; Vira Somesvara, the son 
of Vira Narasimha, is called mamadi by the successors of 
both Mar. Sundara Pandya I and Rajaraja III. 38 


For the rest of his reign, Rajaraja continued to enjoy his 
position without any serious trouble. The 
cJI^Power 116 provenance of Rajaraja’s inscriptions shows 
o.a owe . that for the bulk of the period his nominal 

sway extended over practically the whole of the Cola king- 
dom as it was at the death of Kulottunga III. The contents 
of -the. inscriptions .indicate equally clearly the growing 
dependence of the Cola power on Hoysala support and the 
progressive increase of local disorders and treasons and the 
disregard of the feudatories of the empire for the central 
power. The forms of central government and local adminis- 
tration appear to have remained the same as before; but the 
executive strength of the government, never very great in 
the Hindu state, but realised in a greater measure under the 
great Colas than under any other dynasty, was now visibly 
on the wane. In a.d. 1246, 39 Rajendra was recognised as heir 
apparent, as is seen from the dates in his inscriptions. But 
Rajaraja lived on till at least 1260. 39a 


The inscriptions of Rajaraja in dated up to the thirtieth 
year if not later are found in the modern districts of Salem, 
C. 54 



426 


RAJARAJA HI AND RAJENDRA III 


Chittoor, Cuddapah and Nellore; we find also the inscrip- 
tions of his successor Rajendra III over practically the same 
area; these facts imply that the hegemony of the Cola power 
continued to be recognised over the whole of this area in this 
period. But this was no more than a traditional form which 
apparently persisted for some time after its substance had 
disappeared. For nothing stands out in clearer relief from the 
records of the time than the absence of a central co-ordinat- 
ing authority, and the readiness with which treasons and con- 
spiracies seem to have been set on foot. We have traced the 
growth of the practice among local chieftains of contracting 
alliances for offence and defence without any regard to the 
central government; the habit had spread to the heart of the 
Cola country by the beginning of Rajaraja’s reign and there 
is an instance 40 of three chiefs in the Tanjore district itself 
contracting such a mutual alliance in the third year of the 
reign, a.d. 1219; except for the facts that the inscription re- 
cording this event is dated in a regnal year of Rajaraja III, 
and the treaty of alliance acknowledged a common fealty due 
from the allies to the Cola king, which perhaps meant that 
the alliance would not hold against that ruler, there is no 
evidence that the government of Rajaraja had anything to 
do with it. Another instance of a rather protracted feud 
ending in a matrimonial alliance between the parties is 
furnished by a record of a.d. 1232 from Tiruvennainallur; 41 
the parties to the dispute and to the alliance that followed 
it were members of the Kadavaraya and Cediraya families. 


Instances of treason have reached us not through direct 
testimony, but by the indirect evidence of 
inscriptions recording the public sale of 
land and other property forfeited to the 
state on account of treasonable offences ( rajadroham ) ; it is 
not possible, therefore, to discover the exact nature of the 
offences which led to the punishment or any details regard- 
ing them. Though such cases were not unknown under other 
Co!a rulers, the number of reported instances is unusually 
large during Rajaraja’s reign, and it appears legitimate to 
suppose that this is partly due to the unsettled condition of 
the land and the loss of strength and efficiency in the central 
government. There was a public auction ( Rdjarajapperu - 



TREASONS AND DISORDERS 427 

vilai) in Shiyali (Tanjore Dt.) on the 317th day of the 
eighth regnal year of the king, 42 at which the king's officers 
specially chosen for the purpose disposed of lands belonging 
to some traitors and such among their relations, employees 
and slaves as had been involved in the treason ( drohattukku 
utpattarum) . An inscription from Valivalam (Tanjore dis- 
trict) 43 records that in a.d. 1230, a commission of eight royal 
officers realised 33,000 kasus as proceeds of a similar sale of 
lands forfeited by persons who had turned against the 
king — drohigalcLyp-palaraiyum kani marina nilam. Again at 
Koyil Tirumalam, 44 an order of confiscation issued on the 
348th day of the 20th year, was given effect to on the 80th 
day of the succeeding year, at an interval of about three 
months, and five veli and four md of land yielded to the royal 
treasury a sum of 13,000 kasus. More details are forthcoming 
in regard to the next instance from Sivapuram (Tanjore Dt.) 
and of the twenty-third regnal year; 45 these details show 
that the charge of rajadroham should not be understood in 
the sense that suggests itself at first sight, that of treason in 
a political sense, but in that of turbulence or persistent 
insubordination. In this particular case, two siva-brdhmanas 
(temple priests) were punished by the mdhesvaras (the 
congregation) and the ur for rajadroham and sivadroham. 
The inscription says that the accused handed over to a con- 
cubine the jewels belonging to the goddess, misappropriated 
temple funds entrusted to them, refused to pay the dues on 
lands held by them, and misbehaved in other ways; they 
not only ignored commands issued to them by the king, but 
maltreated the messengers of the king by beating them and 
ducking them. They are also said to have committed in- 
describable sins through the Kannadiyas and to have col- 
lected 50,000 (coins?), perhaps a case of irresponsible local 
oppression. The mention of the Kannadiyas must be parti- 
cularly noted; for it points to an incidental result of Hoysala 
intervention in the Cola kingdom and indicates the presence 
of bands of mercenaries who had no sympathy with the 
local population and were ready to carry out the biddings of 
any ruffian who commanded the means to pay them. There 
is yet another instance also from the Tanjore district (Tiru- 
venkadu) 46 of forfeiture of property for treason which is 
seen, from the name of the tirumandira-olai , to be clearly 



428 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


of the reign of Rajaraja III. It is remarkable that all these 
instances come from the central regions of the C5la kingdom, 
clear proof that the administration was floundering even in 
the limited area to which it had become confined by the 
increasing independence of the greater vassals in the out- 
lying parts of the kingdom. 

The intervention of the Hoysala power secured for the 
Cola kingdom a somewhat longer lease of 
Hoysalas. life than the Pandyas would have allowed 

it; but this respite was not obtained without some cost, and 
it is worth while tracing the part of the Hoysala princes and 
generals in the affairs of the C5la country as revealed by the 
Cola inscriptions themselves. An inscription from Tiru- 
vadatturai (in the Vrddhacalam taluq of the South Arcot 
district) dated in the tenth year, 47 a.d. 1226, states that the 
Hoysala king Narasimhadeva had destroyed the country and 
carried away images from the temple of that village some 
time before, and records the re-consecration of the temple. 
The date of this record seems to rule out the possibility of 
connecting these transactions with the campaign of Appanna 
and Samudra Goppayya, recorded in the Tiruvendipuram 
inscription. 48 It has been pointed out before that Narasimha 
might have taken the side of the Cola earlier on the occa- 
sion of the first Pandyan invasion and proceeded against the 
Kadava ally of the Pandyan invader. 49 Possibly, Tiruvadat- 
turai was then in the occupation of the Kadava and suffered 
damage as part of the enemy country. The Kadava was 
forced once more to acknowledge the Cola overlordship, and 
when peace was restored, the people became free to repair 
the damages inflicted by war. The presence of Hoysala troops 
( bherundas ) at Kafici about this time is attested by the gift 
of a lamp to Attiyur Alvar by Bacaladevi, the daughter of 
Bhutadeya-nayaka of Dorasamudra. 50 of another lamp three 
years later by the mahapradhani Ammanna Dandanayaka, 51 
and of a whole village by Goppayya Dandanayaka in a.d. 
1231. 52 Some time later a pradhani of Somesvara, the son 
and successor of Narasimha, also makes a gift at Kancl. 53 

Hoysala influence in other parts of the kingdom is attest- 
ed by records of gifts by Vallaya Dandanayaka, a pradhani of 



HOYSALA HEGEMONY 


429 


Narasimha, at Tirumalavadi 54 by a member of the subordi- 
nate establishment ( siriipittaigal ) of Narasimha’s queen 
Somaladevi at Tirugokarnam; 55 Vallaya is also seen making 
another gift at Kancipuram in a.d. 1238, when he is called 
a pradhdjii of Somesvara. 56 

In fact, after they began sometime about 1218 to take 
the side of the Colas against the Pandyas in the struggle 
between these two powers, the Hoysalas appear steadily to 
have improved their position and influence in the Cola and 
the Pandya kingdoms. They evidently aspired to a sort of 
hegemony over the whole of South India and to some extent 
succeeded in realising their ambition for a time, during the 
second quarter of the thirteenth century. Depending for 
their very existence on the backing of the Hoysalas, the 
Colas were in no position to offer any resistance to their 
aggrandizement; even the Pandyas found themselves com- 
pelled to purchase peace with the Hoysalas by a tacit recogni- 
tion of their dominant position. Attention may be drawn 
here to the frequent mention of Hoysala kings and generals 
in the Pandyan inscriptions of the period, 37 and in particular, 
to two records from Pudukkottah, 58 dated about a.d. 1245, 
which mention the capture of Kana-nadu by Ravi-diva, a 
general of the Hoysala Vira-Somesvara. It was not till the 
rise of the greatest Pandya ruler of the time, Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya, i.e., till after the middle of the century, 
that the expansion of the Hoysala power received a check. 

For all its weakness, the Cola power maintained the 
appearance of sovereign rule over a con- 
^Feudatones of siderable territory almost till towards the 
Rajaraja III. end of Rajaraja’s long reign. This be- 

comes clear from a review of the inscriptions dated in his 
regnal years and issued by rulers who still called themselves 
vassals of the Cola emperor. Even the notorious Kopperun- 
jinga was no exception. We have seen that the attempt of 
this chieftain to throw off his allegiance to his Cola overlord 
was suppressed in 1230-31 by the intercession of Vira- 
Narasimha. The inscriptions of Kopperunjinga, however, 
show that he had a rather long and stormy career, and that 
in the political confusion that prevailed in the period, he 



430 


RAJARAJA HI AND RAJENDRA III 


found it easy to set himself up as a more or less independent 
ruler and pursue a policy of his own towards the neighbour- 
ing states. He counts his regnal years from a.d. 1243 and 
inscriptions citing these years run in a series up to the thirty- 
sixth year, c. a.d. 1279, i.e., almost to the end of the period 
covered by this chapter. It is needless to follow here the 
details of his career. His conflicts with the Hoysalas and 
the Kakatlyas whose supremacy he had to acknowledge in 
the north, 59 the attack on his capital Sendamangalam deli- 
vered by Jatavarman Sundara Pandya, and the numberless 
gifts made and constructions undertaken by Kopperunjinga 
at various places in the whole area extending from Tanjore 
as far as Draksarama and Tripurantakam — these do not pro- 
perly belong to Cola history. It should, however, be noted 
that as late as a.d. 1246 and 1247 we find the officials and 
relatives of Kopperunjinga, if not the chieftain himself, 
acknowledging the overlordship of Rajaraja III. 60 Among 
the other feudatories, the Telugu-Codas, of whom something 
has been said already, may be noted first. Manumasid- 
dharasa who had the title Calukya-narayana and made a gift 
to the great Siva temple at Kanclpuram in a.d. 1218; 61 
Madhurantaka Pottappiccola Erasiddharasa, gifts from whose 
officials and relatives are recorded in Rajaraja’s inscriptions 
from Kanclpuram and Nellore between his fifth and eleventh 
regnal years; 62 Malamadevarasa and Pudoliyarasa mention- 
ed in records of the sixth and eighth years of Rajaraja from 
the Chittoor district; 63 and the great Tikka I himself who 
figures under the name Gandagopala along with his queen 
and his officials in a large number of Rajaraja’s inscriptions, 64 
are the chief among the Telugu-Codas who flourished in this 
reign. Likewise we find a number of Yadavarayas, Sambuva- 
rayas and Cediyarayas also among the feudatories, parti- 
cularly in the earlier years of the reign; it is not necessary 
to repeat the names of these chieftains which may be gathered 
by a perusal of the inscriptions of the reign; but the fact that 
so many of these well-known local dynasties continued to ac- 
knowledge the Cola overlordship till so late in the reign of 
Rajaraja is of some significance in the history of the decline and 
fall of the Cola empire. Some of the names show that 
chieftains of Bana, Vaidumba, Nulamba and Ganga extrac- 



PRESTIGE OF COLA NAME 


431 


tion were also counted among these feudatories. We have 
already mentioned Hoysala generals citing the regnal years 
of Rajaraja while recording their gifts in Kanclpuram, 
Karuvur 65 and other places. Even a Kalinga ruler Aniyanga 
Bhlmadeva Rahuta adopts this course in making an endow- 
ment in Kanclpuram in the twentieth year of Rajaraja, a.d. 
1236. 66 These facts show that the hold of the Cola empire on 
the imagination of the people was still great, even after the 
disasters brought on it by the incompetence and cowardice 
of Rajaraja III. 

Rajendra, who, as we have seen, was recognised as heir 
apparent in a.d. 1246, was an abler prince 
The position of than Rajaraja III. His inscriptions contain 
“ 1 na ' a Sanskrit prasasti which records his efforts 

to restore to the Colas at least a part of their ancient power 
and prestige which they had lost so completely owing to the 
utter incapacity of Rajaraja. For fourteen years after his 
right to the succession was recognised, Rajaraja continued to 
rule in name, but there can be little doubt that during all 
this period, and perhaps even for some years before, the 
substance of power lay in the hands of his abler colleague. 
The inscriptions of Rajaraja diminish in their number and 
range in the closing years of his reign, particularly from the 
thirty-fourth regnal year, when they are confined practically 
to the two modern districts of North Arcot and Nellore. In 
the same period, the inscriptions of Rajendra, on the other 
hand, are relatively more numerous and come from practically 
all parts of the Cola kingdom. This can hardly be an accident, 
and must be ascribed to some definite understanding by which 
the baneful effects of Rajaraja’s political incompetence were 
circumscribed. There is no evidence that Rajaraja and 
Rajendra were ever engaged in a civil war, as has sometimes 
been thought, or that there was a formal division of the 
kingdom, or finally, that Rajaraja was murdered by 
Rajendra. 67 

It may be doubted if the prasasti of Rajendra mentions 
the historical facts recorded in it in the 


The success of 
Rajendra. 


order of their occurrence, and considering 
the fact that the prasasti can be traced to 


the seventh year of Rajendra, CTa a.d. 1253, when Rajaraja was 



432 RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 

still alive, we may conclude that in a few years after he 
became heir apparent, Rajendra had gone some way to realise 
his ambitious programme of recovery. The evidence of 
Hoysala inscriptions renders it even probable that he entered 
on this task earlier than 1246. The prasasti says that Rajendra 
avenged the humiliation put upon the Cola power and that by 
his prowess he enabled Rajaraja to wear two crowns for three 
years. 68 In some redactions, the prasasti also states that 
Rajendra was expert in cutting off the crowned head of the 
Pandya, 69 while an inscription from Tripurantakam, 70 dated 
in the fifteenth year, contains the more sober claim: iruvar 
pandyar mudittalai-kondarulina. Rajendra is also said to have 
plundered the Pandya country. It is clear that Rajendra 
gained some success against the Pandyas and that the second 
crown he claims to have bestowed on the Cola ruler was the 
Pandyan crown. 71 The Pandyas had carried fire and sword 
into the Cola country twice in twenty years and had been the 
cause of the rebellion of Kopperunjinga and his imprisonment 
of Rajaraja. Rajendra’s anxiety to strike the first blow at 
them was therefore quite natural. But when did he get his 
chance, and why did the effect of his success not last for more 
than three years? And who were the two Pandyan kings who 
had to own defeat at his hands? Now it seems hardly likely 
that Rajendra achieved anything against the powerful Mara- 
varman Sundara Pandya I. But after his death, until the 
accession of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I in a.d. 1251, the 
Pandyan kingdom was held by weak rulers, and it is quite 
possible that Maravarman Sundara Pandya II (acc. 1238) was 
the king who was compelled for a time to acknowledge the 
Cola overlordship. The identity of the other Pandya, 
perhaps co-ruler with Maravarman Sundara II, remains 
obscure. We are perfectly justified in assigning these events 
to the reign of Maravarman Sundara II, because he is known 
to have been a weak ruler, and in his reign, as in the earlier 
part of the reign of Rajaraja III Cola, the influence of the 
Hoysalas on the affairs of the kingdom is visibly on the in- 
crease. 72 This may be due to the same cause, the Hoysala 
protection afforded to its ruler against the aggressions of a 
more active and powerful neighbour. Vira-Somesvara is 
called, in some Mysore records, Pavdya-kula-samraksana- 



RESULT OF HOYSALA POLICY 


433 


daksa-daksiim-bhuja, 73 (the king) whose right arm is expert 
in protecting the dynasty of the Pandyas. About the same 
time, Somesvara is said to have defeated Rajendra on the field 
of battle and to have protected him when he sought refuge. 74 
It is probably these facts that account also for some expres- 
sions found in Rajendra’s inscriptions. 75 

An inscription from Vedaranyam 76 states that in the 
twenty-fifth year of Rajaraja III, a.d. 1241, Singana Danda- 
nayaka invaded that part of the Cola country, that the inroad 
led to the cessation of worship in a temple, and that some 
time later, the temple had to be reconsecrated at a cost of 
50,000 kdsus. A duplicate inscription from Pudukkottah, 77 
dated in a.d. 1245, mentions the capture some years before of 
Kana-nadu on behalf of Vira Somesvara by his dandamyaka 
Ravi-deva. We have thus sufficient evidence to show that 
after Rajendra came on the field, there was a change in the 
part played by the Hoysalas. When the Colas showed signs 
of recovery under the energetic leadership of Rajendra and 
the Pandyas were, in their turn, somewhat weakening, the 
Hoysalas lent their support without any hesitation to the 
Pandyas, as against the Colas. The trend of Hoysala diplo- 
macy is plain. It was to keep the balance even between the 
Pandya and Cola powers, to encourage both to look to the 
Hoysalas for assistance in times of need and thus to secure for 
themselves a dominant place in the state-system of the south. 
Evidently, Rajendra was compelled to give up all claims to 
supremacy over the Pandyas after a period of three years, 
marked by some hard fighting in different areas. We have as 
yet no clear knowledge of the details. 78 

The growth of differences between Somesvara and the 
Cdlas on their Pandyan policy forced the 
Coda Tikka. latter to seek other allies for themselves. 
The Telugu-Codas of Nellore had attained considerable power 
and were ruling over an extensive territory in the Nellore, 
Chingleput and Cuddapah districts. We have seen that these 
rulers were on the whole more friendly with the Cola 
monarchs of the south and ready to acknowledge their formal 
suzerain position. Tikkanrpati alias Gandagopala 79 was the 
contemporary ruler of Nellore and there is clear literary 
evidence of his friendship with the Colas and his hostility to 
C. 55 



4 34 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


the Hoysalas. In the introductory verses to his Nirvacanottara 
Ramayanamu, Tikkana has given a fairly complete and sober 
account of the achievements of Tikka, the father of his patron 
Manmasiddha. From this account we learn that Tikka fought 
against Samburaja and other enemy mandalikas and that he 
compelled KancI, Cedimandala and the Kadavapati to 
acknowledge his supremacy. The importance of these suc- 
cesses was that they checked the predatory activities of the 
turbulent Kopperunjinga and his confederates and thereby 
strengthened the position of the Cola monarch. The presence 
of Gandagopala’s inscriptions dated about a.d. 1230 and later 80 
in Kancipuram and its neighbourhood, and the fact that many 
of them are dated in the regnal years of Rajaraja corroborate 
the statements of Tikkana Somayaji on the relations between 
Tikka and the Colas. The same poet also states expressly 
that Tikka subdued the Karoata ruler Somesvara and there- 
by easily established the Cola in his position and earned for 
himself the title Colasthapanacarya. This is again confirmed 
by a Hoysala inscription of S. 1162 (a.d. 1240) 81 which men- 
tions an expedition of Somesvara against the Gandagopala. 
Once more the date of the Hoysala record indicates that 
Rajendra’s activities for the restoration of Cola power were 
begun some years prior to his formal installation as heir- 
apparent. We thus see that the accession of a weak Pandyan 
ruler, the commencement of Rajendra’s campaign of recovery, 
the estrangement between the Colas and the Hoysalas, and 
the alliance of the Colas with the Telugu-Codas all hang 
together and constitute a revolution in the political condition 
of South India. In fact it was an age of rapid changes in the 
political map of South India. The particular phase that was 
created by the advent of Rajendra and has just been des- 
cribed furnishes, it may be noted in passing, a very good 
example in practice of the diplomatic theory of the mandala 
developed in the scholastic treatises on Hindu polity. The 
Cola kingdom is surrounded by enemies on all sides, and its 
only ally is a ruler whose territory lies beyond that of a 
neighbouring enemy. 82 


Another of Rajendra’s successes is described in his pra- 
t L ka * ast * in Phrase: the very Rama to the 

prosperous Northern Lanka celebrated for 



RAJENDRA Ill’s SUCCESS 435 

its Vira-raksasa (s) This is clearly a reference to a cam- 
paign against the Sambuvarayas, some of whom called them- 
selves Vira-raksasa and who held sway in the region of North 
Arcot. 83 Tikkana Somayaji states that Tikkanrpati undertook 
expeditions against Samburaja and other hostile marulalikcLS 
before he established himself at Kancipuram, and it is quite 
possible that in the wars he co-operated with Rajendra in the 
restoration of Cola power. 

It is thus seen that the attempts of Rajendra met with a 
considerable measure of success and that for some years, be- 
tween 1238 and 1250, the Cola power once more held its own 
against its enemies and ‘feudatoi’ies’, thanks to the loyalty and 
co-operation of the Telugu-Cddas of Nellore. The attempt 
to put down the rising power of the Pandyas necessarily 
failed; this would have been the case even if Somesvara had 
not gone to the aid of the Pandyas; for the latter had always 
been too strong for the Colas even when the Cola empire was 
in the prime of its strength; and from the time of Vikrama- 
cola, the Cola hold on the Pandya territory had been little more 
than nominal; and now the Pandyas had the added prestige 
bom of their recent successes against their quondam suze- 
rains. For the rest of it. however, Rajendra’s achievement 
is sufficient justification for his being described in his prasasti 
as the ‘restorer of the race of Manu’ and the ‘ruler who 
avenged the humiliation of the Colas.’ 

Kancipuram does not figure among the conquests of 
Rajendra and it is worth while to notice briefly the fortunes 
of the city in this period. The latest Cola 
Loss of Kanci. records traceable here appear to be dated 
about a.d. 1245 83a in the twenty-ninth year of Rajaraja III, 
and not a single record of Rajendra III is to be found in Kan- 
cipuram. On the other hand we find an inscription of Kaka- 
tlya Ganapati dated Tuesday. June 8, a.d. 1249 recording a 
large grant by one of his ministers Samanta Bhoja. 8313 There 
is an inscription from Nandalur which, in spite of many gaps, 
clearly shows that Tikka’s son, Manmasiddhi, and Ganapati 
were friends. 83 * 1 There is again a tradition that the great 
Telugu poet Tikkana secured the intercession of Gana- 
pati in the affairs of the Telugu-Coda kingdom on behalf 



436 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


of Manmasiddha when he was sought to be kept out of the 
succession. 83d We have not as yet any decisive evidence of 
the date of Ganapati’s interference, if he actually did inter- 
fere in the manner just mentioned. We may also note that 
some years later, when Jatavarman Sundara Pandya killed 
Gandagopala. i.e. Tikka. in battle and conquered the Telugu- 
Coda kingdom, he became master of Kanclpuram and Nel- 
lore 83e and put Ganapati to flight. We may therefore suppose 
that Kanclpuram had for some years become part of the 
Telugu-Coda kingdom under Tikka, that he held it in nominal 
subjection to Rajaraja III in the beginning, and to Ganapati 
later on, until the city was captured by the Pandyan invader. 
The Colas then did not long keep their hold on Kanci for which 
Kulottunga III had fought successfully in the latter part of 
his reign. With the rise of Kopperunjinga into independ- 
ence, the Cola king must have found it difficult to maintain 
his power in Kanci and acquiesced in the virtual annexation 
of the city by his ally, the Telugu-Coda ruler. 

Their differences over the Pandyan policy resulted, as 

, , x , we have seen, in hostilities between the 

Rajendra and the , , 

Hoysalas. Colas and the Hoysalas m which the former 

were aided by the Telugu-Coda Tikka I; this seems to have 
been, however, only a passing phase; the inscriptions of 
Somesvara imply the resumption of friendly relations between 
him and Rajendra, after a temporary estrangement, and this 
is confirmed by the inscriptions of Rajendra in which Hoysala 
officers figure as donors as in those of Rajaraja III. 84 This 
friendship between the Colas and the Hoysalas was continued 
up to and even beyond the death of Somesvara. Two inscrip- 
tions from Tiruccatturai 85 in the Tanjore district are of great 
significance in this regard; one of them mentions the tenth 
year of Vira Ramanatha, the successor of Somesvara in the 
southern half of the Hoysala kingdom, and records a sale of 
land effected in the twentieth year of Rajendra (a.d. 1265-6) , 
while the other couples the fifteenth year of Ramanatha with 
the twenty-fifth of Rajendra. These records attest the closest 
possible alliance between the two rulers, if not actually their 
joint rule over the territory where the inscriptions are 
found. 8 ® 



RISE OF JAT. SUNDARA PANDYA 


437 


The reason for this close alliance between the Cola and 
Hoysala is doubtless to be found in the new 
Pandyan Expan- danger from the south that threatened 
both. The accession of Jatavarman Sun- 
dara Pandya I, a.d. 1251 to the Pandyan throne brought on 
the stage one of the most famous warriors and conquerors of 
Southern India. Under him the second empire of the Pan- 
dyas attained its greatest splendour, and all the other powers 
of South India, up to the river Krsna and even beyond, felt 
the weight of his arm, the Hoysalas and the Colas being the 
first to do so. 87 The Pandyan ruler had achieved signal 
success against the Cola and the Hoysala before the seventh 
year of his reign, a.d. 1258; he had laid the Cola under tribute 
and compelled the Hoysala to seek safety by retiring to the 
Mysore plateau; and when Somesvara renewed the war, he 
was defeated and killed in a battle fought near Kannanur, 
a.d. 1264. Very soon after, he carried his arms across the 
territory of the Ka^avas and Telugu-Codas, up to Nellore 
where he held a Vlrabhiseka. When the tide of Pandyan 
power was thus rising to its full height, Rajendra III and Vira 
Ramanatha had to carry on anyhow without provoking the 
mighty conqueror and they must have been drawn more 
closely together by their common adversity. They were both 
defeated in battle about 1279 by Maravarman Kulasekhara, 
the successor of Sundara Pandya. 

Very few inscriptions of Rajendra are found outside the 
Cola country proper, and none sifter his fifteenth year, 
a.d. 1261. An inscription of the thirteenth year a.d. 1259 
from Nandalur in Cuddapah, and another dated two years 
later from Tripurantakam (Kumool) are the last traces of 
a suzerainty that had long ceased to be more than nominal. 

The latest regnal year cited in the inscriptions of Rajen- 
dra is the thirty-third, corresponding 
End of Rajendra’s roug hly to a.d. 1279. An undated inscrip- 
relgn ‘ tion from Tirukkannapuram 88 mentions a 

certain Semappillai called by the king ‘nammagan’ , ‘our son’; 
but as this description is often applied to feudatories in Cola 
inscriptions, it is doubtful if Semapillai was really a son of 
Rajendra III. 89 He also figures as a feudatory of Vira 



438 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


Pandya. A queen of Rajendra is apparently mentioned 
under the title Sola-kula-madeviyar in an inscription from 
Tiruvennainallur about a.d. 1263. 90 Rajendra apparently had 
few feudatories under him; a Sola-Gangan and a Kalappalan 
are the only names to be noted in this connection. 91 Gangai- 
konda-colapuram continued to be the capital, and God Nata- 
raja of Cidambaram the istadevata of the king. 91a 

At the close of Rajendra’s reign, the Pandyan empire 
was at the height of its prosperity and had taken the place 
of the Cola empire in the eyes of foreign observers like the 
Chinese and the Arabs. There is no evidence that Rajendra 
was followed immediately by another Cola prince, so that the 
Cola kingdom was more completely absorbed in the Pandyan 
empire than the southern kingdom ever was in the Cola 
empire in the days of its glory. The name Cola-mandalam 
long survived the Cola kingdom itself and was subsequently 
corrupted into Coromandel. Chieftains of later times some- 
times claimed descent from the Colas either through branches 
of the Telugu-Coda dynasty or more directly from the Colas 
of the Tamil country. A certain Vira Saiva Vira Pratapa 
Cola Raja with many high-sounding titles is found ruling in 
the Bangalore district in S. 1223, a.d. 1301. 92 About the same 
time Vira Coda and his son Vira Campa are found in the 
North Arcot district. 93 An otherwise unknown branch of 
Telugu-Codas is represented in the Madras Museum plates 
of Bhaktiraja dated &. 1277. 94 Very much later, in a.d. 1481 
and 1530 we find inscriptions in the island of Srirangam 
recording gifts by Valaka Kamaya and Cennaya Balaya, both 
bearing the characteristic Telugu-Coda title, Uraiyurpurava- 
radhisvara , 95 - The Colas are mentioned in the Kolinjivadi 
plates of Acyutadevaraya. 96 Among the latest references to 
chieftains of Cola extraction must be counted an interesting 
record from Kumbakonam of the grant of two villages for 
worship and offerings to Adi-Kumbhesvara by Mahamanda- 
lesvara Gururaja Rudradeva-Sola-Maharaja in §. 1476 

(a.d. 1554) 97 

1. El. viii, p. 260, Kielhom. 169 of 1942-3 couples S. 1162 (a.d. 
1240) with year 24 of Rajaraja III— ARE. 1939'40— 42 3. II 42. 

2. 409 of 1908. 



NOTES 


439 


3. 216 of 1908. 

4. Contra ARE. 1909, II, 51, 52. Rajendra is regarded by some as 
the son of Rajaraja III by Somaladevi, daughter of Hoysala Nara- 
simha II, ARE. 1936-7 II 33 and 48; also 1938-9 II 24. El. xxvii p. 194 
makes him son of Kulottunga III on very slender evidence. 

5. 116 of 1911 (n-d). 

6. 51 of 1931, 76 of 1920, 23 of 1891, 93 of 1892, etc. 

7. 125 of 1912. 

8. 120 of 1912 (Yr. 20), also from Tiruvorriyur. 

9. 321 of 1911 (Yr. 2). 

10. ARE. 1915 II 28. 

11. ibid, 142 of 1914. 

12. 504 of 1918 (Yr. 4), 392 of 1918 (Yr. 7+1). The latter is 
badly conserved and the stones on which it is engraved seem to have 
been displaced; and it is doubtful if the part containing an account of 
the conquest of ‘the great city of Ceylon’ really belongs to this prasasti: 
‘Kadaladaiyu.de korravenjilai valaiyade venrilangai mdnagar kondu’. 

13. XJlagudaiya perumaludan okka mudi kavittal 
Irdjarajan piriya velaikkdri .... Irdjarajan tiruttali 

perrudaiyal urai siranda taniyanai udandnai perrudaiyal 

puvaniyel tanaddnaiyir-purakkum- andappurap-perumdl .... 
Vanar- kula-nila-vilakku. 

14. 141 of 1926 (Yr. 16 + 1). 213 of 1925 (Yr. 19). 309 of 1927 (n-d). 

15. It is possible that EC. vi. Cm. 56 assigned to a.d. 1217 by Ven- 
katasubbaiya (ante p. 396) is really dated, as Hultzsch thinks, in 1222 
(EL vii, p. 162), and that Narasimha’s march to iSrlrangam had some- 
thing to do with these disturbances which might have been the result 
of a Pandyan invasion. Cf. ARE. 1923 II 7. If that was so, it is some- 
what strange that we hear nothing more of this invasion from either 
the Cola or the Pandyan side. 

16. 271 of 1904. 

17. Possibly the verse on the northern kings in the Atti prasasti of 
the Kadavaraya (296 of 1912) has reference to the conflict with the 
Yadavaraya. 

18. EC. ix, Kn. 87. 

19. 228 of 1929, (Yr. 10), discussed later in this chapter, p. 428. 

20. EC. xii, Tp. 42. 

21. EC. v. Cn. 211 b, (c. 1221); also vi Chikmagalur 150. In 1233 
Narasimha is said to have been Cola-nddu Pancala nelevtdinolu (EC. 
vii Ci: 52) where Pancala may stand for Paccur. 

22. 142 of 1902, EL vii. pp. 160 If. 

23. The prasasti containing these events has not been traced in any 
inscription dated before AJ). 1236, PK. p. 144 n. 3. But the date of 142 
of 1902 (a.d. 1231 — 2) and the Gadyakamdmrta show clearly that they 
occurred about 1230 — 31. 

24. A fragmentary inscription dated S. 1152, 419 of 1914, from 
Tirucculi (Rd.) mentions the defeat of Jananatha (who refused to make 

obeisance) by Sunda This may be a reference to this campaign; 

if so, Jananatha would be Rajaraja III. 



440 


RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


25. Extract by M. R. Kavi in Tirumalai Sri Venkatesvara vi, pp. 
677 — 8. See ARE. 1938-9 II 22 for details regarding the family of the 
author of the Gadyakarnamrta. 

26. 136 of 1900, El. vii, pp. 163—4. 

27. Parts of the Salem and S. Arcot districts, QJMS. ii, p. 121, n. 2. 
Narasimha also captured the women and treasures of the Magara king. 

28. This, I think is the meaning of: Kudikkalgal(um) suttum 
ahttum, rather than 'drinking channels’. Kudikkal is perhaps a variant 
of kodikkal. 

29. El. vii, p. 162. 

30. CV. ii, p. xiv. 

31. Kadavarayana kidisi Colana bidisi tandu allige meed — EC. xii, 
Gb. 95. 

31-a. 536 of 1921. 

32. 418 of 1922, El. xxiii pp. 180-1. 

33. 419 of 1893; 197 of 1905; 182 of 1919 etc. ARE. 1923 II 5—8 dis- 
cusses the Kopperunjinga problem with reference to 418 of 1922, and 
reaches the conclusions that Alagiya Slyan was different from Maha- 
rajasimha, and that the former defeated and imprisoned Rajaraja III 
twice, once in 1221-22 after Tellaru and about 1231 — 2 (Tiruvendipuram 
record). The reasons for these surprising conclusions are said to be 
two: that the Vayalur (Vailur) record calls the king, Alagiya Siyan 
and that it does not mention Sendamangalam. We are also solemnly 
assured that Maharajasimha is in his records Ksirapagadak^ina-nayaka 
and Penna-nadlnatha, ‘titles not known of Alagiya Siyan Kopperunjinga 
whose conquests extended only up to the Kaveri in the South’ (para- 
graph 8). In fact, Alagiya Siyan Kopperunjinga means Kopperunjinga, 
the son of Alagiya iliyan. The Vayalur record opens with the following 
prose passage: (1. 1) Savasti Sri Sakalabhuvana-Cakravarti Sri Kop- 
peruiijingan Solanait-tellarril (1. 2) venru sakala pariccinnamum-gondu 
Solanaic-ciraiyittu vaittuc-conadu konda A(l. 3) lagiya Siyan. It is 
seen then, that the name Kopperunjinga is given at the very outset, and 
then the king is also called Alagiya &yan, ‘the beautiful lion’ — either 
the name of the father being applied to the son or the expression being 
used merely as a title. After the mention of the name Kopperunjinga, 
the omission of Sendamangalam is immaterial. There is no reason then 
to postulate a double imprisonment of the Cola king. The Vayalur 
prasasti is said to be a composition of Sokka-Siyan (paragraph 5). In 
fact, the end reads: idu sokkac-dyan anai meaning, ‘this is by order of 
Sokka (Alagiya) Slyan (engraved).’ 

34. EC. v. Ak. 123. Mangalam is a village in the Vrddhacalam 
taluq about ten miles south-west of Sendamangalam. 

35. M. R. Kavi, ibid. 

36. EC. v. Ak. 123. 

37. QJMS, ii, p. 122. PK. p. 150. 

38. We do not know the details of these marriage alliances. Sewell’s 
statement (H1SI. p. 135) that Narasimha II gave his daughter in marriage 
to the Cola king Rajaraja HI seems to be no more than a plausible 
guess. 



NOTES 


441 


39. March 21 to April 20 — El. viii, p. 7, Kielhorn. 

39a. 192 of 1939-40, (Yr. 44) ARE. 1939 1 40-1942 1 43 II 42. 

40. 23 of 1897. 

41. 480, 481 of 1921. 

42. 393 of 1918. 

43. 112 of 1911. 

44. 244 of 1917. 

45. 279 of 1927; ARE. 1927 II 30. 

46. 506 of 1918 (Yr. 18). 

47. 228 of 1929. The name of Rajaraja does not appear in the record; 
but it is surely of his reign. ARE. 1929 II 48. 

48. Contra ARE. ibid. 

49. Ante p. 420. 

50. 349 of 1919 (Yr. 11). 

51. 408 of 1919 (Yr. 14). 

52. 404 of 1919 (Yr. 15). 

53. 369 of 1919 (Yr. 20). Other gifts by Hoysala generals: 611, 612, 
615 of 1919 (Yr. 24); 138 of 1905 (Karuvur, Yr. 24). 

54. 39 of 1920 (Yr. 20). 

55. Pd. 183 (Yr. 20). 

56. 366 of 1919. 

57. PK. pp. 158—9. 

58. Pd. 340, 341. 

59. 419-c of 1893. Ambadeva, the feudatory of the Kakatlyas, is 
called Kadavaraya-vimardaka, 173, 268 of 1905. 

60. 504 of 1902; 488-a of 1902. 

61. 8 of 1893. 

62. 363 of 1918; NI. R. 38, G. 58. 

63. 104 of 1922; 88 of 1889. 

64. ARE. passim. 

65. 138 of 1904 (Yr. 24). 

66. 445 of 1919. Also 444 of Yr. 19 (a.d. 1235) . 

67. The relations between Rajaraja III and Rajendra III have been 
much misunderstood. We have one more instance here of a tentative 
suggestion put forward by a pioneer scholar being regarded as an es- 
tablished fact and made the basis of further reconstructions. Dealing 
with 64 and 65 of 1892, two inscriptions of Rajendra of the seventh and 
eighth regnal years, Venkayya observed in 1900: ‘That there was at 
least one other Cola contemporary of VIra Somesvara is shown by two 
inscriptions in the Ranganatha temple Srlrangam (64 and 65 of 1892) 
dated during the reign of the Cola King Tribhuvana-Cakravarti Rajendra 
Cola-deva. If this Cola King was reigning during the time of Rajaraja 
III and independently of him, it may show that the decline of the Colas 
about his time was due, partly at least, to internal dissensions.’ ( ARE 
1900, paragraph 30). He also said in another connection in the same 
report: 'As both Cola-Tikka and VIra-Somesvara claim to have es- 
tablished the Cola King on his throne, and as they were fighting with 
one another, it may be assumed that they took up the cause of two 
opposing claimants to the Cola Kingdom,’ (Ibid., paragraph, 48). It 
does not need much reflection to see that either of these statements 

C. 56 



442 RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 

constitutes only one of several possible explanations of the fact cited in 
each case. Yet, all subsequent writers have just accepted these sugges- 
tions of Venkayya as settled facts, and have been rather obsessed by 
them. For, otherwise, there would not have been the attempt, noticed 
above, to maintain, on such slender evidence, that Rajaraja III and 
Rajendra III were brothers; and Krishna Sastri would have been less 
ready to give the start to the theory of Rajendra killing Rajaraja after 
securing for him two crowns for three years, ARE. 1912 II 32. The word 
dhurta in Rajendra's prasasti on which Krishna Sastri relies for this 
theory, has a variant reading drpta, and the compound in which it 
occurs must be referred to the word Pandya that follows, as was cor- 
rectly done by Gopinatha Rao in his Tamil history of the Colas, p. 114. 
It is obviously a reference to the tradition of the Randya’s expedition 
against Indra. All the statements controverted here have been sum- 
marily accepted by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, South India and her Muham- 
madan Invaders, pp. 35 — 41. 

67a. 64 of 1892. Let us note also the words: manukulameduttu neri- 
mudi sudiyaruliya in 185 of 1908 (Yr. 4). In SII. vii. Appendix A, three 
records with a short prasasti beginning pumiyum tiruvum are ascribed to 
Rajendra III; they belong in fact to the early years of Kulottunga I, 
and in two of them Parakesari should be treated as a mistake for 
Rajakesari. 

68. Cola-kula-parihhava-nirakarana vikrama-tri-varsa-dharita- 
ma kutadvaya — Rajaraja. 

69. Pdndya-mani-makuta-sirah-khandana-pandita — 420 of 1911; 515 
of 1922. 

70. 201 of 1905; for the meaning of talai-konda see above pp. 
143-4. Cf. also Pdndya-mani-makuta-jntha-pratisthita-pddaravinda of 
93 of 1897 and 515 of 1922. 

71. Krishna Sastri says : ‘the two crowns — perhaps of the 

Pandya and the Kerala’, ARE. 1912, n, 32. There is no mention of the 
Kerala except in the rhetorical claim that the Kerala and the Pandya 
held his fly-whisks: svar-vesya-sandhana-drpta (dhurta) -Pdndya- 

Kerala-vijyamanacamara-yugala. Moreover, if both the Pandyan and 
Kerala crowns were bestowed on Rajaraja, these with his own Cola 
crown, would make three, not two as stated in the prasasti. 

72. PK. p. 158. 

73. EC. v, p. xxv. 

74. EC. v. AK. 123. 

75. A Srirangam inscription of the eighth year, a.d. 1254, begins 
with the expression: Mama-Somesvara-pratikida-kdla-danda; this may 
mean either ‘the rod of death against uncle Somesvara’ or ‘the rod of 
death to the enemies of uncle Somesvara’. The same ambiguity attaches, 
though perhaps in a less measure, to the similar expression in the San- 
skrit prasasti: Karundta-raja-pratikula-kala-danda. Fortunately for us, 
another phrase in the Sanskrit prasasti settles the meaning in the sense 
that Rajendra was hostile to Somesvara himself. That expression is: 
‘giridurga malla-Vira-Sdmesvara-kar-amukta-pdda-virdbharana’, mean- 
ing: ‘on whose leg Vira-Somesvara, the (wrestler against) capturer of 
hill -forts, put on the anklet of heroes.’ It should be noted that the 



NOTES 


443 


date of these transactions can only be roughly indicated to lie between 
a.d. 1238, the accession of Maravarman Sundara II and 1253, the earliest 
known date of the prasasti of Rajendra. AK. 123 contains two dates in 
a.d. 1234 and 1236, but may have been engraved several years later; the 
dates refer to events narrated in the course of the record. 

76. 501 of 1904 (Yr. 30). 

77. Pd. 340, 341— same as 387 of 1906; ARE, 1907 II 26. 

78. It may be noted that Kopperunjinga also calls himself Pandya- 
mandala-stMpana-sutradhdra, and it is possible that he helped the 
Pandyan rulers also. 

79. 446 of 1919; ARE. 1920 II 55. 

80. 357 of 1919; 446 of 1919 and others. 

81. EC. vi, Kd. 100. Vtra Somesvara Devanu Ganda Gopalana 
mele etti nadedu. 439 of 1937-8 of aj>. 1239 (Yr. 23, Rajaraja IH) is 
said to indicate the stabbing of Narasimha II by Gandagopala, (ARE. 
1937-8, II 42). But as this contradicts Tikkana and as the inscription 
is not easy, it seems better to await clearer proof. 

82. It may be doubted if the title Cola-sthapandcarya which is 
applied to Vira Somesvara has any real historical significance and if it 
is not simply a repetition of a title actually earned by his father. On 
the other hand, Tikkana’s words are very clear about Tikkanrpati and 
deserve to be cited: 

Sambu-rajadi-prasastari- mandalikamujerci-yelade kancipuramu ] 

Cedi-mandalamu gasigajesi Kadavapati-nlyyakolupade palaca- 
munaku [| 


Kamalapta-pratimana-murti-yaguna-Kamata Somesu du- 
rdama-dorgarvamu rupu mapi nijadarpambum pratisthinei H- 
lameyin-joluni bhumipai nilipi Colasthapanacarya-na- 
mamu dakkangoni Tikkabhuvibhudu samarthyambu cellimpade j | 
Ketana, in his Dasakumaraearitra adds that Tikka levied tribute from 
the Pandya (1:16). Can it be that his troops assisted Rajendra in his 
Pandyan war? 

83. 58 of 1908 (Kulo. Ill, Yr. 17). The Northern Lanka has no 
reference to the Lankas of the Godavari delta (ARE. 1918 II 32; 1913 
II 43), but to Mavilangai, Pattuppdttu 3 p. 139, Purananuru 2 Intr. p. 61. 
83a. 352 and 566 of 1919. 

83b. IA. xxi. .pp 197 ff. Another inscription, 2 of 1893, seems to 
be the Tamil version of the same transaction and bears a date exactly 
one week earlier, the astronomical details corresponding to Tuesday, 
June 1, a.d. 1249. 

83c. 580 of 1907. yah sahayyam vidhitsuh Ganapatinrpates-svec- 
chaya samgaragre Godavaryam sariti nrpatis-carmayastya nivrtya | Ka- 
lingam svan Kalinganabhimukham-akarodekav5ras-tadanIm | | ARE. 
1908 II 75. I am unable to trace the authority for Krishna Sastri’s state- 
ment: ‘The Kakatiya king Ganapati of Warangal made a dash, just at 
this period, into the South; took KancI and was encamped on the 
island of Srirangam.’ ASI. 1909-10, p. 155. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III 


83d. Siddesvaracaritra, cited by Viresalingam, Lives of Telugu 
Poets (rev. ed.) Pt. i, pp. 89-92. 

83e. The order of expressions in his Sanskrit prasasti seems to be 
significant: Viragandagopala-vipina-dava-dahana, Kancipuravaradhis- 

vara, Ganapati-harinasardula, Nellurapura-viracita-virabhiseka. SII. iv. 
433. I am unable to share the doubts of Sewell about this expedition 
HISI. p. 155. 

84. 49 of 1913, 387 of 1903, 498 of 1902, 349 of 1919. The suggestion 
has been made (ARE. 1913 II 43) that the part taken by the officers of 
Somesvara in a local enquiry into temple affairs at Sivayam (49 of 
1913) constitutes proof that Somesvara acknowledged the sovereign 
power of Rajendra. But this is very doubtful, especially if we recall 
the number of inscriptions of Rajaraja III in which the Hoysala officials 
appear. It is reasonable to infer the existence of friendly relations bet- 
ween the two powers. 

85. 207 and 208 of 1931. 

86. ARE. 1931, II, 16. 

87. PK. pp. 160 ff. 

88. 515 of 1922. 

89. Contra. ARE. 1923. II. 45. He may be the same as Alagiya 
Seman of Pudukkottah inscrr. nos. 427-37, a Pandya feudatory from 
1257-79 who built the Sembattur and Tiruvidaiyapatti temples, (Pudu- 
kottai Manual, pp. 619-21). 

90. 427 of 1921. 

91. 194 of 1926; 202 of 1908; 339 of 1925. 

91a. 93 of 1897. 

92. EC. ix, Bn. 96. 

93. 3 of 1890; El. in, pp. 70-2. 

94. JOR. v. pp. 128 ff. 

95. 30 of 1891; 56 of 1892. 

96. Bharati. Angirasa, Sravana. 

97. 291 of 1927. Other references, rather vague, occur in Vijaya- 
nagar records— e.g. MAR. 1928, p. 51, 11. 7-8 of 44. 



Chapter XVII 


THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

In this and the succeeding chapters, an attempt is made to 
describe the state of government and society 
Introductory. ^ the Cola country from the accession of 
Vijayalaya to the downfall of the Cola empire. Such a des- 
cription must necessarily be very imperfect, as it has to be 
pieced together from scanty material, scattered over a wide 
area and as yet not fully understood. Numerous as are the 
inscriptions, the task of interpreting them can hardly be said 
to have begun, and but for the access I had, by the courtesy 
of the Archaeological Survey of India, to the unpublished 
inscriptions in the epigraphist’s office at Madras, this survey 
must have remained even more meagre than it is. The deplo- 
rable lack of a settled chronology for the indigenous litera- 
ture imposes a serious handicap on the student who seeks to 
use it in historical reconstruction. Welcome as it is, the light 
shed on South Indian affairs by foreign travellers and chro- 
niclers of this age is faint and flickering. Numismatics again 
offers us more problems than solutions; and taking the area 
and duration of Cola rule into account, we may well say that 
the number and variety of Cola coins known to-day are 
almost inconsiderable. Fortunately, we seem to be in a better 
situation with regard to the monuments of the period, and 
there is no lack of authentic and valuable material for an 
appreciation of its architecture and sculpture. For the study 
of government and social life, however, as for that of political 
history, our primary source must remain epigraphy, aided by 
a cautious use of literary material. 

The historian of India must perhaps remain a stranger 
to the bracing effects of a consciousness that his is a study 
of continuous and progressive tendencies steadily working 
for the amelioration of his fellow-men. He cannot claim that 
in any sphere of human activity, whether it be in the pro- 
duction and conservation of wealth, in the creation and deve- 
lopment of political organisation, or in devotion to the fine 



446 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

arts, or even in the pursuit of religious life and the practice 
of moral virtues, often held up as the differentia of Indian 
culture, there has been a steady advance through centuries 
towards a higher level of achievement. No country in the 
world, not even the most fortunate, has altogether escaped 
disorders and revolutions that have often rudely undone, for 
a time, the noble results of generations of civilised life and 
work. But the student of India’s past finds it hard to resist 
the impression that at some stage in her history there set in 
a rot which, spreading soon over all spheres of life, sapped 
its vitality and made for the continuous loss of her efficiency. 
Foreign domination, the ascendency of caste, the pessimistic 
outlook on life started by Buddhism and perfected by the 
Vedanta, and other causes of an equally sweeping character 
have been brought forward as the possible source of decay. 
Even the earlier phase of the history of India, in which she 
was most herself, little dominated by the foreigner though by 
no means unwilling to absorb the good that he brought into 
her ken, and giving freely of the best in her to the rest of 
Asia without the least attempt at an enforced cultural, much 
less physical, domination of the lands enriched by her gifts, — 
even this phase has often been viewed in the shadow 
of ideas generated by the decadent phase of her sub- 
sequent history. Caste was there, and with it also Buddhism 
and the philosophy of the Vedanta; none of them, nor all of 
them taken together, did anything, at one time, to sap the 
foundations of national life and achievement; and much evi- 
dence lies to hand to show that, on the contrary, these and 
other features of Indian life were the results of earnest and, 
by all human standards, not unsuccessful efforts to solve 
pressing problems of social and intellectual life in a manner 
which, however inconsistent with our modern views on these 
subjects, appears then to have worked tolerably well towards 
the promotion of mutual understanding and good-will and 
contentment in a large section of the human race. The 
history of the Cola empire belongs, on the whole, to this earlier 
and happier phase of India’s history, and we shall see that, 
in spite of much that appears primitive and even offensive to 
us, much greater things were accomplished by corporate and 
voluntary effort, a greater sense of social harmony prevailed, 
and a consciousness of active citizenship was more widespread 



NATURE OF THE MONARCHY 


447 


when the Cola kings held their sway in Southern India than 
in more recent times. 

The period covered by the following survey extends over 

„ , ... more than four centuries, circa a.d. 850-1270. 

Scope of this 

study of social Though, strictly speaking, it should embrace 
life ‘ the whole of Southern India including the 

Telugu country which was, for the bulk of the period, an 
appendage of the Cola empire, still the paucity of Cola records 
outside the Tamil country proper, and the existence of the 
records of many local dynasties in these areas which have not 
yet been as fully studied as they deserve, render it necessary 
to confine this survey primarily to the Tamil land. The history 
of the Eastern Calukyas for instance is a great chapter in the 
annals of the Telugus and their literature; it is hardly pos- 
sible to do justice to it in what is essentially a study in Tamil 
history. And what applies to the Telugu area applies also, 
though not perhaps in the same measure, to the Kerala and 
Karnata countries. Though these districts may find mention 
off and on, especially in the study of the administrative system 
of the Cola empire which embraced them all alike, the follow- 
ing account of social life makes no claim to any approach to 
fullness with regard to these areas. 


The form of government was now, as in the Sangam age, 
monarchy. But there was little in common 
Government. between the primitive and somewhat tribal 
chieftaincy of the earlier time, and the almost Byzantine 


royalty of Rajaraja and his successors with its numerous 
palaces, officials and ceremonials and its majestic display of 
the concentrated resources of an exten- 


A Byzantine 
monarchy. 


sive empire. It is inconceivable that little 
groups of roving bards with their tam- 


bourines and their danseuses could have strolled in a casual 


manner into the stately mansions of these mighty potentates 


and gaily accosted them to an hour or two of feast and song, 
as they did in an earlier age when the ‘ Crowned King ’ of 
the Cola land shared with two other crowned heads some sort 


of primacy in a land studded with petty principalities held 
by a somewhat turbulent, but not uncultured, aristocracy. 
After its recovery from the effects of the Rastrakuta inroad, 
the Cola monarchy embraced the whole of Southern India 



448 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


and extended east to west from sea to sea, while its sway 
was bounded on the north by an irregular line from some- 
where near Mangalore along the Tungabhadra and the Vengl 
frontier; for Vengi was so closely connected with the Cola 
kingdom in the period 1000 to 1150 or so, that, though its 
separate political existence continued throughout in all its 
vigour, for all practical purposes of inter-state diplomacy, it 
counted more or less as part of the Cola empire. The prin- 
cipal conquests of the Colas took place in the interval between 
the accession of Sundara Cola and that of Rajendra I, and 
mainly in the reign of the great Rajaraja. And as in his 
reign the Cola kingdom ceases to be a small state and grows 
to imperial dimensions, the monarchy undergoes a correspond- 
ing transformation, and the king may be said now to become 
‘ Emperor ’, ‘ Chakravartigal u as he is occasionally called by 
his subjects, though in his official records he is still described 
only as ‘ Udaiyar ’, and not till much later is the title ‘ Emperor 
of the Three Worlds ’ adopted or the queen mentioned along 
with the king in public documents as possessing the whole 
world. 2 Under Rajaraja also begins the system of prefacing 
the stone records of the reign with an account in set form 
of the chief occurrences of the reign. 3 This innovation may 
be said to have marked the consciousness of the change in 
the position of the monarch. Another symbol of the same 
consciousness might be found in the magnificent lithic temple 
of Rajarajesvara in Taiijavur which rose in the proportion and 
technique of its architecture as much above any other temple 
then known, as the Cola empire itself did above the earlier 
kingdoms of the south. 

Taiijavur, the Tanjore of the modern maps, was the 
Tanjapuri chosen by Vijayalaya for the seat 
The capitals. Q £ new p Qwer an( j the abode of the god- 
dess, NisumbhasudanI, that had vouchsafed him success in his 
enterprises. Though after the conquest of the Pallava 
country, KancI became a sort of subsidiary capital in which 
the kings spent part of their time, Taiijavur maintained her 
position as the chief city of the kingdom till it was eclipsed 
by the new city of Gangapuri, which with the vast tank in 
its neighbourhood, the Cola-gangam, served for many cen- 
turies to commemorate the ambition and the vanity of Raja- 
raja’s warlike son, Rajendra. We have apparently no con- 



TANJORE : PALACE AND TEMPLE 


449 


temporary account of either of these cities. From the hymns 
of Karuvurttevar celebrating the Rajarajesvara and the Gan- 
gaikondacolesvara temples in the two places, we learn only 
that Tan j ore had a fort-wall and a deep moat surrounding 
it, and nothing whatsoever concerning the other city. The 
big bazaar of Gangaikondacolapuram, and the palace S5)a- 
keralan in it are, however, mentioned in the inscriptions of 
the period, 4 besides the servants of the bathing establishment 
of the king (ti rumanja natta rvelam) attached to the palace. 5 
Palaiyaru, near Kumbakonam, which contained a temple 
called Arumolideva-Isvara after Rajaraja’s name, 6 seems to 
have contained a palace which was the favourite residence of 
Rajaraja’s sister Kundavai, and for some time of Rajaraja 
himself. A small hamlet near Palaiyaru even now preserves 
the name Sola-maligai within about four miles of the Kum- 
bakonam railway station, and a small ruined temple there is 
said still to mark the site of the ancient palace of which it 
served as the guardian angel. 7 It has been pointed out before 
that Rajendra I built a palace of huge dimensions at Madura, 
and other places like Uttaramerur also have traditions of Cola 
palaces having existed in them. 

About Tanjavur, the original capital of Vijayalaya and 
his successors, we learn more from the in- 
Tanjavur. scriptions of the period than about any other 

city. The Big Temple, the most remarkable monument of 
Rajaraja’s reign, was nearing completion about a.d. 1010; it 
is not possible to decide how long before that date its con- 
struction was begun. Though the king’s order for engraving 
on the walls of the temple his gifts to it and those from others 
was issued early in his twenty-sixth year, a.d. 1011, it seems 
hardly likely that the work of actual engraving started till 
nearly three years later. 8 Besides a number of royal palaces 
inside the city and in its vicinity, and the residence of palace- 
servants divided into a number of ve\ams , 9 we find the names 
of a large number of streets and quarters of the city men- 
tioned in the records. The big street of Virasola, the big 
bazaar of Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar, are mentioned in inscrip- 
tions of an earlier date than the reign of Rajaraja. 10 In that 
reign a distinction comes up between the inner ( ullalai ) and 
the outer ( purambadi ) city, and it seems possible that the 
Purambadi was of the nature of an extension, a new city, 
C. 57 



450 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

planned and for the most part built in the reign of Rajaraja 
himself, though the big bazaar named above had been in 
existence for some time already. 11 It is perhaps noteworthy 
that among the new streets constituted in Rajaraja’s reign 
were two running east to west, perhaps in front of the big 
temple, and known as the Northern and Southern Talicceris, 
both of them given over entirely to the occupation of four 
hundred hetaerae who were impressed into the service of the 
big temple from the various other temples of the kingdom, 
and whose names are preserved to us with the door numbers 
of the houses occupied by them. 12 We also learn incidentally 
of other temples in the city called the Jayabhima temple and 
the temple of Tanjai-mamani. And there was a hospital 
attached to a Visnu temple called after Rajaraja’s father Sun- 
dara-colavinnagaratula-salai and endowed by his sister Kun- 
davai. 13 Altogether the impression we get is that of a rich, 
well-provided and progressive city whose life was doubtless 
dominated by the temple and the court. 

The royal household comprised numerous servants of 
various descriptions including body-guards 
Royal Household. q £ sor £ S s eve ral groups of Parivaras are 
mentioned and distinguished from one another by their indi- 
vidual names formed from the surnames of the kings; 14 that 
these groups served also as body-guards is clear from their 
being described occasionally as Tirumeykdppar. The bath- 
room and kitchen establishments would seem to have been 
composed more or less exclusively of women. The palace ser- 
vants were organised into velams and settled in separate 
quarters in the cities of Tanjore and Gangaikondacolapuram; 15 
these velams were often recruited from -the men and women 
captured in war. We have to look upon this crowd of per- 
sonal servants as in the enjoyment of a fair competence in 
return for generally very light work; the status of the 
members of the velams was perhaps that of a not unpleasant 
servitude to which the less sensitive among them might have 
reconciled themselves in a short time. 

‘At state banquets’, we read in Chau Ju-kua 
on the Cola Dominion, 16 ‘both the Prince and four Court 
Ministers salaam at the foot of the throne, then the whole 
(company present) break into music, song and dancing. He 



SOCIAL EXPENDITURE 


451 


(the Prince) does not drink wine, but he eats meat, and, as 
is the native custom, dresses in cotton clothing, and eats flour- 
cakes. For his table and escort he employs “ fully a myriad 
dancing-girls, three thousand of whom are in attendance daily 
in rotation.” ’ 

Apparently each important member of the royal family 
had his own entourage of such personal attendants; this is 
seen from such expressions in the inscriptions as : ‘In the 
particular service ( tanic-cevagam ) of Udaiyar Kodandarama,’ 
‘the Satrubhayankarat-terinda-velam of Pancavan Maha- 
deviyar ’ 17 and so on. The king, his queens and their nume- 
rous relatives set the example, so generally followed by the 
official nobility, the merchants and other well-to-do classes 
of society, of erecting temples and endowing them on a liberal 
scale, and spending considerable sums of money on the recla- 
mation of land, promotion of irrigation works, maintenance 
of schools and hospitals and other useful works. In order 
to be able properly to comprehend the loving regard and 
affection which generally actuated the feelings of the people 
towards their rulers of various grades, we must take account, 
among other things, of the generous measure in which much 
that was collected from the people by way of numerous taxes, 
aids and dues was returned to them in the form of charitable 
endowments. Such endowments formed indeed an essential 
feature of national economy, and it is important to grasp the 
significance, political and social, of the lead given by the court 
in this respect. 

One circumstance worthy of some attention is the paucity 
of references to Vedic sacrifices performed by the monarchs 
of the period. The asvamedlia occurs only once and that in 

the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja. The poems 
Dana preferred 0 f the Sangam age doubtless imply that such 

t0 yajna - .1 T7 - .. , 

costly Vedic rituals were more common m 
that age. More emphasis seems to be laid in this period on 
dcina, gift, in preference to yaga, sacrifice. Occasions for such 
gifts are multiplied not only by the elaborate organisation of 
temples and worship in them, and the studied effort to group 
all social amenities round the temple as a nucleus, but by 
the newer means of obtaining religious merit enjoined on the 
rich in general, and on royalty in particular, such as the tula- 



452 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


bhdra , the hiranyagarbha and so forth. It is one of the most 
remarkable achievements of mediaeval Hinduism to have 
harnessed the religious emotions of man in the effective ser- 
vice of society. The temple and the matha flourishing on ddna 
(gifts) together with the agrdhdra. the caturvedimangalam of 
the Cola inscriptions, are the most typical expressions of this 
phase of South Indian religion. The Jain pallis and the 
Bauddha viharas also derived benefit from this general move- 
ment. 

That the Cola monarchs were staunch Saivas in their 
religious persuasion is a well established 
Raja-guru. f ac t, Saivism, like many other sectarian 

manifestations of latter-day Hinduism, required its followers 
to obtain initiation from a guru; the Cola kings no doubt 
followed this rule and there must have been in existence a 
succesion of raja-gurus during the whole period of Cola rule. 
The names of Isana Siva and Sarva Siva stand out from the 
inscriptions of the reigns of Rajaraja I and Rajendra, and 
bear testimony to the North Indian connections of the Saivism 
of the Cola Court. A guru-devar revered by the king as his 
spiritual preceptor is mentioned in an inscription of Rajad- 
hiraja I. 18 Another raja-guru is mentioned by a Mysore in- 
scription of the reign of Kulottunga I which records that the 
king followed the advice of the guru in granting a Brahmadeya 
to 108 caturvedibhattas . 19 And the position held by Udaiyar 
Svamidevar in the reign of Kulottunga III shows that the 
guru generally acted as the king’s adviser in the administra- 
tion of religious institutions; Svamidevar, for instance, disap- 
proved of certain dispositions made by the king regarding 
the conduct of worship in the temples at Tirukkadaiyur on 
the death of one of the priests; when the king came to know 
of it, he revised his orders and appointed the men recom- 
mended by Svamidevar as having a just claim to the place. 

Several temples, of the period, and often also the chief 
icons in them, were called after the ruling 
Temples as sepul- kings who established them. The worship 
chral monuments, accorded to idols called sometimes after 
living monarchs seems to have been con- 
nected with the apotheosis of royal personages after their 
demise. This practice in the form of the cult of Devaraja, 



ARMY ORGANISATION 453 

‘God-king’, was even more widespread in the Indian Archi- 
pelago and the contemporary kingdoms of the Indo-Chinese 
peninsula than in Southern India. 20 More closely allied to 
Saivism than to any other form of Hinduism, the prevalence in 
the Cola country of the notions that gave rise to the cult of 
Deva-rfSja is attested by inscriptions which mention the con- 
struction of sepulchral temples over the remains of kings and 
princes. The Adityesvara at Tondamanad erected as a paUi- 
padai to his father by Parantaka I, 21 the Arinjigai-Lsvara at 
Melpadi built by Rajaraja I likewsie to commemorate Arinjaya 
who died at Arrur, 22 and the Pancavanmadevisvara in Rama- 
nathan Koyil apparently erected by Rajendra I 23 are among 
the most conspicuous examples of this practice. The existence 
of human bones underneath the sanctum sanctorum in 
several temples has been revealed in recent times when their 
renovation was started; 24 and the growing disapproval of this 
practice in later times is shown by the attempt to erase the 
word ‘ pallipadai ’ in the inscription at Ramanathankoyil just 
referred to. 25 

An image of Sundara Cola Parantaka II is said to have 
been set up in the temple at Tanjore and 
Portrait images. arran g eme nts made for its worship by his 
daughter Kundavai who also endowed another image either 
of herself or her mother in the same place. 26 There were 
also images of Rajaraja and his queen Lokamahadevi. 27 The 
temple in the village of Sembiyanmahadevi, so called after 
the pious queen of Gandaraditya, contained an image of the 
queen, likewise regularly worshipped. 28 Inscribed images of 
a more or less authentic character supposed to represent 
Rajendra and Colamahadevi are found to-day in the temples 
of Tanjore and Kalahasti. 29 These examples are enough to 
establish the divine honours accorded to royal personages 
after death, and sometimes in their lifetime. 

The king was the head of the army and the navy. Num- 
erous regiments of the army are mentioned by their 
The Army. S p ec ifi c names in the inscriptions. One remarkable 
feature of the army brought out by these records is that each 
of these regiments had a corporate life of its own and was free 
to endow benefactions or build temples in its own name. 



454 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

Sometimes individuals still in service adopted the same course. 
And we come to know the names of these regiments and 
individuals from the records of such transactions. In fact we 
learn more of the part taken by the forces of the king in the 
civil life of the country than of the details of their military 
life and organisation. The names of over thirty regiments 
mentioned in Rajaraja’s inscriptions have been collected by 
Venkayya and the list can easily be extended to about seventy 
by adding to it names that can be drawn from the records of 
other reigns before and after Rajaraja. Each of these names 
clearly commemorated the time when the regiment was con- 
stituted, and it possibly recalled, to the minds of contempo- 
raries, the exact occasion for it; many surnames otherwise 
unknown of the kings of the period are preserved in this 
manner — Parthivasekhara, Samarakesari, Vikramasinga, Taya- 
tonga, Danatonga, Candaparakrama, Rajakuhjara and so on. 
These names of regiments constitute evidence of the gradual 
growth of the army in the early days of Cola expansion and 
to some extent also of the nature of the different sections of it. 
We hear for instance of the elephant corps ( anaiyatkal , 
kunjiramallar etc.) , the cavalry ( kudiraiccevagar ) , and several 
divisions among the infantry. The Kaikkolapperumbadtai , 30 ‘the 
great troops of kaikkolas’, included all the regiments known 
as KaikkSlar. This name has sometimes been interpreted in 
its modern meaning of ‘weavers’; 31 but the term has a more 
literal meaning in the contexts in which it occurs in the Cola 
inscriptions; it indicates ‘(a class of) men distinguished by 
the strength of their arms’, or ‘the strong men of the wings 
(of the army) ,’ that is, soldiers of the infantry division in the 
army. Then there were regiments of bowmen ( villkjal ) and 
swordsmen (valperra kaikkolar). The velaikkarar of the 
valangai (Right-hand).— we hear of Idangai (Left-hand) also 
in the Polonnaruva inscription of Vijayabahu,— were another 
large section comprising several regiments. The conjecture has 
been made that these were volunteers enlisted on particular 
occasions ( velai ) ™ This seems to be, however, wide of the 
mark. In fact, the velaikkarar were the most per- 
manent and dependable troops in the royal service, 
and their designation implies that they were ever 
ready to defend the king and his cause with their 
lives when occasion (velai) arose. This view is supported by 



ARMY TRADITION 


455 


some literary references of a somewhat later date. 33 Perhaps 
closely analogous to the velaikkdrar in organisation and pur- 
pose were the tennavaTi-dpattudavigal found in the service of 
the later Bandya kings of whom Marco Polo says that they 
kept always near the king and had great authority in the 
kingdom. 34 The distinction between Sirudanam and Perun- 
danam seems to have cut across the other divisions so far 
mentioned. Sometimes, regiments were distinguished by ter- 
ritorial names like Pandip-padai. 35 

A unique inscription from Tiruvalisvaram near Amba- 
samudram in the Tinnevelly district furnishes the military 
history of a regiment which calls itself Munrukai-Mahasenai 
(the Great Army of the Three Arms or sections) . 36 Undated 
though it is, there can be no doubt that the record belongs to 
the period of Rajaraja I and Rajendra I. In this inscription 
the Mahasenai is said to have constantly worshipped Visnu 
and Siva, to have defeated the Kannara and pursued him, to 
have killed the Gangeya, to have captured Kalmadam and 
destroyed Vilinam on the sea, to have crossed the sea on the 
other (eastern) side and razed Matottam to the ground, to 
have taken the Hill country (Malai-nadu) and routed the 
fleet ( kalamaruttu ) at Salai, to have put to flight the Vallan 
(Calukya) and captured Vanavasi and to have been praised 
in song for these achievements by the Tamil poets of Kala- 
hasti, to have also destroyed the fortress on the hill of Kucci 
and captured Uccandi (Uccangidroog) , to have inflicted a 
defeat on the Vadugas (Northerners) who opposed them, and 
dismantled the fortifications of Vatapi and done other things 
which, on account of a gap in the record, are not easy to fol- 
low. The army is also called — the residents of Pandi-nadu, 
the dauntless soldiers of the Great Army of the Three Arms. 
They took under their eternal protection the Temple of Tiru- 
valisvaram and all its belongings, including its priests and 
servants. It is evident that the campaigns in which this regi- 
ment claims to have fought with such glory were those of the 
reigns of Rajaraja and his successor. The same regiment 
again proclaims its ideals of heroism in an inscription from 
Sermadevi in a.d. 1096 37 and solemnly takes under its pro- 
tection another temple and its properties; here the regiment 
is called: ‘the several armed thousands of the great army of 
the three divisions ( kai ).’ 



456 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

The army seems to have been spread over the country 
in the form of local garrisons and in cantonments called 
kadagams. Expressions like the villigal (bowmen) of Enanal- 
lur-kadagam, 38 the troops quartered in Tiruvidaimarudil, 39 
Ivvurp-padait-talaivan (the Captain of the troops in this 
town) 40 are clear indications of the practice mentioned. After 
his southern campaigns, Kulottunga I stationed an army in 
Kottaru, and established military colonies along the road from 
the Coja country to that place. 41 A section of the army was 
posted in Madavilagam in South Arcot in the forty-sixth year 
of the same king. 42 

We can form no idea of the methods of recruitment or of 
the numbers of the troops permanently employed in the army. 
It is remarkable that many of the leadei’s ( sendpatis ) in the 
army were of Brahmin extraction and when sufficiently dis- 
tinguished bore the title Brahmadhiraja. The children born 
and bred in the velams 43 seem to have formed a normal re- 
cruiting ground for the army, though they could not have 
furnished moi’e than a small proportion in it. There is little 
evidence that the soldiers formed anything like a highly train- 
ed pi’ofessional army having little or nothing in common with 
the civil population. On the other hand, the evidence is clear 
that they were not a mere rabble beaten up for particular 
occasions with no training in the military arts and no taste 
for the field. An army which included regiments like the 
Munrukai Mahasenai with cherished traditions of their own 
could hardly have been recruited or maintained in that man- 
ner. The mention of kadagavis (cantonments) also goes to 
show that periodical training in military practice and the en- 
forcement of discipline were not altogether unknown to the 
military department of the Cola government. But there is 
much to show that the army was deeply interested in the civil 
transactions of life, and that its sections acted in many ways 
like the innumerable local corporations of a professional or 
territorial character of which we shall have to speak in detail 
later. The numerous charitable endowments made by them 
as groups and by their individual members, and the protection 
of the Tiruvallsvaram temple undertaken by the Munrukai- 
Mahasenai have already been mentioned. We find three regi- 
ments of the Kaikkolappadai of Rajaraja I 14 co-operating 
with a revenue official ( nadu vagai ) at Somur in imposing 



WAR ELEPHANTS 


457 


and realising a fine levied on the authorities of the local 
temple for their default in not organising a procession of the 
image of the goddess on the occasion of a solar eclipse. Later 
Cola inscriptions from Kudumiyamalai in the Pudukkottah 
state mention two divisions of the army interesting them- 
selves in civic affairs. In the thirty-sixth year of Kulottunga I 
(a.d. 1106) the munru-padaip-porkoyil kaikkolar and the nattup- 
padai paliyili ainnurruvar undertake to co-operate with the 
assembly of the nadu in maintaining a charitable endowment 
made in favour of the local temple. 45 Again, in the year 1213, 
the Kaikkolar mentioned above are described as stationed in 
Konadu and undertake to provide for the celebration of a 
number of festivals every year in the same temple. 46 It must 
be noted, incidentally, that the two divisions of the army 
here mentioned appear to have constituted two out of the four 
kinds of troops prescribed in the books on Indian polity — 
hereditary (maula) , mercenary ( bhrtaka ), militia (sreni ) , 
and tribal (atavi). The kaikkolar were perhaps royal troops 
receiving regular pay from the treasury; the nattuppadai was 
the popular militia, called sreni or janapada by Kautilya, and 
employed perhaps only for local defence. 47 Who the faultless 
500 ( paliyili ainnurruvar ) were and what relation they bore 
to the rest of the nattuppadai, it is not possible to say. 

Almost to the end of the period of Cola power the compo- 
sition of the army and its role in the civil life of the community 
apparently continued to remain the same as at the beginning. 
In the reign of Rajaraja III, a member of the regiment called 
Narasinga Vikkirama VIrar built a temple at Pulivay 
(Chingleput) and made some gifts to it. 48 

A Chinese author, writing in 1178, gives the following 
account of the Cola country and its army: 49 ‘This country 
is at war with the kingdoms of the West (of India ? ) . The 
government owns sixty thousand war-elephants, every one 
seven or eight feet (cubits ?) high. When fighting, these ele- 
phants carry on their backs houses, and these houses are full 
of soldiers who shoot arrows at long range, and fight with 
spears at close quarters. When victorious, the elephants are 
granted honorary names to signalize their merit, and there 
are some who bestow upon them embroidered housings and 
C. 58 



458 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


golden mangers. Every day the elephants are taken into the 
presence of the king.’ 

The idyllic view of war which makes it a joust among pro- 
fessionals interfering little with the normal 
Effects of Wars. Q £ neighbourhood gains no sup- 

port from our sources. From them war is seen 
to be a grim business of fire and sword; and, to judge 
from the inscriptions of the Colas themselves, no less than of 
their enemies, the Calukyas, life was made an intolerable 
burden for many generations to the people on either side of 
the Tungabhadra by the bitterness of warfare. Even the 
common rules of fair fighting and chivalry seem often to have 
been ignored and much wanton injury inflicted on non-com- 
batant populations, and women subjected to cruel disgrace 
and mutilation. The evidence from Ceylon and the Kamatak 
is too glaring to be set aside or glossed over. The destruction 
of temples of which Rajendra I is accused in a Calukya in- 
scription was no doubt due in part to religious differences 
and in part to cupidity; Rajendra was a 5§aiva and the temples 
were richly endowed Jaina bastis in the enemy country and 
were fair game. The amount of booty that fell into the hands 
of the Colas as a result of foreign war must have been enor- 
mous, and the Cola inscriptions make no secret of the bene- 
factions of the monarchs being often only the bestowal of 
plundered wealth on public institutions. 50 The booty cap- 
tured in war belonged to the king who disposed of it at his 
will. In his sixth year, Rajaraja I ordered that nine hundred 
sheep captured from Sippuli and Paki nddus were to be em- 
ployed in endowing ten lamps in his own name in the temple 
of Durga at Kanclpuram. 51 Again, we find an officer peti- 
tioning the king for the gift of one of the icons brought after 
the conquest of Malanad, and obtaining, as a result, an image 
of Marakatadevar which he installed at Tiruppalanam soon 
after. 52 

The ‘numberless ships’ which carried Rajendra’s troops 
The Navy across the ‘rolling sea’ to the conquest of Sri- 

Vijaya and its dependencies could not have 
come up suddenly and must be accepted as proof of a steady 
naval policy pursued by the Cola monarchs of the period. 
The early Colas of the Sangam period had a good share in 



THE COLA NAVY 


459 


the maritime trade and activity of the Indian seas. The his- 
tory of the Hindu colonies in the Malay Archipelago and 
Indo-China gives clear evidence of a steady increase, under 
the Pallavas, in the trade and culture contacts between these 
lands and the countries of South India. The Tamil inscrip- 
tion 53 of Takuapa shows that an important mercantile cor- 
poration of South India, the manigramam, had established 
itself on the opposite coast of the Bay of Bengal in the ninth 
century a.d. . The Colas only continued an ancient tradition 
in the attention they gave to developing their power on the 
sea. The conquest of Ceylon and the Maldives, and the evi- 
dence of the Chinese annals on the embassies that reached 
China in this period from the Cola country give us some 
measure of the success they attained in this direction. And 
the overthrow of the Cera fleet at Kanda;lur Salai may well 
be taken to mark the definite establishment of Cola naval 
power in this period in the territorial waters of Southern 
India. We have little direct evidence on the build of the 
ships employed. Considering that the author of the Periplus 
distinguished three types of vessels several centuries earlier 
on the Coromandel coast and that the naval expedition of 
Rajendra was a great achievement in itself, the existence of 
a well-ordered fleet comprising ships and boats of different 
grades must be admitted. The Arab merchant Sulaiman made 
several voyages between China and the Persian Gulf in the 
ninth century a.d., at a time when this long distance trade 
was being carried on very briskly. In his curious account 
of the Maldives, he says that the people of these islands ‘built 
ships and houses and executed all other works with a con- 
sumate art . >54 Sulaiman had no occasion to visit the Coro- 
mandel coast; and his voyages were made before the rise of 
the Colas of the Vijayalaya line into prominence. Taking 
into account Sulaiman’s testimony to the quality of the ships 
built in the Maldives, and the conquest of these islands ef- 
fected by Rajaraja’s fleet, we may form some idea of the 
efficiency of the C5la navy in this period. Abu Zaid Hasan, 
in the notes which he added to Sulaiman’s work about the 
beginning of the tenth century a.d., observes that the vessels 
of the Indian ocean, specially those made at Siraf, differed in 
construction from those of the Mediterranean. ‘It is a fact 
that the type of ship built by pieces of wood sewn together 



460 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


is a speciality of the builders of Siraf; the ship-builders of 
Syria and of Rum (Byzantium) nail, on the contrary, these 
pieces of wood and never sew them one to the other.’ 55 To-day 
we can see boats on the Madras coast with planks ‘sewn’ 
together by threads of cocoanut fibre. But these are usually 
of a small size; and the observations of Abu Zaid based on 
what he saw and heard at Siraf about a.d. 916 on navigation 
in the Indian ocean 56 should be no obstacle to a just estimate 
of the size and importance of the navy of the Cola empire 
more than a century later. If the Arab writers are too early, 
Marco Polo comes unfortunately too late, and we are without 
a good contemporary account of ship-building on the Coro- 
mandel coast under the Colas. Ahmad-ibn Majid, an Arab 
writer of the fifteenth century and author of several nautical 
works, makes frequent allusion to the opinions of the C5las 
which he approves or modifies. He must have had before 
him a specialised nautical literature of Tamil (Cola) origin 
which he compared with Arab documents of a like nature. 
This literature must have included geographical tables with 
indications of the latitude of ports for the use of the mariners 
of the Coromandel coast. 57 Of this technical literature men- 
tioned by this and other Arab writers, unfortunately no part 
seems to have survived. 

The king’s share in the public administration consisted 
^ £. in the issue of oral orders (tiruvayk-kelvi) 

e ng ' on representations made to him by respon- 
sible officials on particular matters requiring the personal 
attention of the sovereign; secretaries were always in atten- 
dance on such occasions and it was their duty to make a 
note of the terms of the petition made to the king and his 
orders thereon, and to transmit copies of such records to the 
authorities of the central or local administration concerned 
for necessary action. The time and place of the original 
petition, the name of the officer who presented it, and even 
the particular hall or throne where the monarch received the 
petition were often noted in reciting the order for being 
recorded in public places, usually the walls of temples. Raja- 
raja, for instance, is said in the larger Leyden grant to have 
ordered the gift of Anaimangalam to the palli (temple) of 
the Sulamani-panma-vihara while he was sitting in the hall 
to the south of his palace called Rajasraya in the outer city 



SPHERE OF GOVERNMENT 


461 


(purambadi) of Tanjavur; and the order was written out by 
a clerk, — nam solid nam olai eludum .... Amudan-firttakaran 
eluttindl . 58 Other instances may be easily gathered and some- 
times the same form is adopted in the records of the Cola- 
Pandya viceroys, who were invariably members of the royal 
family . 59 Most of these examples relate, however, to gifts 
in one form or another; though it does not seem likely that 
the method of dealing with other matters differed very much, 
the very one-sided character of the inscriptions makes it 
difficult to prove this conclusively. 

There is no definite evidence of the existence of a council 
of ministers or of other officers connected with the central 
government. A numerous and powerful bureaucracy assisted 
the king in the tasks of administration, which were those of 
controlling, supervising and regulating an existing order, 
State and changing it, if at all, only by imperceptible 

Society. steps. No government of an Indian state 

ever enjoyed in those days legislative power in the modern 
sense of the term; there was no legislature proper, nor any 
attempt at legislative control of the executive. What legis- 
lation there was took the form of declarations ( vyavasthas ) 
by local associations of sorts, meant to meet the require- 
ments of new situations as they arose. Such declarations in so 
far as they conformed to a general conception of what was 
fair and proper (Dharma) , that is in so far as they com- 
manded support from the public opinion of the class or group 
concerned, formed part of the social code, and were liable 
in the ultimate resort to be enforced by the king’s govern- 
ment. Indian Society did not commit to the care of govern- 
ment anything more than the tasks of police and justice. 
Even the adjudication of disputes among individuals and 
groups often took place without reference to the officers of 
the crown, and went up to them only in the last resort, when 
other means had failed. The essentials of social regulation 
were undertaken by numberless local groups of a hereditary 
or voluntary character, and the duty of the central govern- 
ment was only to maintain the general conditions of peace 
and security needed for these numerous social organisations 
to thrive and fulfil their several purposes. The law-codes 
( Smrtis ) and the learned ( sistas ), as well as the elders in 
each group, commanded the allegiance of these social groups 



462 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


more readily than royal mandates tha(t contravened Law 
(Dharma) and custom ( dcara ). The king was in no sense a 
law-maker; he was only the guardian of social life and laws. 


The Coja 
bureaucracy. 


In this respect the Cola government did not differ per- 
ceptibly from its contemporaries. What dis- 
tinguished it from them was the superior 
executive strength it was able to develop 
by bringing into existence a highly organised and thoroughly 
efficient bureaucracy. It saw to it, moreover, that the grow- 
ing host of officials by no means interfered with the free life 
and the initiative of local authorities and associations, while 
at the same time they controlled them efficiently and kept 
them on the straight path by a periodical scrutiny of their 
affairs. The more one reads the contemporary records, the 
more one begins to admire the nice balance struck between 
centralised control and local initiative, the clear distinction, 
ever present, between the functions of the state and those of 
the social group. The individual, as such, did not count. The 
problem of ‘the man versus the state’ never arose in a society 
that is best described as a federation of groups. 


The hierarchy of officials in the service of the king were 
in the enjoyment of titles and distinctions which marked them 
off from one another and from the rest of society. Some of 
these were titles of ancient renown like enadi, and marnyan, 
found mentioned as early as the age of the Sangam. From 
the context in which the author of the Tolhdppiyam 60 mentions 
marayam, it would seem originally to have been a military 
title indicating distinction won on the field of battle. In the 
inscriptions of this period, however, we find the title in more 
common use for designating persons in civil occupations like 
Kadigai-marayan, Vacciya-marayan and so on. We have also 

the title marasi, the feminine of m&rayan, 
Official nobility. , ,, . . . _ _ „ 

applied to the wives of the wArayans . 61 

Araiyan and peraraiyan are other titles also of quite common 
occurrence and conferred on persons distinguished in civil 
occupations like— nittapper araiyan (grand master of the 
dance). We have also the general title adigdrigal used to 
describe the higher officers in the army and in general admini- 
stration which were not differentiated from each other in 
those days as they are now. These adigdrigal often described 
themselves by the name of the ruling sovereign followed by 



BUREAUCRACY 


463 


the phrase muvendavelar and it is often impossible, as a result, 
to detect their personal names, and unless particular care is 
taken, one is apt easily to mistake one officer for another with 
similar or even identical titles. The annotator of the Takka- 
ydgapparani, writing no doubt some centuries after our period, 
gives a quaint account of the class of adigarigal, which may 
be rendered thus: ‘The adigarigal are said to have come of 

the families descended from Bhojaraja. Members of these 
families only accepted appointments as mantris . and did no 
other work. It is an improper thing that they are found 
holding the position of accountants in these days; except that 
they could not wear a crown, they are entitled to all the 
other insignia of royalty, and it is improper for them to accept 
any positions other than those of mantris.' 62 This curious 
legend shows how quickly the new class of official nobility 
that was coming up as a result of the elaboration of the Cola 
administrative system developed group-traditions of its own 
and how readily such inventions gained currency. The wives 
of the adigaris may have been called adigariccis; but we have 
obvious instances of the women in the female establishments 
of the queens bearing the title in their own right. 63 A more 
general distinction often found in the records of the period 
is that between the higher grade and lower grade of official 
nobility, so to say. The terms ‘perundaram’ and ‘sirutaram’ 
(often with ‘tanam’ written for ‘taram’) seem to imply this 
distinction more than anything else; 64 the officers and servants, 
karumigal and panimakkal , even, at times, divisions of the 
army, are mentioned as belonging to the perundanam or the 
sirudanam. 65 Sometimes an intermediate status is also im- 
plied by the term sirudanattup-perundaram to which even 
commanders of troops, servdpatis, are assigned. 68 It is also to 
be noted that not only the king, but some of his more impor- 
tant feudatories like Paluvettaraiyar Kandanmaravan, 67 and 
perhaps also other members of the royal family, employed 
officials and servants grouped in such higher and lower 
grades. The earliest mention of the perundaram in a datable 
record is in the fifth year of Maduraikonda Rajakesari, 68 c. 
a.d. 961. Eight officers of Rajaraja, of the perundaram rank, 
along with some others, were caught by the king in some act 
of cowardice or misdemeanour, and endowed lamps in the 
Tanjore temple apparently in fulfilment of vows they had 



464 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


taken to secure divine intercession against their being dis- 
graced by the king . 69 Nyayattar (judges) of both perundanam 
and sirudanam are mentioned in the reign of Rajadhiraja II . 70 

Little is known of the manner in which the officials of 
Recruitment; different grades were chosen for appoint- 
tenure. ment in the first instance and for promotion 

to higher ranks thereafter. Birth and high connection must 
have conferred some advantage at the start, though the subse- 
quent career might have depended largely upon the individual 
ability of a person, and the occasions for distinguished service 
which he got and utilised successfully. As even the succes- 
sion to the throne appears to have been determined by a 
proper regard for the individual merits of those who might 
be deemed eligible for it, and as successive kings are seen 
to have used their discretion freely and fearlessly, not hesi- 
tating to keep out the unfit and always seeking to instal as 
heir-apparent the ablest person of their own generation or the 
next, it is not a violent assumption to make that the same 
stress on ability marked the choice and encouragement of 
public servants in the king’s service. The most common 
method of remunerating officials was that of assigning to each 
according to his status a certain extent of land 71 which he 
held as his j Ivita, and regular cash payments from the public 
treasury were practically unknown. But the income from 
such assignments usually consisted of two parts, one rea- 
lised in kind and the other in cash payments. What was 
assigned in all these cases was by no means the absolute 
proprietorship of the soil which always belonged to the indi- 
vidual occupier or the village community, unless indeed their 
rights were bought out, but the rights of the central govern- 
ment to certain dues from the area so assigned 72 Such assign- 
ments often included a whole village, or even district , 73 and 
this is the reason why many officials are found described as 
possessors or leaders ( udaiyan , kildn ) 74 of particular villages 
or even nadus. It was open to the assignees to sell or other- 
wise alienate or give away in part or as a whole the rights 
assigned to them. The system was open to uncertainties and 
abuses, though perhaps effectively checked by the accurate 
record of landrights maintained by the government and by 
the public opinion of the villages themselves, ready to assert 
itself in various ways in those times. 



OFFICIALS 


The self-governing village was the unit of government. 

A number of them constituted a kurram or 
. Administrative nadu or Icdttam, as it was called in different 
divisions. ■ ' __ T1 . , 

parts of the country. What is often des- 
cribed as a taniyur (a town apart) seems to have been a big 
sized village large enough to form a kurram by itself, as is 
implied by the phrase occasionally employed in connection 
with such places — viz. tan-kuru. 75 Several examples of such 
taniyurs, in some ways analogous to the boroughs of mediae- 
val England, can be gathered from the inscriptions. 76 A 
number of kurrams made up a valanadu, often also called 
nadu in the region where the smaller division was called 
kottam viz. Tondai-nadu alias Jayangondasola-mandalam. 
Above the valanadu 77 was the mandalam or province proper, 
the largest division of administration. There were about eight 
or nine of these provinces including Ceylon, at the end of 
Rajaraja’s reign, and it does not seem likely that this number 
was ever exceeded. 78 The subordinate divisions evidently 
underwent numerous reshufflings, and their names were 
changed so often as to justify the complaint that ‘Cola 
geography came to suffer as much from the plague of 
homonyms as the kings themselves.’ 79 

The designations and functions of some of the officers of 
government as they are found in the more impor- 
tant inscriptions of the period give us a 

Offices. very good idea of the numbers and organi- 

Adnumstration. , , 7 , 

sation of the executive government of the 

day. The general terms by which such officers of all ranks 
are described are Karumigal and Pani-makkal, more or less 
corresponding to ‘officials’ and ‘servants.’ The Anbil plates of 
Sundara Cola mention a Brahmin Saciva by name Aniruddha 
whose father was a teacher who gloried in a life of learning 
and instruction, and whose grandfather was an Ahitdgni and 
a devotee of Rangesa. Aniruddha’s was a celebrated family 
of Vaisnavas from the village of Anbil. What the exact posi- 
tion of this ‘noble minister’ ( many a saciva) of the Jaimini 
sutra and the Avenika gotra was in the administration, we 
are not told. But he got from the king the title of Brahma- 
dhiraja and a perpetual grant of 10 velis of land in token of 
his regard and affection. The machinery employed for the 
execution of this order of the king is comparatively simple. 

C. 59 



466 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

The order is communicated in the form of a sn-miikham by 
the Anatti, the executive officer nominated by the king for 
the purpose, and the rest is done by the local corporations to 
whom the letter is addressed; and when the transaction is 
complete and a record of it is drawn up, it is attested by a 
number of persons who appear to be local magnates and 
describe themselves in various ways as Nattukkon, Nadu- 
kilavan, Urudaiyan and so on. It is difficult to decide if these 
witnesses were only prominent men of the neighbourhood 
or held definite posts under government. However that may 
be, the procedure followed some years later under similar 
circumstances is far more elaborate and furnishes a measure 
of the complexity of the administrative organisation that had 
grown in the interval. The larger Leyden grant and the Tiru- 
valangadu, Karandai, and Charala plates exhibit a close 
resemblance with regard to their official forms. The grant of 
Anaimangalam to the Bauddha shrine in the Cudamanivarma- 
vihara was ordered by the king on the 92nd day of the 
twenty-first year of his reign, recorded on the ninety-sixth 
day of the same year, and the execution was completed on 
the 113th day of the twenty-third year. 80 The corresponding 
dates for the grant of Palaiyantir as a devaddna recorded in 
the Tiruvalangadu plates of Rajendra I are : the 88th and 
90th days in the sixth regnal year, and 155th in the seventh 
of that monarch. 81 

We have an instance reported in an inscription 82 of 
Uttama Cola which furnishes an early example of remissness 
and neglect with regard to details, partly due to the fact that 
the system of audit and control elaborated in later times had 
not yet arrived. The village Sirriyarrur was granted as a 
devadana. and brahmadeya in the twenty-first year of Aditya I, 
apparently soon after his overthrow of Aparajita and the 
annexation of Tondaimandalam. Although a sdsana was 
drawn up in the very next year, the grant was not entered 
in the account books till the fourth year of Parantaka I or 
more than twelve years later. Again, in the 36th year of 
Parantaka I a fresh allocation was made of the dues from 
the lands (granted to the temple) for which the assembly of 
Puduppakkam was responsible; the assembly apparently 
managed to evade the enhanced assessment due from it in 



PROCEDURE IN GRANTS 467 

consequence; towards the close of Uttama Cola’s reign the 
whole subject was brought up for enquiry before the king at 
Kancipuram, the defaulters punished, and the rights of the 
temple restored. The confusion in this instance may have also 
been partly due to the disturbed state of the times following 
the Rastrakuta invasion. 83 In this instance, the complaint 
against the sabhd of Puduppakkam, is laid before a high 
official at the Court, having the title Solamuvenda-Velan, by 
the authorities of the temple; that official takes it to the 
king; 84 the king himself summons to his presence the parties 
concerned and delivers judgement after enquiry, confirming 
the old grants to the temple and the responsibility of Pudup- 
pakkam for the supply of a certain quantity of paddy and a 
fixed amount of gold, and orders the necessary entries to be 
made in the rolls. The officers present on the occasion were 
one karuvii, two naduvirukkai. who acted as anatti and 
vdykkelvi: the order was written out by an uttaramantri on 
duty (olai-eludum ) , and compared and attested by the olai- 
ndyagam: then a karumi 85 ordered the entry to be made in 
the registers ( variyilittuk-kolga ) in accordance with this 
document ( tdttu ); and then, four officers of the puravu-vari 
one of whom was an uttaramantri. one of the varippottagam, 
four mukavetti officers, three officers of the puravu-vari of 
Tondai-nadu, two of the varippottagak-kanakku. and two of 
the variyilidu were present together and made the entries in 
the official records and attested them. In the Leyden grant 
are enumerated all these stages in almost identical form, 86 
and there is one more step at the end; an officer called 
7 nandira-dlai sends a tirumugam to the nattar of the Pattinak- 
kiirram requesting them to make an aravolai (charity-deed) 
after marking off in a solemn manner the boundaries of the 
village granted, which they do in the presence of a puravu- 
vari officer. It may be observed, in passing, that this parti- 
cular grant seems to be signed by the representative officers 
of all the villages of the Pattinakkurram. The Tiruvalangadu 
plates mention also these later stages culminating in the 
drawing up of an aravolai, and further introduce the names 
of some new officers like puravuvari~tiiiaik-kalam, sl pattolai, 
kil-mugavetti , puravuvaritinaik-kalattuk-kankdni in addition 
to those already named. 



468 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

The same officers are mentioned in similar connections in 
many other records. The Tirumukkudal inscription of Vlra- 
rajendra, 88 for instance, records the following stages : the 
monarch’s oral order is written out (eluttu) by a tirumandira- 
olai, and compared ( oppu ) by the three officers called tiru- 
mandira-olainay again, before it is entered ( pugunda ) ; three 
other officers, one of them a vidaiyil adigari, order the entry 
of this in the vari, and then, six officers of the udankuttam, 
twenty-eight of the vidaiyik and four of the naduvirukkam 
cause this to be done; nine superintendents ( kan-kdni ) of the 
puravu-vari tinaik-kalam, one varippottagam, eleven muga - 
vettis, three variyilidus, two varippottagak-kanakkus, and one 
pattolai attest the entry in the vari in token of their presence 
when the order was read out and entered in the proper 
register. We are not, of course, to imagine that every order 
required the presence of such a host of officials to be put 
through; the occasion recorded in this inscription was no 
doubt an exceptional one and there were a very large number 
of details to be settled and properly recorded. In fact this 
inscription is among the longest stone inscriptions in the world. 
But most of these offices, under the same or similar names, 
survived to the end of the reigns of Rajaraja III and Rajen- 
dra m. 

With little assistance from contemporary literature in the 
elucidation of the public administration of the period, we are 
thrown almost entirely on the inscriptions themselves and 
the contexts in which the various terms cited above occur, in 
our attempt to interpret them. The term naduvirukkai lite- 
rally means ‘being in the middle’ and as it is applied to the 
vijnapti- ( vaykkelvi ) the petitioner, and the a natti the execu- 
tive officer, it seems to carry with it the notion of liaison bet- 
ween the monarch and the persons who desired to lay matters 
before him for his consideration. There is no evidence to 
show that particular officers were told off wholly for this 
purpose; on the other hand, it seems more likely that highly 
placed officials, for one reason or another, espoused the cause 
of particular persons or groups that came seeking royal inter- 
cession, and consented to act as naduvirukkai in those specific 
cases. Likewise the execution of particular orders of the king 
was entrusted specially to particular officers selected for the 
purpose. The officers of the olai seem to have been of a 



RECORDS 


469 


specialised character, and the organisation was carefully 
designed to minimise the possibilities of error in recording the 
orders. Thus the first draft of the order written by the olai 
officer 90 in immediate attendance on the king is scrutinised and 
approved by those of the olai-nayagam, 91 that is by senior 
officers conversant with the proper official form and practice, 
the custodians of official tradition, corresponding to the per- 
manent officials of a modem secretariat, who scrutinise each 
new proposal in the light of existing codes, rules and practice; 
then the olai becomes a fittu and affords the basis for further 
action, such as an entry in the permanent record books, or 
a communication to the local authorities concerned, or both. 
Such communications to local bodies were called tirumugam 
or srimukham 92 and received by the addressees often with 
great ceremony; at any rate the official formula recording 
their receipt is highly formal and deferential. The Anbil 
plates for instance contain these picturesque phrases describ- 
ing the occasion : 93 ‘Seeing the srimukham, we rose to wel- 
come it, saluted it and placed it on our heads before taking 
and reading it.’ Among the permanent records, the varip- 
pottagam and the varip-pottagak-kanakku are to be carefully 
distinguished, and they formed the most important registers 
of the Revenue administration as their names indicate. This 
is, however, not to endorse what has so often been asserted 
of all oriental governments, that they are primarily tax col- 
lecting agencies. All governments worth the name have to 
collect taxes in order to maintain themselves and the public 
activities in their charge; and there is much evidence that 
the Cola government was very mindful of its revenue. But 
the varip-pottagam was not a manual of extortion, but a care- 
fully maintained record of land-rights, based on complete 
enquiries and accurate surveys, and kept up-to-date by fresh 
entries made from time to time by a set of well trained offi- 
cials who were no strangers to the feelings of service tradition 
and loyalty to the king and state that actuate modem admini- 
strators. The varippottagak-kawakku was apparently a 
register corresponding to what we now call Demand-Collec- 
tion-Balance statements, showing clearly the position relating 
to current receipts at any time. 

The exact functions of the different grades of the officials 
named are not easy to define. The term c puravu-vari-tinaik- 



470 GOVERNMENT OF THE C6LA EMPIRE 

kalam’ occurs in so many combinations that it is very essen- 
tial to get as clear a notion of its content as possible. The 
term ‘puravu’ has the meaning of ‘cultivated land.’ 94 ‘Puravu- 
vari,’ therefore, may be equated with ‘land-tax’. The term 
‘puravu by itself is found used in the same sense in several 
inscriptions and includes obviously all payments due from 
lands in kind and in money. 95 In fact in these contexts the 
term closely resembles the modern revenue term ‘assess- 
ment’ as employed by the Indian land revenue officers. It 
may be suggested that in the expression varippottagam we 
must recognise a contraction of puravu-varippottagam, the 
second member of the compound word for land-revenue, 
puravu-vari, doing duty for the whole. If these interpretations 
are sound, the expression ‘puravu-vari-tinaik-kalam’ would 
necessarily mean the Department of land-revenue, and all 
the combinations in which this phrase is introduced must be 
interpreted accordingly. 96 We see clearly that a distinction 
was maintained between the officers concerned with the main- 
tenance of the records and those engaged in the local areas 
in the actual task of collecting revenue and carrying on the 
administration. The central office of control over the whole 
kingdom was also carefully distinguished from the local offices 
which were accountable to it, as for instance the officers in 
the Jayangondasolamandalam mentioned in the Tiruvalan- 
gadu plates. 97 There are also mentioned in different con- 
nections a fair number of kankdnis or supervisors who were 
the agents of the central department of control and audit, 
maintained as a check on the officers of the various depart- 
ments in each locality. An entry in the varip-pottagam was 
known as a variyiluLu, and it is possible that only officers 
bearing the designation varippottagam and variyilldu could 
make fresh entries in the books; and to judge from the in- 
stances furnished by the copper-plate grants, this was a most 
elaborate process requiring a considerable measure of pub- 
licity at almost every stage of it. The mugavetti of apparently 
two ranks, 98 and the pattolai were also minor officers of the 
land-revenue department, 99 of whose duties we have no 
precise knowledge. The suggestion that mugavetti is a con- 
traction of sri-muga-vetti, and that it connotes the duty of 
writing or engraving, as the case may be, of royal letters, may 
well be true. 100 



DUTIES OF REVENUE OFFICIALS 


471 


The duties of Revenue officers included, then as now, 
many other spheres besides that indicated by their designa- 
tions. They are often found regulating the receipts and ex- 
penditure of temples, or helping local authorities to do so . 101 
They audit the accounts of temples and take steps for the 
prevention of embezzlement . 102 In one instance they are 
seen, as a department of the government, purchasing land 
after paying cash to a village assembly; the purpose of the 
purchase is not clear as the inscription is incomplete . 103 They 
attest public documents of importance drawn up by local 
authorities like village sabhds, embodying their resolutions 
such as exempting lands from payments of taxes and dues , 104 
determining the status and obligations of particular groups 
of people 105 and so on. They seem to have been in the en- 
joyment of magisterial powers. In one instance they bound 
over to good behaviour the villagers of Kallur who renounced 
some temple lands they had originally undertaken to culti- 
vate, and were thereafter required not only to give up the 
lands but to undertake, on pain of being held guilty of treason, 
not to obstruct the cultivation of the lands renounced by 
them, nor to seek to re-establish their claim to them . 106 The 
inscriptions abound in extravagant oaths and asseverations; 
yet, it seems proper to infer, in this particular instance, the 
existence of a somewhat acrimonious dispute between the 
authorities of the temple of a neighbouring village and the 
residents of Kallur. The temple owned some lands in Kallur 
of which the cultivation was in the first instance entrusted to 
the people of that village; the Kallur villagers suddenly threw 
up the land and pleaded inability to continue the cultivation 
and the periodical payment to the temple of the dues thereon. 
The bond entered into by them with the revenue officers 
closed the dispute, so far as we know. A nattarasa in the 
Mysore country conducts a trial for manslaughter . 107 It may 
be observed in passing that a revenue official, an accountant, 
is stated 108 to have received a deposit of money that belonged 
to a charitable endowment in the charge of the assembly of 
Manali and agreed to pay the annual interest on it at a pre- 
scribed rate. This he must have done in his private capacity; 
but. if that be so, the example is interesting in relation to 
the personal conduct of public servants. 



472 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


In the inscriptions we come across the names of several 
other offices representing the central government in the dis- 
tricts. Of their functions we can as yet form no accurate 
idea. We can only note their names such as: sandu-vigra- 
ham, im mahamatra — ancient name, 110 nadu ( kottam ) vagai 111 
and nattuk-kandu kdtci ( sungamum karaiyum seygira ) . The 
creation of a caturvedimangalam, a tax-free brahmadeya 
granted by the king to 108 Brahmins, in the twelfth year of 
Kulottunga I, was first entered in the tax-register ( vari ) and 
then communicated to the mandalamudaliyar of Mudigonda- 
sola-mandalam where the land so given away was situated. 112 
A nadu-kuru, Adittasulamani Brahma-marayar, is mentioned 
in an inscription of about a.d. 1114 from Ennayiram; 113 pos- 
sibly, his duties were connected with the revenue survey and 
settlement of the ruidu. 

We have stated above that no clear evidence is forth- 
coming of the existence of a council of 
U . an kuttam. ministers or other officials regularly asso- 
ciated with the king in the central government of the realm. 
But the value of consultation and deliberation was emphasised 
in all ancient treatises on polity, and not even the most auto- 
cratic of monarchs felt himself free to throw away the wise 
counsels of able ministers. Some high officials of the state 
are described as of the udan-kuttam, an expression meaning 
‘the group or assemblage (ever) at hand’; the term ‘ kuttam ’ 
is often applied to the executive bodies of rural assemblies in 
the phrase kuttapperumakkal. The idea of the udan-kuttam 
then seems to be that of a body of executive officers in im- 
mediate and constant attendance on the king. Some officers 
of this rank are named in a record, 114 (from Tiruppaccur) of 
the third year of Adhirajendra; a few years earlier, six offi- 
cers of the udan-kuttam are mentioned in the Tirumukkudal 
inscription of the fifth year of Virarajendradeva 115 (a.d. 1067). 
An inscription 116 of the thirtieth regnal year of Kulottunga I 
mentions the land revenue department of the udan-kuttam 
and thus raises the presumption that each department of the 
bureaucracy was represented in this group of officers in im- 
mediate attendance on the king. If this presumption is cor- 
rect, the role of the udan-kuttam must be held to be not so 
much that of a council, as of a staff of personal assistants who 
served as liaison officers between the monarch and the regular 



JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION 


473 


bureaucracy, explained the policy laid down by the king to 
the members of the departments carrying on their work in 
the mofussil, and conveyed to the king, as occasion required, 
the actual results, in the provinces, of the policies and 
measures of government. At the same time, it would have 
been open to the king to consult any official or group of offi- 
cials on matters on which he felt the need of their advice. The 
important part played in the administration of the realm by 
this group, the nearest approach to a council of ministers that 
we are able to trace, was well recognised by Pallavarayar, 
the trusted minister, who armed himself with the consent of 
the udan-kuttam before he proceeded to instal Rajadhiraja II 
on the Cola throne . 117 

As the head of the civil administration, the king himself 
occasionally toured the country and wherever necessary car- 
ried on inquests into the local administration. The royal 
camp was usually fixed in temples and viandapas in places 
where there were no palaces. The king is also found attend- 
ing the periodical festivals in some of the bigger shrines such 
as Tiruvorxiyur, Cidambaram, Tiruvarur and Kancipuram. 
We shall see that besides the taxes collected by the central 
government, several local bodies and corporations enjoyed 
the privilege of raising tolls and octroi duties and other 
miscellaneous dues. It would seem that the exercise of these 
privileges was subject to general supervision and control 
from the centre. There is an example of such regulation in a 
royal order of the time of Rajendra II by which the right to 
raise such dues in the village of Vakkur (Bahur) is made the 
monopoly of the Vellajas who are said to have had the kdni 
of the place . 118 

Justice, like legislation, was very largely a matter of 
local concern, and minor disputes were 
settled by one or other of the corporations 
to which the disputants belonged. The village assemblies 
exercised large powers in such matters and settled, some- 
times by means of small committees of nydyattar , affairs that 
did not fall within the jurisdiction of the occupational or 
voluntary groups in the locality. The dharmasana is men- 
tioned in several inscriptions 119 as the place to which persons 
in charge of charitable endowments undertake to remit the 
fines due from them in cases of default. Though this is not 
C. 60 



474 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

quite certain, it seems most likely that the d harmasana was 
the king’s court of justice and that in deciding matters 
brought before it, the court was assisted by the presence of 
learned Brahmins versed in the law, the dharmasana-bh'ittas 
as they are called in the inscriptions. On the nature of judi- 
cial records, if any, or the details of judicial procedure, we 
learn nothing from the inscriptions; and in our extremity, 
we have to turn to the story of a mythical trial preserved in 
a literary work, written most probably in the reign of 
Kulottunga II. 

Sekkilar narrates at length how the Lord Siva, out of his 
grace, saved Sundaramurtti from falling into the miseries of 
family life by appearing before him as a Brahmin on the eve 
of his marriage and claiming him as his bondslave. In his 
ignorance, Sundaramurtti at first contests the claim; but the 
intrepid old Brahmin insists on his claim being settled 
before Sundaramurtti marries, and the dispute is taken 
before the law-court of Tiruvennai-nallur. 120 In the sabh.5- of 
learned Brahmans, the plaintiff’s case (muraippadu) is first 
stated; an objection is raised by the judges that the plaint is 
in violation of usage which forbids a Brahmin being 
enslaved under any conditions; the plaintiff answers that 
a deed of perpetual bondage on behalf of himself and his 
descendants had been executed by the grandfather of the 
defendant, and asks indignantly whether it is a proper method 
of winning a case to tear up the evidence produced by the 
opposite side which Sundaramurtti had done earlier in 
the proceedings before the parties reached the court-house; 
at this stage the judges express their approval of the old 
Brahmin’s arguments and require the defendant to state his 
plea; deeply agitated, Sundaramurtti confesses to a feeling 
of utter amazement, appeals to the personal knowledge of 
the judges that he was an adisaiva of the village, and states 
that he feels too bewildered to find an answer to the prepos- 
terous claim of the plaintiff; the judges then turn to the plain- 
tiff and require him to prove the unusual claim put forward 
by him by one of the three methods, usage (atci) , documents 
( avanam ), or the testimony of eyewitnesses (ayaldr-tangal- 
kdtci) : the plaintiff now avers that the document destroyed 
by the defendant was only a copy, and that the original deed 



JUDICIAL PROCEDURE 


was still with him and that he would produce it, if its safety 
was guaranteed by the court; the original deed is then pro- 
duced, the karanattan takes charge of the document which 
is in the form of a roll, unrolls it and reads it out; the ap- 
parent age of the document, its contents, the signatures of 
witnesses which are scrutinised and found to be regular, and 
a comparison with another document from the record office 121 
known to have been written in the hand of Sundaramurtti’s 
grandfather establish the genuineness of the deed by which 
he is seen to have pledged himself and his descendants to 
eternal slavery to the Pittan (Siva) of Tiruvennainallur, and 
this concludes the investigation. The judges at once pro- 
nounce judgment that Nambi Aruran had lost his case to the 
Brahmin sage, and that he was in fact the slave of the plain- 
tiff. What followed need not be pursued here. 

Judicial procedure could not have changed very much 
between the time say of Rajaraja I and that of Kulottunga II 
when Sekkilar composed his great Purina. In this purana 
indeed Sekkilar aimed at producing literature which should 
please and entertain the contemporary Cola monarch better 
than the vulgar works of heretical Jains. Though he was 
handling ancient themes, therefore, it is proper to assume that 
in enlarging upon the holy lives of the Saiva saints, from the 
meagre outlines preserved by his predecessors, Sekkilar 
drew upon his intimate knowledge of contemporary life to 
lend colour and verisimilitude to his narration. The trial 
scene summarised above may, therefore, be treated as a fair 
specimen of the daily occurrences in the numberless villages 
of the Cola kingdom. It is remarkable how little the pre- 
sence of the supernatural is allowed to intrude into the account 
of the trial, and how much of the trial is borne out by inscrip- 
tions known to us. The village assembly acting as a judicial 
body, the dominance of senior and learned Brahmins in the 
proceedings on such occasions, and the role of the karanattan 
are quite in keeping with what we learn on these subjects from 
other sources. The procedure adopted is on the whole simple 
and apparently not governed by any fixed rules. The dispu- 
tants state their own cases, — there is no trace of any employ- 
ment of advocates, — and the emotion or certitude with which 
they present their pleas has its effect on the mind of the 
judges. There is no hard and fast rule that every statement 



476 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


of a relevant fact in the case must be established in the course 
of the proceedings, and the judges are expected to use their 
personal knowledge of facts relevant to the case before them. 
The three lines of evidence by which facts which are chal- 
lenged may be established, the tests employed to ascertain 
the trustworthiness of a document, the only evidence pro- 
duced in this trial, clearly represent contemporary practice. 
The hint that we get, incidentally, that the village had access 
to a well-guarded record-room where documents ranging 
over a period of several years were carefully preserved may 
appear incredible but for the emphasis laid on records of 
another type in the inscriptions to which attention has been 
drawn before. The result of the trial seems to be that an 
express document can override custom however well estab- 
lished, and no reasons of public policy could stop the enforce- 
ment of a specific agreement however opposed to public 
opinion and accepted morality. But we must not press this 
inference as, in the story, the conclusion of the trial is just 
rendered tolerable by the immediate revelation of the Divine 
element in it; for the judges, strangely as it seems to us, after 
delivering judgment, want the plaintiff who has won the suit 
as a resident of the village, — he is described as Pittan (Siva) 
of Tiruvennainallur, — to show them his house and estate, 
and then the God leads them towards the temple, suddenly 
disappears, and soon after informs Sundaramurtti of the 
reason for his miraculous intervention to stop his marriage. 
We may assume that in a real trial this question of the resi- 
dence of the plaintiff would, if necessary, have been raised 
much earlier, and that an agreement in such flagrant viola- 
tion of prevalent morality would not have been so readily 
enforced. 

The distinction between civil and criminal offences was 
unknown; there are few instances where we can trace the 
conception of crime as a public wrong; one of them 122 is the 
case of two persons who stole the images, ornaments, etc. 
belonging to a temple and were punished by the confiscation 
of all their properties, which were sold publicly, the proceeds 
being remitted to the king’s treasury. This was about a.d. 
1222. Speaking generally all offences including those com- 
mitted by village officials, were tried in the first instance in 



CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 477 

village courts; in cases of dissatisfaction the matter was taken 
up to the officer of the king’s government in charge of the 
administration of the wdn. Seldom, if at all, did an appeal 
go further than that. There was a great deal of rough natural 
justice dispensed through extra-judicial channels. The sharp 
definiteness and uniformity that characterise modern methods 
of justice were unknown, and in every case, whatever the 
authority enquiring into a dispute, an effort was made to 
convince both parties that the standard of ideal justice which 
would satisfy reasonable men had been attained in the award. 
The prevalent notions about this standard were no doubt 
largely influenced by the Smrtis, and by local practice. 

Sometimes disputes especially over civil rights were al- 
lowed to drag on without a settlement until time offered a 
solution. The sabhd of Srikantha-caturvedimangalam and 
the ur of Tiruverumbiyur had a boundary dispute of rather 
long standing; and the solution was found ultimately by a 
local chieftain buying up the rights of both the parties in the 
disputed area paying prices that satisfied them both, and then 
handing over the land to the local temple as an endowment 
for the maintenance of persons singing sacred hymns to the 
accompaniment of specified musical instruments. 123 

That theft, adultery and forgery were considered serious 
offences is seen from the list of persons declared unfit for 
service on the village committees of Uttaramerur. 124 In this 
list of exclusions are mentioned also persons who had ridden 
upon donkeys, and possibly this was the form of punishment 
for some offences. Considering that most offences appear to 
have been punished only by fines, and that even man-slaughter 
and murder 125 were often punished only by the offender being 
required to maintain a perpetual lamp burning in the nearest 
temple, the code must be held to have erred on the side of 
leniency. In one instance, when a nadalvdn stabbed to death 
a commander of a regiment of bowmen, the king, Rajendra 
II, sent an order to the local village assembly that the culprit 
was to be required to endow 96 sheep for a lamp in the 
neighbouring temple. 126 In another, a woman committed 
suicide, being unable to stand the pain or the shame of an 
ordeal to which she was subjected by a village official 
for the recovery of dues which she said she was not liable 



478 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

for; the man is let off with a fine of 32 kasus imposed by a 
meeting of the people from ‘the four quarters, eighteen dis- 
tricts and various countries.’ 127 In yet another, when one 
soldier killed another, he came to an agreement with the 
relatives of the deceased and endowed a lamp in the temple 
at Karutttattangudi, near Tanjore, 128 — an instance of private 
commutation for murder. Even deliberate civil war started 
under cover of night and ending in the death of a general and 
the satl of his wife in the sixth year of the reign of Kulottunga 
was only punished by the culprit being required to endow a 
lamp; this course had the approval of Edirilisola !§ambuva- 
raya, the overlord of the dead general, and of the elders of 
the nadu ( ndttu purusar) , 128a In a solitary example from the 
Mysore country, assault and murder lead to the award of 
capital punishment by the vfittaraja of Hulimadda. 129 In a case 
of homicide due to an accident in the reign of Kulottunga II, 
the judge expressly stated that the guilty man need not die 
for his offence 130 — a recognition of the fact that homicide may 
be punished with death. In another similar instance, some 
years later in the same reign, a vellala was the offender; the 
case came up before an officer of the king’s government, he 
consulted the bhattas , and they advised him that death sen- 
tence should not be meted out to a vellala. 151 There is record- 
ed an interesting case of vicarious punishment, about 1091 132 
in the reign of Kulottunga I. A boy of six, while cutting wood 
with the sickle (arival ) , hurt another lad of seven, who died 
in consequence of the injury; the father was required to endow 
half-a-lamp in expiation of the boy’s offence. Another case 
of what appears like a penance, rather than punishment 
following an enquiry, comes from the reign of Kulottunga III; 
two men found a buffalo grazing amidst their crops in the 
fields; they belaboured the animal so severely that it died 
in consequence; they consulted the bhattas and were advised 
to endow a half-lamp in the neighbouring temple, and did 
so. 133 Another record of the same reign, from’ Kllaiyur 
(Tanjore), gives an instance of two persons who were a 
public nuisance and a source of trouble to Brahmins, vellalas 
and the temple; they were tried for rioting ( kalaham ) and 
incendiarism and together fined 1000 (casus; no one helped 
them to pay the fine, and their lands were sold to the temple 
for 1060 kasus , the extra amount of 60 kasus being 



TREASON 


479 


treated as penalty for default in the payment of the 
fine. The inscription mentions incidentally a royal order 
of a general nature that in similar cases of rioting, 
incendiarism and so on, the amount of the fine may go up to 
20,000 kasus. 133 In the sixteenth year of Kulottunga III, 
a.d. 1194, a case of misappropriation of temple property, siva- 
droha, is punished by the confiscation of the estate of the 
offender, the proceeds being handed over to the temple that 
had suffered by the offence. 134 

In the sixth year of Rajaraja II the authorities of the 
temple of Pasupatlsvara in Pandanallur (Tanjore Dt.) — the 
officiating priests called here pati pdda m/ula pattudaiya pan- 
cacaryas, the devakanmis, mahesvaras and snkaranam seyvar 
— were authorised by a separate royal order to punish thiev- 
ing Sivabrahmanas, defaulting tenants and others. 1343 This was 
perhaps a delegation of authority by government to meet a 
special exigency. In 1225 in the reign of Rajaraja III two 
inscriptions from Tirunagesvaram (Tanjore Dt.) record the 
case of two brothers and another who held the accountancy 
right in several temples and embezzled much temple pro- 
perty, took gods’ clothes for their own use, and misappro- 
priated for their own constructions bricks belonging to the 
temple; the temple authorities lodged a complaint to a high 
royal official, Pillai Yadavaraya, and the king was himself 
camping in Jayangondasola-caturvedimangalam at the time; 
on enquiry the accountants were convicted, and all their lands 
confiscated and the sale proceeds, 40,000 kasus, credited to the 
temple treasury and the accountancy-right sold to another 
for 3,000 kasus. 134b 

Offences against the person of the king or his close rela- 
tions were a class apart, and dealt with by the king himself. 
Attention has been drawn to the order of Rajaraja I requir- 
ing the confiscation of the properties of persons involved in 
the murder of his elder brother Aditya II. 135 A similar pro- 
cedure is adopted against another person for default in pay- 
ment of fines imposed on him, — the original offence is not 
recorded, — and his properties were sold in ajuakrayam, ‘Sale 
by (royal) order.’ 136 Another example of unspecified offences 
against the king being severely dealt with by heavy fines 
collected by harsh processes is the case of the Koliyak-kudai- 



480 GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 

yar (?) of Kuhur. 137 These three instances are all from the 
reign of Rajaraja I. Instances of rajadrdham became rather 
numerous towards the end, in the reign of Rajaraja III. 138 

Cattle-lifting was a common offence in several parts of 
the kingdom and was not easy to control. The gift of Man- 
galam (Salem Dt.) as a devadana was accompanied by a pro- 
clamation that the property of those who stole the cattle from 
the devaddna or otherwise caused any injury to the village 
would be forfeited to the temple a somewhat drastic decla- 
ration equalled only by the wide terms of some clauses in the 
emergency laws of modem states. Acts of mischief against 
cattle, one of the chief forms of wealth in those days, from 
robbers and by means of regular cattle-raids in the open are 
recorded in numerous inscriptions from the Pudukkottah, 
North Arcot and Mysore areas. 139 Another source of danger 
to cattle was from wild animals, and a vigorous relief sculp- 
ture on a rock at Kil-muttugur (N. Arcot) commemorates 
the heroism of a man who felled a tiger on the spot. 140 Such 
stray instances are bound always to occur; and their fewness 
on the whole strengthens the impression that during this 
period internal peace was very successfully maintained. But 
the times were rough, and people had none of the sentimental 
squeamishness about physical pain and suffering that marks 
our outlook on life to-day. 

Chau Ju-kua, the Chinese writer of the early thirteenth 
century, who has so often been cited above, has this to say 
on the Cola system of justice: 141 ‘When any one among the 
people is guilty of an offence, one of the Court Ministers 
punishes him; if the offence is light, the culprit is tied to a 
wooden frame and given fifty, seventy, or up to an hundred 
blows with a stick. Heinous crimes are punished with decapi- 
tation or by being trampled to death by an elephant.’ 


1. This expression occurs even in some records of Parantaka I (e.g. 1 
and 2 of 1898). 

2 241 of 1927; 446 of 1918. The title Konerinmaikondan (unequalled 

king) is applied to Rajaraja himself in 1. 112 of the larger Leyden 
grant. See Anbil plates 1. 124 for Konoyinmai (King in good health). 

3. 261 of 1923 and 225 of 1929 raise some doubt on this point. 
They both contain a prasasti beginning pvvi-mangai valara which is pure 



NOTES 


481 


rhetoric and gives no incident which might furnish a clue to the identity 
of the king concerned. The first describes the monarch as Parakesari 
Tribhuvanacakravartin Parantakadeva; and the other calls him Raja- 
kesari Cakravartin Parantakadeva, and both records bear the regnal 
year 9. They come respectively from Koyil-Tevarayan-pettai (Tj.) 
and Tiruvadatturai (SA). It does not seem likely that they belong 
either to Parantaka I or Parantaka II. Palaeographically, 261 of 1923 is 
earlier and may be assigned to the time of Rajaraja I, while the other 
record is much later, say 12th or even early 13th century. Ante p. 140 
and n. 1. No. 135 of 1941-2 of Kannaradeva (Yr. 25) also gives him a 
prasasti, ARE. 1939|40 — 43l3, II, 23. 

4. SII. ii 20. 102 of 1926; 182 of 1915. 

5. 510 of 1926; 121 of 1914. 

6. 157 of 1908. 

7. ARA. 1909-10, p. 16. 

8. SII. ii, Introd., pp. 14-5. 

9. Koyil, SII. ii, 1; Citrakuta palace— 73 of 1923; Purambadimaligai— 
Leyden grant 1. 116. For the Velams of Tanjore, see 241 of 1926; 226 of 
1911; 225 of 1911; SII. ii, 94 and 95; 401 of 1921: 142 of 1919 and other 
references. 

10. 49 of 1897; 241 of 1923. 

11. For names see SII. ii, 94. 

12. SII. ii, 66. 

13. 248 and 249 of 1923. 

14. SII. ii, 11. 

15. We gather about twenty names of velams from the inscriptions 
of the period from Parantaka I to Rajendra II. See, e.g . 241 of 1926; 225 
and 226 of 1911; 240 of 1894; 627 of 1909; 340 of 1927; SII. ii, 94 and 95; 
212 of 1911; 401 of 1921; 323 of 1927; 142 of 1919; 121 of 1914; 63 and 64 
of 1928. We have mention also of tadimarum kudiraiccevagar in 459 of 
1918. 

16. Chau Ju-kua, p. 95. 

17. 342 of 1907, 62 of 1928. 

18. 413 of 1902. 

19. MAR. 1917, pp. 42-4. 

20. Maspero — -h’Indochine I, p. 260. 

21. 230 of 1903. 

22. SII. iii, 16. 

23. 271 of 1927. 

24. ARA. 1915-16, p. 34. 

25. ARE. 1927, II, 13. 

26. SII. ii, 6, paragraphs 14 and 19. The latter has Tammai aga 
elundaruluvitta tirumeni. 

27. SII. ii, 38— paras 14, 17. 

28. 481 of 1925. 

29. ARE. 1925 II, 12: and 168b of 1922. Cf. Bhasa's Pratima-nStaka 
and El. xxi, pp. 4-5. 

30. 253 of 1907. 

C. 61 



482 


GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


31. S1I. ii, p. 390, n. 6; ARB. 1919, II, 10. 

32. 'SII. ii, Introd. p. 10. 

33. El. xviii, p. 334. Cf. also the tiriiccula-velaikkdrar of Punjai 
who sacrificed their lives by entering fire to attest the ownership of the 
temple in some devadana lands. (188 of 1925). See also Ibn Battuta 
Tr. by H. A. R. Gibb, (Broadway Travellers), pp. 287-8. Cf. also 
Manemagattin of the Kannada inscrr. EC. iii, My. 41, 43, 44 and Nj. 
158; viii, Sb. 91; xi, Hk. 87; etc., and Fleet at EL vi, p. 44, n. 4. 

34. PK. pp. 196-7. See also Abu Zaid’s curious account in Ferrand- 
Voyage du Marchand Arabe Sulayman, p. 114. 

35. 255 of 1911. 

36. 120 of 1905. See El. xviii, pp. 334-5 for the record from Ceylon 
mentioned above. 

37. 189 of 1895. 

38. 394 of 1921. 

39. 242 of 1907. 

40. TAS. iv, pp. 134-5. 

41. TAS. i. p. 246, SII. iii. 69, 11. 27-29. 

42. 389 of 1925. 

43. 627 of 1909, ARE. 1910, H 19. 

44. 67 of 1890. 

45. 353 of 1904. 

46. 364 of 1906. 

47. Kural 762 and Parimel-alagar thereon; Kautilya, Adhi. ix, ch. 2. 

48. 159 of 1923. 

49. Cited by Chau Ju-kua, p. 96; also p. 100, n. 8. 

50. See e.g. SII. ii, 91 and 93. 

51. 79 of 1921. 

52. 135 of 1928. 

53. JOR. vi, pp. 299 ff. 

54. Ferrand, Voyage, p. 32. Wilson, Persian Gulf, pp. 57-8 and n. 
Pelliot casts a doubt on Sulaiman’s authorship of the work attributed 
to him, T’oung Pao, xxi, pp. 401-2. 

55. Ferrand, op. cit., p. 93. See also Renadout— Ancient Accounts— 
Remark ‘E’, and Marco Polo. 

56. Ferrand- Voyage, 14. 

57. ‘Dans tous ses ouvrages nautiques, Ibn Majid fait frequemment 
allusion a V opinion des Colas qu’il approuve ou rectifie. Ce’st qu’il 
devait avoir en main les Instructions nautiques et les tables geographiques 
avec indication de la latitude des ports, utilisees par les marins du 
Coromandel et qu’il les comparait avec les documents arabes de meme 
nature.’ Ferrand, JA. 11: 14, (1919) PP . 171-2. 

58. ASSI. iv, pp. 208-9. 11. 116 and 128. 

59. 113 of 1896 ; 420 of 1925; 327 of 1916; TAS. i, pp. 164-8, etc. 

60. Porul, Purattinai sutra 8 and Dampuranar thereon who seems to 
interpret the text better than Naccinarkkiniyar. 



NOTES 


483 


6L 78A of 1895. Mardyan and peraraiyan mean the same thing as 
maharaja. Kadigai is a division of time, and Kadigai-m. time-keeper, 
while vdcciya is a derivative of vadya, musical instrument. 

62. Gloss on v. 179. The title ‘Perunambi’ is also explained here, 
and connected with the ‘Adigari’ title. 

63. 463 of 1918; 213 of 1894; 95 of 1928. 

64. ARE. 1913, II, 22. El. xviii, p. 336. 

65. 29 of 1897; SII. ii, 82-83. 

66. SII. ii, 56; 84 of 1895. 

67. 106 of 1895. 

68. 246 of 1912. 

69. SII. ii, p. 477 n. 

70. 224 of 1923. 

71. e.g. 419 of 1923. 

72. cf. Anbil plates 11. 173-4: KottottunnarpaUidu epperppattadum 
ivanukkey urxtt&vadagavum; cf. Leyden 11. 286-8; Tiruvalangadu 11. 
442-3. 

73. e.g. 68 of 1923; 177 of 1911. In the reign of Kulottunga m, 
a certain Vadugan Devan gave away a 2/3 share of his rights so assigned 
to him as stridhana (dowry) to his two daughters, (313 of 1929). 

74. In one instance a woman figures as an ur-ki latti (297 of 1901) , 

75. SII. ill, p. 3, n. 7. 

76. e.g. 129 of 1919; 259 of 1921; 167 of 1915; 90 of 1892 etc. 

77. The Leyden grant (1. 77) equates Janapada with kurram and 
Janapada~nivaha with valan&du. 

78. SII. ii, Introdn. pp. 21-9. Gangapadi came to be called Mudi- 
konda-sdlamandalam (490 of 1911). 

79. 1A. xxvi (1897), p. 144. 

80. 11. 115, 148-9, and 434. 

81. 11. 6, 62. and 517, Tamil Text. 

82. 286 of 1906 (SII. iii, 142). 

83. 330 of 1917 (Rajadhiraja 30) is an example of unusual delay 
in the execution of an order. 332 of 1916 is evidence of the same pro- 
cedure being followed by the Viceroys of the Pandya country. 

84. 11. 34-6. 

85. At this stage the Tiruvalangadu plates have five adigarigal 
(11. 485-94) and the Leyden grant apparently nine officers. (11. 138-43). 

86. 11. 129-150. 

87. 11. 49-52; 57-61; and 494. 

88. 182 of 1915. 

89. Literally ‘palm-leaf’ on which records were written. 

90. Often called tiru-mandira-dlai, clerk of the holy word. 

91. Also called tiru-mandira-olai-nayagam: nayagam means chief 
or superintendent. 

92. Also at times called niyogam (83 of 1897). 

93. 132-3. cf. Leyden— 11. 174-5. Tiruvalangadu 11. 143-4, etc. 

94. Puram 260, 1. 9 and Index, s. v. Puravu. 



484 


government of the cola empire 

95. SII. iii, 142, 11. 29, 50, 57 and El. xvii, pp. 5-6. Also S1I. ii, 
p. 386. text 1. 99; El. iv, p. 224, text 1. 19; ARE. 1920, II 4. 

96. The learned editors of the SII. have been very cautious in 

dealing with the numerous and obscure terms they have had to eluci- 
date. The expression ‘ Puravu-vari-tinik-kalattu varippottaga.-rw.ya- 
gam’ occurs in SII. ii, 88 and is rendered by Venkayya into: ‘the 

master of the rent-roll in the department ( tinaikkalam ) of taxes (levied 
from) endowments.’ He explains himself in a note by referring us 
to an inscription of Adhirajendra (SII. iii, p. 116), in which the pro- 
ceeds of devadana villages made over to a temple are appropriated 
for the expenses of the temple by the officers of the puravu-vari-tinaik- 
kalam. It seems to me, however, that like their modern counterparts, 
the officers of the land-revenue department were entrusted with many 
functions which, though not connected directly with the collection of 
revenue, they were in a position to discharge in the best manner and 
with the greatest economy of effort. I would translate the phrase in 
SII. ii, 88 into: ‘the master of the rent-roll in the department of 

land-revenue.’ 

97. 11. 120 ff. 

98. cf. Kilmugavetti in Tiruvalangadu plates, 1. 60. 

99. SII. iii, p. 139. 

100. SII. iii, p. 301, n. 1. 

101. SII. iii, 57. 

102. 183 of 1915. 

103. 135 of 1926. 

104. 2 of 1927. 

105. 274 of 1910. 

106. 630 of 1916. 

107. 497 of 1911. 

108. 142 of 1912. 

109. 2 of 1927. 

110. 539 of 1920; and 502 of 1911. cf. Woolner, Asoka Text and 
Glossary, p. 122, Divakaram II. 34; Periya Puranam Siruttonda, vv. 2 
and 3. 

111. 274 of 1910. 

112. MAR. 1917, pp. 42-4. 

113. 351 of 1917. 

114. 113 of 1930. 

115. 182 of 1915. This list is followed by the names of twenty-eight 
vidaiyil-adigarigal. 

116. 429 of 1916. 

117. 433 of 1924, cf ante. p. 357. 

118. 180 of 1919. The expression used is ‘Vakur-pattam’, 

119. SII. iii, index, s. v. Dharmdsana. 

120. Taduttatkonda-puranam — w. 51-63. See also JOR. vi, pp. 83 ff. 

121. The text is very explicit about the record room : Marundadu- 
teliva marra maraiyavaneluttal olai-yaran-daru-kappil veronralaittudan- 
oppu nokki. 

122. 308 of 1927. 



NOTES 


485 


123. 129 of 1914. 

124. 1 of 1898. 

125. Accidents in hunting parties are too numerous to mention. 
Hunting on horse-back is mentioned in 273 of 1919, (Kulottunga I, 
43rd yr.). Death caused in a duel, and as the result of an attempt to 
outrage a concubine, is similarly punished — 109 of 1895 ; 77 of 1906. 

126. 227 of 1904. 

127. 80 of 1906. 

128. 48 of 1897. 

128a. 162 of 1932-3, ARE. p. 66. II, 25 where the text of the in- 
scription is given. 

129. 497 of 1911. 

130. 64 of 1900. Also 146 of 1922-23. 

131. 200 of 1929. 

132. 223 of 1902. 

133. 110 of 1919. 80 of 1925. 

134. 189 of 1929; ARB. 1929, II, 37. 

134a. 115 of 1931-2; ARE. 1931-2, II. 16. 

134b. 70 and 71 of 1931-2; ARE. 1931-2, II, 20. 

135. 577 of 1920, ante ch. viii. 

136. 379 of 1922. 

137. 277 of 1917. 

138. Ante p. 426. 

139. 315 of 1904; 104 of 1900; 168, 169, 186 of 1921 and others. 

140. 2 of 1896; EL iv, p. 179. 

141. p. 95. 



Chapter XVIII 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

In the life of our day, the town has begun to replace the 
village as the characteristic unit. In a physi- 
village™ 16 ° f ^ ca * sense life is still largely led in the 

villages; but ideas generated in the town, 
and propagated through the town-made newspaper and an 
urban system of education, are rapidly changing the rural out- 
look, and few who have come into contact with these new 
forces are able to fit themselves into village life as it is or to 
resist the temptation to migrate to the nearest town. 

Until very recently, however, village life engrossed the 
attention of the richest as well as the most cultured Indians 
in their daily concerns. The bulk of such persons had their 
residence in the villages, and exercised a dominant influence 
in the conduct of their affairs. The encomiums bestowed on 
the ancient village-republics of India by the observant British 
Indian administrators of the early nineteenth century, though 
we may not accept them as literally true, are clear proof that, 
until then, the village continued to be the real centre of social 
life and the principal nursery of social virtues. from the 

hundreds of Cola inscriptions that have come down to us, we 
see that under the Colas the villages of Southern India were.. 
full of vigour and strength. 

The beginnings of the system of village government that 
we see in full swing under the Colas must be sought in an 
earlier age. / The Pandya and Pallava inscriptions of the 
eighth and early ninth centuries show a system, very similar, 
but not quite so developed, in operation throughout the Tamil 
country. For our purposes, it is enough to observe that an 
important inscription from Manur 1 in the Tinnevelly district 
of about a.d. 800 anticipates in several respects the better 
known inscriptions of the time of Parantaka I from Uttara- 
merur in the Chingleput district. The life and functioning 
of rural institutions, the ultimate cells that sustained national 



THE ROLE OF THE BRAHMIN 


487 


existence, were clearly little affected by dynastic wars and the 
shiftings of political power at the top. 

/ Government by means of primary assemblies comprising 
the adult males of each village was the cen- 
AssembUes tral feature of rural organisation. / Besides 

these assemblies, there were in existence 
many other groups and corporations of a social, religious or 
economic character, each interested in looking after some 
definite local institution or function. The relation between 
these groups which are found in almost every village and the 
village assembly itself is not easily expressed in terms of 
modern political thought. The village assemblies and the 
groups alike derived their authority from ancient custom and 
ideal right (Dharma) ; the moral support of public approval 
of their conduct in particular instances was in either case the 
primary sanction underlying their daily activity; in the last 
resort they could both appeal to the king’s government for 
support in so far as their behaviour conformed to the accepted 
code of moral conduct. What was right in each case depended 
on the circumstances, and on the application to them of 
enlightened reason informed by the principles of the law- 
codes (Smrti) and precedents, if any. Precisely in the 
determination of such casuistical points did the learned 
Bhattas of the time render the highest service to society. For 
to the extent to which their findings were impartial and 
convincing, and not warped by prejudice or corruption, to that 
extent was social harmony promoted and the foundations of 
orderly and peaceful development strengthened. That the 
system survived intact till the beginning of the last century 
must lead us to infer that this delicate and onerous work was 
on the whole well done by those to whom it was entrusted. 
The village assemblies and the groups were then more or less 
legally on the same footing in their relations to government 
and society. But they, in fact or even in theory, were not of 
equal importance to the life of the nation.^ The village assem- 
bly had the widest range of functions in relation to its locality, 
whereas the groups were each limited in the range of their 
operation to some specific purpose or other, such as the 
maintenance of a single temple, or the regulation of a single 
craft or trade. The village assembly had a general interest in 
everything that these groups did, and in many things besides 



488 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


that none of them attempted. Even in matters that fell 
specifically within the competence of a particular group, the 
assembly had a concurrent jurisdiction to which any one 
could appeal, if the group concerned was in default. The 
groups, as long as they did their work well, relieved the 
assembly of that work; the ultimate responsibility for local 
welfare, however, lay on the assembly. The members of the 
groups were also members of the assembly, and this fact must 
have considerably influenced their relations inter se. While 
the groups represented particular interests that might occa- 
sionally clash, the assembly looked after the general interest 
and, as a dispenser of justice, helped in adjusting rival claims 
to the satisfaction of all partiesT] Perhaps the nearest analogy 
to this complex of relations may be found in the pluralist view 
of the relation between the State and the groups, with this 
difference, that the relation here was among local bodies and 
groups functioning in limited areas and not over the entire 
national field. The national state, represented by the King’s 
government, enveloped and sustained the villages and the 
groups together. 

Before discussing the types of village assemblies and their 
working, the leading examples of the more 
Groups. limited groups may be briefly noticed. In 

speaking of these groups and of the village assemblies them- 
selves as corporations, we are to understand, not that there 
was in existence any formal system of incorporation by which 
groups attained a particular legal status, but simply that they, • 
in fact, acted like individuals, buying and selling, suing and^ 
being sued in their group capacity. JThey recognised also that • 
the continuity of their life as corporations was independent of 
their changing personnel . 2 He who runs may read from the 
inscriptions that this was the universal rule. It was simply 
assumed that there was no difference in these respects 
between an individual and a group of persons banded to- 
gether for a common purpose and well known as such in the 
neighbourhood. Such groups were organised for all sorts of 
purposes. Some were economic like the mercantile groups of ^ 
Valahjlyar, and the Manigramam, often named after the > 
locality of their domicile;— Valanjiyar of Tiruppurambiyam , 3 
Manigramam of Adittapura 4 are examples. These mercantile 



GROUPS 


489 


groups will come up for more detailed consideration in another 
connection. There were other groups, more numerous, organis- 
ed on the basis of religion. The mulaparudaiyar of different 
localities were clearly in direct charge of temples. In 
Sucindram, this body was functioning under the control of 
the local Mahasabha (assembly) from the time of Parantaka I 
to that of Rajaraja I; subsequently they threw up the manage- 
ment of the temple and restored it to the Mahasabha; and 
having done this, they dissolved themselves. 5 We see here a 
body, constituted for a specific purpose, going out of existence 
when it is no longer able to function properly; and its duties 
thenceforth devolve on the Mahasabha. The Mulaparudaiyar 
of Tiruk-kuda-mukkil are stated to be in charge of the affairs 
of the temple of Tirunagesvaram. 6 The priests attached 
to temples organised themselves into groups with many 
picturesque names. The generic name for these priestly 
groups of Saivas was Sivabrahmanas; those of Vaisnavas were 
called Vaikhanasas. Among the specific names of particular 
groups, the following may be given as examples: Aga-naligai- 
Siva-brahmanar; 7 pati-pada-mulattar, 8 tiruvunnaligaik-kanap- 
perumakkal, 9 tiru-vunnaligai-sabhai. 10 The Pan-mahesvarar 
and the Srlvaisnavas whose protection is invoked at the end 
of almost every inscription recording a gift to the temples 
were the congregations of these sects, sometimes said to be 
spread over eighteen districts ( visayam or n&du) which are 
nowhere named. 11 Satta-ganam, Kumara-ganam, Krsna- 
ganam, Kali-ganam and other such groups were in the posi- 
tion of managers and trustees of single shrines from which they 
took their names. The perilamaiydr, and the sankarap- 
padiydr 12 were other bodies connected with temples though 
their duties are obscure. There are other names of groups 
related to temples, but they need not be reproduced. There 
are also instances of local groups within a village, and pro- 
fessional groups. The villages were often divided into seris, 
streets or quarters, and the people of each seri formed a group 
for certain purposes. Uttama Cola appointed the people of 
two seris of Kancipuram to take charge of the Uragam temple 
and manage its affairs. 13 The seris of Uttaramerur formed 
the basis of representation on the executive committees of the 
village assembly in the constitution agreed to in the twelfth 
year of Parantaka I. 14 An inscription of a.d. 1103 15 from 
C. 62 



490 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


Pennadam mentions the sabhas of the seris of Mudigonda-sola- 
caturvedi-mangalam, and in another instance the seris appear 
to have been represented on the panel of members for draft- 
ing resolutions of the assembly. 16 Examples of professional 
groups are the kalanais of lias, carpenters, goldsmiths, iron- 
smiths, and washermen in Talaiccangadu (Tanjore) , 17 a nd the 
Manradik-kalanai (shepherds?) in other places. 18 Some of 
these groups apparently ranked below others and were 
designated, accordingly, kilk-kalanaigal. 13 

In 1077, at Cebrolu 20 an endowment of some lamps in the 
local temple was placed under the permanent protection of 
the Sthanapati, and the three hundred ayyalu and the three 
hundred s&nulu of the place. At Kamarasavalli, a body called 
the Seven-hundred-and-fifty took charge in 1096 21 of an 
endowment which involved the periodical collection of speci- 
fied contributions and the maintenance, with the proceeds, of 
the worship and specified festivals in the temple. The ‘citti- 
ramelipperiya-nadu of the seventy-nine nadus’ act as judges 
in a case of accidental homicide during a hunting party at 
Jambai in the third year of Kulottunga II . 22 The Araiyar of 
the locality undertake the protection of a charitable endow- 
ment in Kunnandarkoyil (Pudukottah) in the second year 
of Rajaraja II. 23 The bhattar, periyauatt&r and pannAtfdr 
prescribe the prdyascitta . penance or expiation, for an acci- 
dental homicide at Olakkur (South Arcot) in the fourth 
regnal year of Rajadhiraja II, 24 _ a function which was per- 
formed some years later by the panuattdr alone at Velur in 
the same region 25 In the nineteenth year of Kulottunga III, 
the periya-nattu-visay attar of twelve nadus gave some land 
as tiruvidahjdttam to a temple in Nellore! 26 In the same year 
a body called devaddna-nattavar present a petition to Kulot- 
tunga III at Tiruvor r iyur regarding the condition of a dev a- 
daiia village. 27 In the twentieth year of Kulottunga III the 
sthanattar of the temple, the Rudra-mahesvaras, and the ’four 
ami les \v o acted as guardians of the temple ( innayandr 
kapparana ndlu kudyilom) accepted an endowment from a 
devaradiyal of the temple of Tirumananjeri-udaiya-nayanar 26 
Twelve years later, the authorities of the VLsnu temple at 
Tirukkoyilur recovered from a certain Arattamukkidasan ten 
cows entrusted to his grandfather many years before; evi- 



INTER-GROUP RELATIONS 491 

dently the terms of the original endowment had suffered 
neglect. 29 The mahesvaras were present with the sabhd of 
Tirunaraiyur and the nadu of Kuldttungasola-perilamainadu, 
when they enquired into and adjudged a case of longstanding 
misappropriation of the livestock belonging to a temple. 30 
This was in 1218. At Muniyur in the Tanjore district, a hign 
official of the central government, the niyayattar of tne town, 
the executive committee (of the ur) comprising nine persons 
and the trustees of the temple ( t&nattar ) co-operated in 
engraving on the temple walls the title deeds of the temple 
relating to its iraiyili lands, as the deeds were in danger of 
being lost by decay. 31 The mahesvaras of Tirukkalar, Tanjore 
district, decided in 1234 that descendants in the female line 
could be held responsible for the performance of duties 
undertaken by their ancestors in accordance with the terms 
of a charitable endowment, and that they should continue to 
pay interest on money invested with the family. 32 These ins- 
tances illustrate the variety of local corporations and the 
wide range of their interests and activities. We are not yet 
in a position, however, to determine the composition and 
mutual relations of these bodies as closely as may be desired. 

Social life was dominated by these innumerable groups, 
and the individual did not lack opportuni- 
Group relations. tieg f or se lf-expression. By birth, residence 
and occupation, and sometimes by choice, he was a member 
of one or more of these corporate bodies, each devoted to a 
specific local purpose. Mutual adjustment among these groups 
was largely a matter of good-will. We do not come across 
many instances of intercession by government or by private 
parties for the regulation of group-relations. And there is no 
evidence in the works of the jurists that speculation on this 
fascinating aspect of jurisprudence ever advanced far in India. 
If these groups had acted in the spirit of enforcing their rights 
strictly and straining them to their utmost limits, the relations 
among them would easily have become too complicated to 
be settled without the aid of an intricate and nicely thought 
out system of positive law. The groups were there all over 
the land for several generations; but they did not give rise to 
any attempt at a precise definition of their rights and relations. 
Much must have been left to the play of good-will on all 
sides. 



492 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


Of the village assemblies proper, we notice two types 
distinguished by the names Ur and Sabha. A third kind of 
local assembly was the Nagaram confined to 
Assemblies mercantile towns. All of them were pri- 

mary assemblies of the residents of the loca- 
lities concerned, and, generally speaking, regulated all their 
common concerns. They were subject to general supervision, 
in particular a periodical audit of their financial transactions, 
by the officials of the king’s government. Otherwise, they 
were left to themselves. When important business was trans- 
acted by these assemblies, such as a change in their consti- 
tutional procedure or an alteration of land-rights affecting 
the revenues of government, their meetings were attended 
by the officers of the central government . 33 How much their 
presence influenced the proceedings it is not easy to deter- 
mine. In some places, large temples were regularly managed 
by officials who also attended the meetings of the assembly, 
where the affairs of the temple came up for consideration . 34 
Important matters were sometimes taken up to the king for 
his decision; two inscriptions of the reign of Kulottunga I 
from Tribhuvani show him regulating the enjoyment of a 
Kani and laying down a scheme for the promotion of areca 
plantations at Tribhuvani . 35 

The Ur was the simplest type of these assemblies. This 

Cr word means ‘village’ or ‘town’; it is employed 

also in the sense of the assembly of the Ur; 
this becomes clear from the phrase ‘uray-isainda-urom’ , 
meaning ‘residents of the village met as ur / which occurs in 
some records; and from the Ur ordering, like the sabha, the 
drafting and engraving or records by its agents . 36 The Ur 
functioned in several places alongside of the sabha.™ acting 
by itself or jointly with the sabha according as the’ business 
on hand required. On the other hand, the Ur was the only 
assembly in other places. 

The Sabha constitutes the type of which we get the 
Sabha m ° St detaile< l accounts in the inscriptions. 

It is invariably an assembly associated with 
the Brahmin village.— the Caturvedi-mangalam. Many of 
these agraharas or mangalams were created by royal grants. 
Faith in the unique merit of the gift of land ( bhii-dana ) was 



SABHA AND UR 


493 


very common and frequently acted on by those who could 
afford it. Thus it came about that new colonies of pious and 
learned Brahmins were settled in the different parts of the 
country and gained control of local affairs through the Sabha. 
and its executive. 

The Sabha and the Ur co-existed in places where a new 
settlement of Brahmins was super-imposed 
Their relation. Qn a more anc i en t community by the consti- 
tution of a mangalam. In almost every place, the advent of 
the new class of settlers must have been welcomed for many 
reasons. Often the land had to be purchased from its previous 
owners, individuals or communities, before being made over 
by the king or the noble to the donees who were to form the 
new mangalam, and this resulted in a rise in land-values; at 
any rate, it put the members of the ur in possession of much 
cash that they could put to good use. If the land sold had 
been common property, as it sometimes was, the proceeds 
were used in financing projects of public utility. Then the 
coming in of a group of persons, conspicuous for their learning 
and character, benefited the people by bringing them into 
touch with the best and highest culture available at the time, 
and giving them a class of natural leaders to whom they 
could turn for advice and guidance in their difficulties. The 
common people continued to meet as the ur and carry on 
their affairs as before; the newcomers formed themselves into 
a sabha of the usual type. Such, in outline, is the course of 
affairs one is led to postulate from the inscriptions of the 
period. 

Sometimes one village was organised as two ur-assem- 
blies for similar reasons. About a.d. 1227, the village of 
6attamangalam had two assemblies, one of them made up of 
the residents of the Hindu devad&na part of the village, and 
the other of persons in the Jaina palliccandam; both assem- 
blies were called ur and they co-operated in setting apart some 
of the village land for a tank and flower-garden, and making 
the land tax-free, by themselves undertaking to pay the taxes 
and dues thereon. 38 Similarly we find the constitution of a 
double-fir in two other villages, Kumara-mangalam and 
Amankudi in Urattur-kurram in the modem ‘Pudukkottah 
State’, about a.d. 1245. 39 



494 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


Of the exact composition of the ur we have no direct 
knowledge. From the general expression 
Constitution and employed urom, we must infer that the 
working of Ur. meet j n g was attended by all the residents of 
the ur, though the leading part in the deliberations would 
have been taken by the elders. The ur had an executive body 
called ‘alunganam’ ‘the ruling group’, a term which is some- 
times shortened into ‘ganam, or expanded into ‘nu-ydlun- 
ganam'. i0 The numerical strength of this executive and the 
manner of its appointment are not known. We also find the 
term ‘ur-alvdrgal’ which is doubtless another way of describ- 
ing the ‘alunganam’ , 41 Some of the sabhds also appear to 
have had this form of a simple executive which was respon- 
sible to them for all matters; 42 for we find the names of Bhat- 
tas (learned Brahmins) among the members of some of the 
ganams. Another explanation may, however, be offered for 
this feature; the bhattas who were members of the alunganam 
might have, in fact, been the executive members of the iir. 
In other words, they might have formed part of the original 
village and continued to do so, even after the constitution of 
a mangalam with its sabha in the same place. 


An inscription of a.d. 1220 from Muniyur 43 mentions the 
tandal and niydyattar of the ur besides nine persons whose 
names are preceded by the phrase: iirkkuc-camaindapadi, 
which may signify either that they represented the general 
assembly of the iir on the particular occasion or that they 
formed the executive of the ttr-assembly for the time being. 

As a rule the Sabha had a more complex machinery of 
local administration and functioned very 
and of Sabha. i arge j y through its committees called the 
‘Variyams’. The exact meaning of ‘Variyam’, perhaps a Tamil 
word, is somewhat obscure; a connection with ‘Vari’, ‘income’ 
in Tamil, ‘rigorous demand’ in Kannada, 44 may be suggested. It 
is equally possible that variyam is a Tamilised Sanskrit word, 
vdrya, meaning ‘selected’ or ‘chosen’; in fact one inscription 
. employs the expressions ‘ varanam seydaV 
tor the act of choosmg, and varanam for 
the executive body of the sabha* s And the term ‘ v&riyar ’ , 
denotes persons employed by the Sabha in specified duties. I 
When the Mulaparudai or Sucindrum ceased to manage the^ 
local temple, the sabha appointed two vdriyar to do this work 



VARIYAMS 


495 


on their behalf. And the Pandya inscription at Manur, to 
which reference has already been made, lays down that no 
kind of * variyam ’ was to be entrusted to persons who did not 
possess certain qualifications. The early history of the vari- 
yam is very obscure. But enough evidence remains to show 
that the systematic employment of committees for executive 
work in rural administration was the result of a fairly long 
period of experiment, trial and error. In the earlier stages 
such work may have been done by individuals or very small 
groups. What looks very much like an ad hoc variyam for a 
specified temporary purpose is mentioned in an inscription 
from Srinivasanallur; 46 its precise date cannot be determined 
as the ruling king is described in it only by the title Raja- 
kesari, but there is little doubt that it is an early Cola inscrip- 
tion. This variyam is appointed, not by the territorial sabha, 
but by the mulaparudai of Mahendramangalam in charge of 
the local temple; and the duty entrusted to the variyam was 
to describe authoritatively and record the extent of the iraiyili 
devadana lands of the temple. There must have been several 
other instances of similar special variyams appointed for 
specific purposes. Whether the experience gathered from 
such experiments led to the growth and spread of the system 
of variyams in local administration, or whether the machinery 
of committees evolved by the sabha in its active working was 
adapted by the other corporations, cannot now be decided. 
A nila-variyan of Tirukkadaiyur is mentioned as late as 1194, 
and he was doubtless an official under the sabha.* 1 The mem- 
bers of the executive committees of the sabhus were generally 
called ‘variyappenimakkal’. 48 

1 The number and descriptions of the variyams differed in 
different sabhas, as also the method of their appointment. 
The best known example of the constitution of such variyams 
is that of the sabha of Uttaramerur, a village still flourishing 
under that very name in the Chingleput district and pre- 
serving many interesting vestiges of its past glory. The large 
irrigation tank within a couple of miles to the west of the 
neatly planned village is doubtless the celebrated Vairame- 
gha-tataka of the Pallava and Cola inscriptions in Uttara- 
merur, a tank which occupied much of the attention of the 
Uttaramerur sa bhd in those days and was placed under 
the management of a special Tank com- 



496 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


mittee (the eri-variyam) . In the twelfth year of Paran- 
taka I, 49 a.d. 919, the sabhd adopted a resolution fixing the 
method of appointment to its executive committees, of which 
five were named. This resolution ( vyavasthd ) was taken in 
the presence of the official of the king’s government specially 
deputed for the purpose by a royal order ( sri-mukham ) . The 
central object of the arrangement adopted was to secure on 
the committees a fair representation not only for the thirty 
kudumbus (wards) into which the whole village was divided, 
but for the twelve seris (streets) into which the wards were 
grouped. The actual method of selection was by lot ( kuda - 
volai) ; 50 but selection was confined to those who were duly 
nominated by the kudumbus according to rules which laid 
down certain conditions which had to be satisfied by every 
person before he became eligible for such nomination. The 
attempt to combine the representation on the committees of 
the kudumbu and of the seri did not work, and as the result 
of the breakdown that followed, another effort was made, two 
years later, to reform the method of election to the committees. 
The seri was allowed to fall into the background, and the 
direct representation of the kudumbus on the committees 
became the only aim. But the occasion of the revision was 
used to clarify other doubtful questions that had cropped up 
in the interval, and to make more detailed and specific regu- 
lations for the nominations by the kudumbus. This revision 
of the constitution was also carried out in the presence of a 
king’s official and recorded in the form of a vyavasthd of the 
sabhd. The very next year, the fifteenth of Parantaka I 
(a.d. 922). the sabhd appointed another 51 committee for as- 
saying gold for all people in the village; this was not a new 
vdriyam; it was a committee of eight persons chosen by lot 
from among citizens who paid taxes, were resident in parti- 
cular quarters of the village, and had made a name for assay- 
ing gold. This committee was perhaps intended to assist the 
pon-variyam (gold-committee) of the sabhd in the perfor- 
mance of their work. 

Of the constitution and working of no other sabhd do we 
have such detailed knowledge as of that of 
Other Sabhas. Uttaramerur. By their references to the 
vdriyams in other places, however, the inscriptions lead us 
to suppose that the method of entrusting details of executive 



WORKING OF SABHAS 


497 


work to committees was generally followed by the other ' 
sabhas, when they found such details too much for a single 
executive committee. The work was honorary, no payment 
for it being suggested in any of the records, and no one could 
be expected to give more than a part of his time and energy 
for such work; the division of labour among a number of 
committees, the number being varied from time to time, was 
the most natural device to adopt, and so it was adopted. 52 / 
Two inscriptions from Tenneri of the eleventh year of Raja- 
raja I, a . d . 996, show the gradual spread from one place to 
another of these expedients of rural administration. One of 
these inscriptions records a resolution of the sabhd of Utta- 
masola-Caturvedi-mangalam that only members learned in the 
Mantra-Brahmana were eligible for service on the vdriyam 
and for drafting the resolutions of the assembly, 53 and that 
any one who contravened their resolution should be liable to 
the same punishment as those who disobeyed the king’s 
orders ( tiriivdnai-maruttar-padiim dan dam). Less than two 
months after the date of this resolution, the same sabha took 
another resolution calculated to exclude from the privileges 
of serving on the vdriyam and drafting the resolutions of the 
assembly, persons who had been found guilty of theft of a 
Brahmin’s property and other offences of a more serious 
nature (mel-padu-kurram) . The simple and piecemeal nature 
of these resolutions, and their dates, are proof, if proof were 
required, of the uneven pace kept by the numerous sabhas 
in the development of their constitution and administrative 
practice. And no official of the king’s government attended 
the sessions of the sabha of Uttama-sola Caturvedi-mangalam 
when these resolutions were taken, /fn fact the sabhas werb 
left largely to themselves, and eacnsabha was free to make 
the~afrangements that best suited its own peculiar conditions. 
Nb~Fewer than nine vdriyams are enumerated, for instanfe,^ 
as having been set up by the sabhd of Amani-narayana Catur- 
vedi-mangalam in the third year of Parthivendravarman; 54 
while only four vdriyams are mentioned in a record of a . d . 
919 from Tirupparkadal. 55 

An inscription from Siddhamalli (Mannargudi tq. Tan- 
jore) dated in the third year of Adhirajendra 553 records a very 
interesting grdma-vyavasthd (a constitutional resolution for 
the village) arrived at by the sabhd at a full meeting sum- 
C. 63 



498 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


moned after due notice and held in the presence of a royal 
officer. It says that the executive committee ( ur-kuttam ) 
and the vdriyams ( ur-variyam ) as also the v&riyam for the 
nadu (Purangarambai) were to be manned only by the 
Sasanabaddhar and the Sdsanabaddha-makkal. If others are 
to do such work, they must be elected at a full meeting of the 
sabhd held after due notice in accordance with a royal order 
( tiruvanai ) ; if, however, they are directly appointed by the 
government — ippadi anrikke rdjakulattal varananjeyvdr — 
they should be ten per seri for kuttam, one per seri for vdri- 
yam, and three per seri for nattuvdriyam. And in any case 
only persons who had not served for five years including the 
year concerned should be chosen. The inscription breaks off 
here and is perhaps not complete. But the part that has sur- 
vived is remarkable for two reasons; it contemplates three 
alternative methods of appointment to the executives of the 
village and the nadu — hereditary right guaranteed by sdsana, 
election by sabhd, and appointment by government. Then, 
it shows that one class of persons were deemed qualified in 
their own right for all the executive posts; they are described 
as Sasanabaddha and Sdsanabaddha-makkal. These terms 
are not easy and can be elucidated only tentatively at present. 
An inscription of Uttama Cola’s reign from Sembiyanmaha- 
devi (Tanjore dt.)55b states that the sdsanabaddha-caturvedi- 
bhattattdnap-perumakkal of that village were brought into 
existence as a body by the queen whose name the brahma- 
deya village bears; this shows that the term refers to men in- 
cluded by name in the original sdsana deed creating the 
brahmadeya, who were chosen naturally for their learning and 
character; and the makkal of our inscriptions may then be 
taken to apply to their descendants. This view, if correct, 
leads to the further inference that the hereditary owners of 
brahmadeya lands were quite ready to admit others into 
partnership in the management of local affairs, and content, 
if necessary, to limit the sphere of their own political ambi- 
tion to give scope to their fellows,— or possibly found them- 
selves compelled to do so by the force of changing conditions. 

There are not wanting, on the other hand, instances in 
which the king’s government interferred to regulate the con- 
stitutional arrangements prevailing in the sabhds. They be- 



GOVERNMENT AND SABHAS 


499 


long generally to the late Co|la period. Even in these instan- 
ces, it is possible, though by no means clear, that the initiative 
was taken by the sabhas themselves, and that the terms of the 
constitutional settlement reported to the king by his officials 
and sanctioned by him were based on resolutions taken by the 
assemblies concerned. The inscriptions, however, contain 
only the record of the sanction accorded by the monarch to 
proposals placed before him by his own officials. An inscrip- 
tion from Talainayar (Tanjore district), dated the 73rd day 
of the seventh regnal year of Kulottunga III, 56 takes the form 
of a letter addressed to the sabhd of Kulottunga-solan-tani- 
nayaka-caturvedi-mangalam and the taiiduvdn (collector) of 
the village. The letter contains rules for the election of the 
executive body ( kuttam ) of the assembly 57 sanctioned by the 
king at the instance of two officials, Brahmendra and Vanad- 
hiraja, written out by the tirumandira-dlai and attested by 
nine others with titles ending in raya or raja, also no doubt 
officials of the central government. The rules laid down were 
the following: from the seventh regnal year, only those were 
to be elected to the kuttam who had not been in the kuttam 
for ten years preceding the year in which the election took 
place; the candidates must also be Brahmins above forty years 
of age, learned ( vidvdn ) and impartial (samar) ; the rela- 
tives of those who had served on the kuttam during the five 
years before and the five years after the seventh regnal year 
were also to be held ineligible for the kuttam. The king also 
ordered that all Brahmins who were guilty of wicked deeds 
( vinaikkedu ) by defaulting the land revenue ( kadamai ) and 
oppressing docile Brahmins and respectable tenants, accept- 
ing bribes ( kaikkuli ) and so on, were to be fined in propor- 
tion to their offences, irrespective of whether they had served 
on the kuttam or not. This last clause, together with the 
requirement of impartiality in the candidates for election 
under the new rules, warrants the supposition that local 
administration in Talainayar had suffered by the growth of 
faction and violence for some time before the reform recorded 
in this inscription. Another instance of the royal sanction of 
a local constitution is dated five years later, a.o. 1190, and 
comes from Ayyampettai. 58 At the instance of Nulambada- 
raya, the king ordered that the executive ( varanavi ) of the 
sabhd of Rajendra-sola-caturvedimangalam were to be chosen 



500 LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

from among those who had not served on it before and were 
not less than forty years of age. 

Lest it should be thought that village assemblies as a 
rule lost their initiative and passed under the ' control of the 
central government in the late Cola period, it may be noted 
that the ma.hdsa.bhd of Kamadavalli-caturvedimangalam resol- 
ved in a.d. 1232 to adhere to an earlier decision of theirs to 
constitute their executive ( grdmakdryam ) from among those 
who agreed to serve on the basis of a yearly tenure; 59 and 
there is no evidence of any reference to the central govern- 
ment on either occasion^ Likewise, the mahasabhd of £>em- 
biyanmahadevi resolved of their own accord not to hold meet- 
ings of the executive at night for purposes of local admini- 
stration ( grama-karyam ) and for considering revenue affairs 
(kadamaikkdriyam ) , as nocturnal meetings resulted in ineffi- 
cient work ( upahati ) and extra expenditure of oil for lamps. 
They fixed the day from which the new arrangement came 
into force. They also resolved not to reappoint any person to 
the executive ( kiiftam ) within five years after one term of 
office. 60 The inscription is dated in the seventeenth year of 
Rajaraja III. The distinction made here between grdma- 
kdryam, local affairs, and kadamaik-kdriyam , revenue busi- 
ness, deserves to be particularly noted. Though this distinc- 
tion is not expressly found in other records, we are justified 
in assuming that it was observed universally by all the village 
assemblies which had definite responsibilities both towards the 
locality concerned and towards the central government. 

There is lastly an inscription 603 of the thirtieth year of 
the reign of Rajaraja III from Senganur (Tanjore district) 
which is of unusual importance to the study of local institu- 
tions in the late Cola period. It is a record of constitutional 
and other arrangements relating to the assembly of the village 
(the Mahasabhd). The interesting point here is that these 
arrangements are decreed by the mulaparusai of the temple 
of Visvesvaradeva : Visvesvaradevar koyil mulaparusaiydr 
kuttanguraivarak-kudi inrndu grdmakdriyam vyavasthai 
pannina padi, a clear statement that the mulaparusai (mula- 
pansat) of the temple framed the regulations that follow in 
the inscription for the conduct of the affairs of the village. 
It is not clear why the MahdsabU (mentioned further on in 



LATER COLA SABHAS 


501 


the record), instead of following the usual rule of itself 
regulating its own affairs, left the decision of important issues 
to the mulaparusai ; we may surmise, however, from the trend 
of the record as a whole that the Mahasabhd was unable to 
reach satisfactory decisions on account of sharp differences, 
and felt the need for laying the whole matter before some 
external authority for arbitration. If this view is correct, it 
is not without significance that the Mahasabhd sought the 
assistance of another local authority, rather than of the king’s 
government; it may be that by the end of the reign of Raja-! 
raja III, the central government, having lost its efficiency, 
failed to command the confidence of the people. In fact, one 
of the rules made on this occasion shows that in this period 
the officials of the king’s government ( mudaligal ) even dis- 
turbed the smooth working of local institutions by their 
intrigues with particular factions. 

The rules that follow are reasoned statements of the 
decisions reached, and we see that the mulaparusai were fully 
alive to the extraordinary and difficult nature of their task 
on this occasion. The first resolution relates to the constitu- 
tion of the executive administration ( kuttam ) of the village : 
there was an immemorial practice ( auddiydga vyavasthai) 
that, when the executive of the village was chosen ( nammurk - 
kutfavi idum idattu), those who had once served could serve 
again only in the fifth year thereafter, their sons only in the 
fourth year and their brothers in the third, and this ancient 
practice was to be maintained; only those who were not less 
than forty years of age were to be chosen; the kuttam should 
be chosen after obtaining the consent, ‘as our ancestors did’ 

( piirvapurusagal seydapadik-lddaga) , of the villagers assem- 
bled as the ur; any persons who got in by fraud ( ulvari , lit. 
disguise) with the support of the officials ( mudaligal ) of gov- 
ernment or in violation of these rules, would be deemed to 
be traitors to the village, all their properties being confiscated; 
the kuttam was to be chosen every time for one year (sam- 
vatsara-varanam) ; any persons that stayed on longer (mer- 
padi ninrdr) would also be considered gramadrohis and 
punished as above. The appeal to the mos majorum , the 
stress laid on the consent of the ur, the protest against undue 
influence by the mxidaligal and the deterrant punishment laid 
down against attempts to capture the executive by improper 



502 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


methods or to prolong the period of office beyond the proper 
term/ are all features of the resolution that deserve to be 
noted. Let us observe this also : how the choice of the execu- 
tive was actually made, we are not told; nor do we hear of 
how the consent of the ur was expressed; obviously our 
record does not tell the whole story, but sets down only the 
decisions on a few points that had come under discussion, 
the rest being a matter of common knowledge at the time. 

The rest of the vyavastha relates to matters of revenue 
and financial administration. When collecting the kadamai 
and kudimai (general revenue) dues of the village and the 
sabhdviniydgam (local cesses), the members of the kuttam 
should collect only the legitimate dues ( prdptam ) and not 
anything in excess thereof; the sabhdviniydgam was not to be 
mixed up with the kudimai, but collected separately, and 
expended in accordance with written orders separately com- 
municated to the accountant ( kanakkanukku-nyogam eludik- 
koduttu ); if the expenditure on any single item ( oru poru- 
lukku) exceeded 2000 kdsus, the written sanction of the 
Mahasabhd had to be obtained before the expenditure was 
incurred; if any expenditure was incurred otherwise than in 
accordance with these rules or any excess collection (of taxes 
and dues) was made, a fine of five times the amount involved 
was to be collected, which together with the proceeds of penal 
assessment on persons who had arrears of revenue (they had 
to pay double the original assessment) went into the coffers 
of the sabha. (sabhiviniyogam) . Lastly, the accountant of the 
village and the officers of the variyam and the kudumbu were 
to change annually and carry out the orders lawfully issued 
to them — dnclu mart niyogappadi nirkak-kaclavaddgavum. 
We have no means of ascertaining the exact role of the 
variyam and the kudumbu in this village and our knowledge 
of the actual working of these institutions here, as elsewhere, 
must remain imperfect. 

The sabha , mahasabhd , and the corresponding Tamil 
words. Jam and perun-guri, refer to the same institution, 
which is sometimes even called perunguri-mahasabhai. Its 
members are collectively referred to as perumakkal, and the 
honorific term ‘tiruvadhfdr > is also employed in some inscrip- 
tions. The sabha usually held its meetings in the temples and 



OTHER ASSEMBLIES 


503 


mandapas of the village, and the term Brahma-sthana 61 
appears to indicate the fixed meeting place of the sabha. 
wherever there was one. Sometimes it met outside the village 
on the banks of a tank or under a tree; this was certainly 
not due to the lack of a more sheltered place for the meeting. 
Some examples of such meetings are best accounted for by 
assuming that the inauspicious nature of the business tran- 
sacted required that it should be done beyond the living quar- 
ters of the village . 62 The sabha was usually summoned by the 
beating of a drum (sarri); the meeting was also proclaimed 
by sound of bugle (h a\am) or a double bugle (irattaik- 
kdlam) 63 Meetings were also held at nights when required. 


The Nagaram was another type of local assembly, not so 
much in evidence, however, as the Ur and 
N agaram. the Sabha. The same term is sometimes em- 

ployed to designate occupational groups like Saliyanagarat- 
tSm . 64 But when the Nagaram of places like Sivapuri , 65 Tirup- 
palanam , 66 Parakesaripuram , 67 and Takkolam , 68 and the Ma- 
nagaram of Kirnci 69 are in question, we are clearly dealing 
with territorial assemblies which, by their status and func- 
tions, had much in common with the Sabha and the Ur. In 
some places like Tillaisthanam 70 the Nagaram and the Ur 
seem to have carried on their duties side by side. 


j The Nagaram was in all probability a primary assembly 
of "merchants, which was organised as one of the local assem- 


blies in important trade centres and was the only assembly 
in places where the mercantile interests overshadowed all 


the rest. 


Territorial assemblies representing the rvddu were also 
in existence and discharged important dut- 
- a u ' ies, particularly in regard to land revenue 

administration. ‘Nadu’ like ur generally means a territorial 
division, and the corporate character of ‘ndda’ in some of the 
contexts in the epigraphs is brought home to us by expres- 
sions like ‘naddyisainda nattdm’, ‘residents of the nddu met 
(formed) as nddu\ n These corporations endow charities in 
their own names , 72 and take charge of charitable endow- 
me nts 73 In the fifteenth year of a Parakesari, a certain 
Kandan Maravan, the feudatory of the Cola monarch, issued 
an order to the ndttdr of Kunrakkurram . 74 This order stated 



504 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


that the chief had decided to make a gift of some land as 
kdni to a certain person subject to a fixed annual payment 
of 25 pon for all time as the land tax on it; on no future occa- 
sion, when general revision of assessment was made, was this 
land to be put in a class which would raise the dues from it 
to more than the sum of 25 pon then fixed; the ndttdr were 
requested by the chieftain to give effect to these conditions, 
and they accordingly handed over the land to the person 
named and undertook not to enhance the tax due from the 
land in any future assessment. The part assigned by this 
inscription to the ndttdr in the classification of the lands and 
the periodical assessment of land revenue, and the permanent 
settlement of the assessment on some land are all noteworthy 
features of the land-revenue administration of the time. The 
order of Rajaraja on the gift of the village Anaimangalam to 
the Buddhist shrine in Negapatam was addressed among 
others to the ndttdr of the Pattinakkurpam. No direct evi- 
dence on the constitution of these assemblies of the nadu is 
forthcoming; an analysis of the signatures affixed to the Leyden 
grant (of Anaimangalam) is, however, very instructive in this 
connection. The grant is signed first by the officer of the 
puravu-vari who was present with the ndttar when they 
marked the boundary of the village by getting an elephant 
to beat the bounds, then by the man who rode the 
elephant on the occasion, then by the accountants of twenty- 
seven villages, including Anaimangalam, in the Pattinakkur- 
ram, and lastly by the bhattas who guided the whole transac- 
tion. The accountants sign on behalf of the sabhd or the ur 
of their villages and in accordance with their instructions. 
One wonders if the assembly of the nadu was constituted by 
the representatives of each of the villages in it coming to- 
gether, the accountants being present among them. 

In the tenth year of Kulottunga I, 75 the ndttdr of Pura- 
malai-nadu are seen appointing a pujari (priest to conduct 
the worship)^ in the temple at Tlrthamalai in the Salem dis- 
trict. The vddu of Vada-panangadu in Pudukkottah resolved 
in a . d . 1149 to levy a fine of one md of arable land to be as- 
signed to the temple for any injury caused by ambanavar (?) 
to arable land or on the highways in and near Nal-vayalur 76 
An inscription from Jambai dated in the reign of a Karikala- 
Coladeva 77 assigns an important part to the nadu of Vanagap- 



NADU AND NAGARAM 


505 


padi in the conduct of the affairs of the temple of Valaiyur- 
nakkar-yogavanar; the donor, a chieftain of Bana extraction, 
states that his ancestors had assigned to the temple the vil- 
lage of Ranabhimamangalam; he then increases the endow- 
ment and the scale of expenses, and entrusts the proper ob- 
servance of the new scale to the nadu. It is also of interest to 
note that under the general supervision of the nddu, the de- 
tails of the management were carried on by one single village 
chosen by lot ( kudavolai ) for each year — a provision which 
emphasises the relation between the assembly of the nadu 
and the village-assemblies suggested by the Leyden grant of 
a much earlier time. An undertaking given by the shepherds 
of a village to make certain annual payments to a temple is 
attested by 98 persons from 67 villages who describe them- 
selves as u rkkuccamainda, i.e.. representing their respective 
villages, evidently on the assembly of Valluvappadi-nadu, the 
region in which the villages were included; 773 the inscription 
comes from Srlrangam and is dated 1184, the sixth year of Ku- 
lottunga III. Another inscription of the late Cola period from 
Kanclpuram, 78 records what is apparently an approval by 
Madhurantaka Pottappiccola, the Telugu-Coda king of the 
time, of a resolution of the nadavar of Jayangonda-solamanda- 
lam remitting six kalams of paddy from the kadamai due on 
each veli of land that was tirappu, or devadnna, tiruvidaiydt- 
tam, ■pa.Uiccandam, agarapparru, madappuram, j Ivitapparru, 
padaipparru and vanniyapparru. This enumeration of the types 
of holdings is apparently meant to be exhaustive and to in- 
clude all the productive lands in the nadu; the instance before 
us is therefore one of a general revenue-remission initiated by 
the nadu and approved by the ruler of the locality, clear proof 
of the vitality of the assembly of the nddu even so late as 
the thirteenth century. The nattavar are also found often co- 
operating with other corporations and with individual officials 
in the administration of justice and in other matters 79 

The nagaram and nddu of the Tamil inscriptions are, in 
their names, if nothing else, the exact counter-parts of the 
paura and jdnapada respectively of Sanskrit literature. 
Whether the village assemblies called Ur and Sabhu in South- 
ern India were known to the Sanskritic writers on Indian 
polity, and whether the assemblies must be taken to have 
C. 64 



506 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


been included under the generic term janapada, are questions 
not easily decided at present. 

The procedure that was followed in the conduct of busi- 
ness at the meetings of the various bodies so far mentioned 
is not described in any of the inscriptions. 

Procedure^ Even the method employed in the choice of 
the executive of the assemblies remains obscure except in the 
case of Uttaramerur. Regarding the executive bodies of other 
villages, we learn something of their qualifications and tenure 
of office, but nothing of the actual mode of their appointment. 
We must assume that membership in the general assembly 
was unrestricted and open to all the residents of the village; 
the inscriptions sometimes state expressly that the meeting 
was fully attended, everybody young and old being present. 
There is no evidence that the idea of a quorum was known; 
but definite methods of summoning meetings and giving notice 
of them were prescribed, and the expression often employed, 
kiittakk uraiv ara-kudi irundu , 79b indicates that importance 
was attached to the presence of all the members of the exe- 
cutive for the time being. There is also no evidence that 
votes were taken; as each question came up, there must have 
been a general discussion in which the leading men took part 
in accordance with their social status, and if the matter was 
one affecting any class in particular, the representatives of 
that class had every chance of explaining their point of view; 
the final decision was reached by common agreement. Rules 
were sometimes made, as in the Manur assembly, against 
factious opposition and attempts to hold up business by ob- 
structionism; obviously the enforcement of such rules de- 
pended on the support of public opinion. The procedure at 
meetings seems on the whole to have been rudimentary, and 
the assemblies had, but for their executives, hardly outgrown 
the stage of folk-gatherings. 

The local assemblies often co-operated with one another 
and with other corporations in pursuance of 

Co-operation common objects. The sabhd of Tiraimur, 
among assem- , 

biies. the nagaram and the devakanmis of a temple 

in Tiruvidaimarudur were together respon- 
sible for the proper management of the temple and when they 
transacted its business, they met in the theatre ( natakasdla ) 
of the temple . 80 The emoluments of the servants of another 



PROCEDURE AND COOPERATION 507 

temple at Tiruvamattur were fixed at a common meeting of 
the sabhd of the place, the ur, the Sivabrahmanas, the Rudra- 
gana who sang sacred hymns before god, and the servants of 
the temple including the uvaccar. 61 The presence at the meet- 
ing of the servants whose emoluments were being fixed im- 
plies that this was not done without some regard for their 
wishes in the matter, a typical instance of the elastic and 
humane character of the economic arrangements of the time. 
Again the priests of a temple at Polonnaruva and other ser- 
vants on its establishment are, together with the nattavar of 
the division, 82 placed in charge of a cash endowment for a 
lamp. There is one instance on record of the sabhds of two 
neighbouring villages coalescing and agreeing that the two 
villages should thenceforth count as one. 83 This happened in 
the reign of Parantaka I, a.d. 933, and constitutes a measure 
of the freedom enjoyed by these local bodies. The union of 
villages was the result of their voluntary choice and was 
effected without any direct reference to the central govern- 
ment. The grant of brahmadeya or devadana in its execution 
involved the co-operation of many organised groups. A typi- 
cal instance is the grant of Palaiyanur, which is put through 
by the ndtpdr of Palaiyanur-nadu with the assistance of the 
elders 84 of brahmadeya villages, the urgalihar of all urs includ- 
ing devadana, paUiecandam , kanimurriittu, vettipperu and old 
araccalabhoga and the nagarams 85 This enumeration of co- 
operating local authorities is of interest in two ways: it men- 
tions some special tenures by which land was held; these will 
be discussed elsewhere. And it shows clearly that the assembly 
of the rvadu ( nattar ) was a body distinct from the assemblies 
of the villages ( urgal ) and towns (nagarangal) . Unlike the 
Leyden grant which is addressed to local groups in more 
or less the same terms and is signed by the representatives 
of all villages and towns in the nadu, this grant, from Tiru- 
valangadu, is attested only by the villages whose land rights 
were affected by the gift, besides the officials of the revenue 
department. Except for this difference in detail the two grants 
remarkably confirm each other, and imply that the assembly 
of the nddu was made up of representatives from the assem- 
blies of all the villages and towns in the division. 86 Instances 
are not wanting of a number of such assemblies of the nddu 
co-operating for some common purpose 87 



508 LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

Local administration was thus carried on by means of 
primary assemblies in the villages and towns, 
Local Govern- an( j representative assemblies in the larger 
ment divisions. The sabhd , the ur and the naga- 

ram were of the nature of folk meetings in which every one 
who had a stake in the locality was entitled to be present. 
This becomes evident from the manner of summoning these 
meetings, which was by a general proclamation, by beat of 
drum or other suitable means, of the time and place of the 
meeting. The formula is often employed in describing these 
meetings that they were quite fully attended; the young and 
the old having assembled together after due notice of the 
meeting had been given. There is not a single instance on 
record of a decision having been reached by the method of 
voting; and it does not seem likely. The political spirit of 
the time, such as it was, aimed at securing the harmony of 
classes, rather than their equality. A healthy society based 
on a general distribution of small properties, which was free 
from the glaring economic oppression of one class by another, 
had no particular use for the ideals of modem democracy. 
Social life was dominated by groups rooted in ancient custom 
and ideal right, and was subtly suffused with emotions of a 
quasi-religious nature. All that was demanded in such an 
atmosphere was an opportunity to watch the course of affairs, 
and to raise a protest if anything went wrong, or to press a 
point of view that was being overlooked. This was furnished 
by the periodical meetings of the assemblies and the groups; 
but the leadership in such gatherings remained with those 
naturally fit for it. Age, learning, and wealth, in addition to 
birth, furnished the most obvious qualifications for such 
leadership; official standing and public benefactions were 
other claims to the consideration and homage of the average 

That the villages were little ‘republics’ which had a large 

Local taxation measure autonomy in the management of 
their own affairs is seen from the powers 
of taxation for local purposes, and of granting exemptions 
from such taxes and dues, enjoyed by their assemblies, and 
from the separate administrative staff, comprising doubtless 
only a few officials, employed and controlled by them. Of 
their power of taxation for local purposes, an idea may be 



LOCAL TAXATION 


509 


formed from the instances in which the assemblies grant re- 
missions and assignments of dues without any reference to 
the king’s government and in the exercise of their own powers. 
In the second year of a Rajakesari, the sabhd of Nalur 88 as- 
signed, in perpetuity, to the local temple to which they owed 
some money, the proceeds of a local cess on shops ( angadik - 
kiili) in lieu of the interest on the loan. The nagarattdr of 
Kumara-mattandapuram 89 made over : their annual income 
from vara-vaigal, — a cess of which the nature is not clear, 
towards a fund for maintaining a Jaina shrine in good repair. 
At Tiruverumbur, the sabhd of Srlkantha-caturvedimangalam 
resolved that no dues of any kind should be levied on the pro- 
perties of the temple on their account from the date of resolu- 
tion ; 90 they got on another occasion a lump sum payment 
from a person as they wanted cash for digging a tank, and in 
consideration thereof assigned to him the right exercised till 
then by the assembly of collecting paddy at a certain rate 
from the cultivators of the village. The ur of Ulliyur obtained 
a number of exemptions in perpetuity on behalf of a temple 
in their hamlet, and these were pronounced by the sabhd of 
Uttaramerur who granted them to be free from the interfer- 
ence of all extraneous powers . 91 In these and many other 
instances of a similar nature, the village assemblies were 
clearly disposing of rights that were exclusively vested in 
them and that they were free to utilise in any manner cal- 
culated to advance the social good of the little community 
whose affairs they managed. These assignments and remis- 
sions of the taxes and dues collected by themselves should 
not be confused with another class of tax remissions for which 
the village assemblies became responsible. In the latter class 
of cases, in lieu of a lump sum payment made in advance to 
it, the assembly undertakes to pay all dues to the local and 
central governments on particular plots of land for all time. 
The lump sum in these instances was the capitalised value of 
the annual dues chargeable to the land, and was generally 
called irai-dravyam or irai-kdval 92 Possibly the term pur- 
vdcaram 93 which occurs in some inscriptions in a similar con- 
text has the same meaning. Such advance payment in a lump 
sum of future taxes was due to two general causes. First, 
persons who endowed charities by setting apart land, often 
desired to secure for such land freedom from all dues and 



510 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


imposts, and the common way of doing this was to pay their 
capitalised value to the assembly of the village where the 
land was located, making them responsible for all future 
payments. Secondly, the assemblies, on their own initiative, 
often raised money in this manner for immediate capital ex- 
penditure for public purposes, which could not be financed 
otherwise. The sabha of Sirranaiccur, a brahmadeya, for in- 
stance, owed a considerable sum of money to a person whose 
properties became forfeited to the king for reasons not stated; 
when the sabha was called upon to remit the amount to the 
king’s treasury, they had to borrow the sum from the local 
temple and undertake to pay the taxes on some temple 
lands. 94 

The responsibility for the details of local administration 
was, as pointed out before, vested in small 
Loc al Executive. execu ti V e committees appointed by the 
general assembly, and service on such committees was hono- 
rary. There was a small staff of paid servants in each village 
to assist these executive committees and maintain the records 
of the village. These village officials were called madhyas- 
thas, a term often rendered into ‘arbitrators’; 95 the word does 
indeed mean ‘arbitrators’, but it is difficult to admit that this 
is its meaning in the CSla inscriptions, or that the duties of 
the madhyasthas employed by the assemblies included the 
task of arbitrating among disputants^ Perhaps the term was 
applied to village officers in order ttf'femphasise their neutral 
position in all matters of rural politics. They attended the 
meetings of the assembly and assisted in the conduct of the 
proceedings, but took no part in the deliberations. Their 
duties and remuneration were fixed by the assembly at its 
discretion. In a.d. 923, for instance, the sabha of Ainjastasam 
resolved that their madhyasthas employed in writing up the 
accounts connected with the tank ( eri ) were to be remuner- 
ated at the rate of four measures ( ndlis ) of paddy per diem, 
and were to receive in addition seven kalanju of ‘red gold’ 
per annum with a pair of cloths each; that each of them had 
at the end of his year of office, to produce accounts and pass 
through the ordeal of red-hot iron (malu ) ; that those who 
were declared pure after the ordeal should receive a bonus 
of a small amount of gold, and that those that failed in the 
ordeal should pay a fine of ten kdlanjus of gold, the reason for 



VILLAGE OFFICIALS 


511 


the heavy fine being that the corpus of the tank-fund ( eri - 
mudal) was not of sufficient size; and that no corporal punish- 
ment (sariradandam.) was to be resorted to by the sabha in 
such cases. 96 Generally it was a madhyastha that recorded 
the resolutions of the assemblies to the dictation of one or 
more of the prominent members present and taking part in 
the preceding discussions. Another class of officers was called 
‘karanattdr’ , the exact duties in which each was engaged being 
indicated by the phrases like Karai-kalukkuk-katy-kanik- 
kanakkii , 97 the accountant who was supervising the bounda- 
ries (of lands?). In a.d. 1235, an accountant was dismissed 
by a sabha, and his descendants and relatives declared unfit 
to hold the office again. 88 An inscription of uncertain date 
from Mannarkoyil in the Tinnevelly district mentions the 
madhyastha, the blacksmith, the carpenter, the goldsmith and 
the village-pariah as the persons on whom the representa- 
tives of the central government depended for demarcating 
the boundaries of a village Vindanur, given away as tiruvidai- 
yattam." A curious inscription 100 from Tribhuvani (Pondi- 
cherry) dated in the forty-third regnal year of Kulottunga I, 
a.d. 1113, contains a provision that the artisans and profes- 
sional men should pursue their crafts and professions within 
the precincts of the village, and that such of them as served 
the residents of other villages would be deemed to have been 
guilty of a grave offence against the law. This is an interest- 
ing example of rural protectionism; but we have no reason 
to believe that it was universal, or even common. On the 
other hand, the occasions for service outside one’s own village 
or town could not have been very frequent. An inscription 
from Tirumanikuli (S.A.) records the endowment of a sandi- 
vilakku by an urp-paraiyan in a.d. 1221. 101 


The functions of the assemblies had a wide range. They / 
were as a rule entrusted with the direct v 
as^mHi 1 ^ charge or, at least, the supervision of all 
chari table endowments in the village.: To 
judge from the number and provenance of the inscriptions 
recording such gifts, in no place was this source of public 
benefaction a negligible item, and in several villages it was 
in itself sufficiently important to warrant the creation of a 
separate committee ( dharmn-vdriyam) for its administra- 
tion. 102 Statistics are of modem origin, and it is no easy thing 



512 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


to venture on quantitative statements relating to a distant 
past; but the student of Cola institutions often wonders 
whether for local well-being, the gifts of the rich did not 
mean more in that period than the taxes levied and collected 
from the residents of a locality by its assembly. However 
that may be, the assemblies were not slow to address them- 
selves to the task of enriching local life by additions to its 
amenities, social and cultural. For one thing, they took good 
care to preserve the records of older charities and to see 
that their terms were carried out by the parties concerned . 103 
Altered economic conditions sometimes led to a revision of 
the original terms, but a genuine effort was made not to allow 
any of the numerous perpetual endowments to fall into desue- 
tude. Most of these centred round the village temple which, 
from somewhat obscure religious origins, had grown by the 
time of the Colas to dominate every aspect of social life all 
over the country. The role of the temple in the secular life 
of its neighbourhood can hardly be exaggerated, and the 
temple and its affairs were among the chief preoccupations 
of the local assemblies; and the temples, and sometimes indi- 
vidual shrines in them, had separate groups who were in 
charge of their management; but these authorities were 
subject to the double control of the local assemblies who ex- 
ercised a general supervision and of the officer of the king 
who audited the accounts. The temple was the centre of all 
the institutions of popular culture and amusement. A detail- 
ed account of these institutions is given elsewhere. Here the 
part of the village assemblies in their upkeep may be briefly 
noticed. v The assemblies often set apart land for the mainte- 
nance of persons who expounded, in the halls of the temples, 
the national epics of the Rdrnayana and the Mahdbhdrata. and 
and the purdnas: such land was called Bhdratap-pangu (share 
for Bharata) , 104 and was usually made tax-free. Music and 
dancing, and theatrical presentations of popular tales and le- 
gends, formed part of the ordinary routine of the temple, and 
received special attention on festive occasions; and Natdka- 
sdtes were specially constructed for these purposes . 105 There 
were recitations of sacred hymns in Tamil and in Sanskrit in 
the course of the daily worship in the temples, and the assem- 
blies sometimes gave shares from the common lands of the 
village for the maintenance of these services. Schools of 



RURAL SERVICES AND RECORDS 


513 


higher learning were attached to temples and so were hospi- 
tals. The assemblies were found endowing or assisting in the 
endowment of particular subjects like Mimamsa of the Pra- 
bhakara school, 106 Vedanta, 107 Vyakarana, 108 Bhavisya, 109 Tait- 
tirlya, 110 Vajasaneya, 111 and so on. In the foundation of hos- 
pitals and the maintenance of physicians attached to them the 
assemblies actively assisted and co-operated with the donor. 112 
They also aided persons who desired to put up rest-houses 
( ambalam ) and provide for the supply of drinking water in 
them. 113 Agrarian rights and tenures, and irrigation of land, 

' of which an account- is- -given elsewhere, were among the most 
- important concerns of the assemblies. In addition to the re- 
cords relating to such matters maintained by the central gov- 
ernment, the villages seem to have kept their own record 
books including a land-register ( nila-mudal ) and a tax-regis- 
ter (pottagam) , 114 The_consent of the sabhd was essential to 
any alteration in the classification of the lands in the village ; 
iKe king simultaneously addressed the local adhikari (official 
of the government) and the sabhd concerned, 115 and then they 
met together and put the business through. The part of the 
assemblies in the administration of justice has been noticed 
before. Th e judicial officers of the village ( niyayattdr ) evi- 
dently used the. proceeds of the fines levied by them for some 
common good. In one instance, they presented a golden dia- 
dem to the god of a local temple. 116 

In 1236 the mula parisat of Tiruvellarai (Trichinopoly dt.) 
met in the local temple to consider the lease of some villages 
that were the personal property of the king, Rajaraja III; this 
was obviously an assembly which had the management of the 
temple and its affairs. They resolved to replace the existing 
Executive Committee of probably four members by another 
consisting of eight, who should settle the kadamai and kudi- 
mai dues to be collected from the tenants in occupation of the 
leased lands. /The members of this Committee were remune- 
rated for their service and were to be changed annually; and 
a person who once served on this Committee could not serve 
again for the next four years. 1163 . ~~~ 

An inscription from Tirukollikkadu, undated but clearly 
of the early Cola period, reveals an instance of unauthorised 
occupation of some temple lands by the Sabhd of Maraya- 
C. 65 



514 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


mangalam for a period of 35 years between the third year of 
Uttama Cola and the twenty-ninth of Rajendra I. A peti- 
tion to the king led to an enquiry by a royal officer, and then 
the Sabha was required as penalty to pay 400 kdsus instead of 
200 received by them previously; the Sabha returned the land 
as the equivalent of 100 kdsus (vilai-dravyam) , and for the 
balance they agreed to pay all the dues on the land to the 
state for all time, thus treating 300 kdsus as iraikdval. 116b 

The village assemblies sometimes stimulated the flow of 
private charity for the general benefit of the community by 
giving suitable public recognition to their benefactors. The 
sabha of Tirupper recorded in an inscription, a.d. 1129, their 
gratitude to a certain Bhatta whose prayers and benefactions 
were believed to have been of great use to the village in a 
troublesome period when its fortunes had sunk low and the 
people were deserting it. 117 The sabha of Uttaramerur confer- 
red some hereditary privileges on a courtesan who carried out 
extensive repairs and additions to the Visnu temple in the 
locality. 118 The sthanattar of the temple and the residents of 
Tirumalavadi adopted an interesting method to express their 
gratitude to a benefactor; he had greatly improved the temple 
and by slightly diverting the course of the Coleroon, averted 
the danger of inundation which threatened the village; in ap- 
preciation of these and other services, the sthanattar petition- 
ed the deity on the occasion of a festival that a free house 
might be granted in perpetuity for the residence in the village 
itself of this great benefactor, and then, ostensibly with the 
sanction of the deity, a house was set apart for the purpose 
from the properties of the temple. 119 This was in 1223. Other 
examples can be easily gathered from the inscriptions. 

Such in outline were the nature, organisation and functions 
of local assemblies and groups in the tenth and eleventh cen- 
turies. In a general account, many characteristic details 
which might add vividness to the picture are necessarily left 
out. No room can be found for them except in detailed histo- 
ries of particular assemblies which cannot be attempted 
here. 120 But what has been said is enough to show that between 
an able bureaucracy and the active local assemblies which in 
various ways fostered a live sense of citizenship, there was at- 
tained a high standard of administrative efficiency and purity, 
perhaps the highest ever attained by the Hindu State. 



A GALLIC PARALLEL 515 

A remarkable parallel to the position of the townships in 
the Cola empire is furnished by that of the cities of Gaul in 
the Roman empire as can be seen from the description of the 
latter by Fustel de Coulanges. 121 ‘Each city possessed its 
public property comprising buildings, land, capital fund, con- 
tributions. It could receive donations and bequests. It di- 
rectly administered all this property. It regulated land rights 
and lent out its money on interest. It got contributions for it- 
self such as octrois, market dues, tolls on bridges and roads. 

‘It had its own expenses on its buildings (fortifications), 
streets, its forum, its basilicas, its temples, its public baths 
and its theatre, its roads and its bridges. It established schools 
and appointed teachers, as it appointed its doctors. . .In short, 
the city and its. . . .territory was constituted like a veritable 
state. We do not mean to say by this that it was independent. 
To think of it as a free community under the simple suze- 
rainty of the empire would be exaggerated and inexact. It 
had to obey all the orders of the imperial government. It 
opened its portals to a pro-consul every time he wished to 
visit it, and we may go further and say that nearly all its acts 
were submitted to the governor of the province for his appro- 
bation. But what we should note here is first that the impe- 
rial government had no agent always present in the city, and 
secondly that the city had a complete organism and a life of 
its own. It possessed its directing senate, its corps of magis- 
trates, its jurisdiction, its police, its treasury, its goods mova- 
ble and immovable, its public fund, its schools, its clergy and 
its high priests. None of all these came to it from outside: 
magistrates, professors, priests, every one was found within. 
Doubtless it was not a free state; it was at any rate a state’. 


1. El. xxii, p. 5-11. 

2. Studies, pp. 101, 129; 67 of 1898. 

3. 71 of 1897. 

4. 33 of 1895. 

5. 82 of 1896. 85 of 1896. TAS. ii, p. 7. The dissolution of the 
body is a legitimate inference from 1. 14. which lays down punishment 
only for the members of the Parudai going back on their agreement indi- 
vidually and not in their collective capacity. 

6. 214 of 1911. 



516 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


7. 629 of 1916. 

8. 39 of 1895; 117 of 1910. 

9. 120 of 1902. 

10. 145 of 1900; 239 of 1902. 

11. 640 of 1905; 519 of 1922. 

12. Krishna Sastri suggests that Sankarappadi was a general name 
applied to the quarters in which the iSaivas of a town lived. ( SII . iii, 
p. 275, n. 1). It should be noted, however, that in almost all known 
instances, the Sankarappadiyar have duties connected with the main- 
tenance of lamps and in particular the supply of oil — 547 of 1920, 80 
of 1897, 78 of 1898, etc. Two records imply moreover that they were a 
corporation of oil-mongers; in his second year, Kulottunga I ordered that 
25 familes of Sankarappadi should be settled in Tiruvalangadu (NA.), 
in a new settlement called Rajendra-Solappadi and made responsible 
for the supply of oil for 15 lamps ( SII . iii, 65); an inscription from 
Achyutamangalam (Tj.) contains the expression: iekku onrukku San- 
karappadiyar per pannirandu aga. (395 of 1925). 

13. Madras Museum plates. SII. iii, p. 269, 11. 3-6, and 112-3. 

14. 2 of 1898. 

15. 238 of 1929. 

16. SII. iii, p. 177, contra Hultzsch. 

17. 198 of 1925. 

18. 597 and 620 of 1920. 

19. 118 of 1888. 

20. 151 of 1897. 

21. 73 of 1914. 

22. 67 of 1906. The ‘elubattonbadu nattom’ supervise the engraving 
on stone of a decision of the nadti and nagara of Uttattur-nadu in 1199. 
(521 of 1912). 

23. 372 of 1914. 

24. 352 of 1909. 

25. 106 of 1919. Also 77 of 1900. 

26. 197 of 1894. 

27. 368 of 1911. 

28. Pd. 152. 

29. 327 of 1921, which may be of the reign of Kulottunga I. 

30. 543 of 1921. 

31. 610 of 1902. 

32. SII. iii, 210. 

33. 1 and 2 of 1898; 692 of 1904; 335 of 1917; 178 of 1919, 348 of 1917. 

34. 152 and 154 of 1895. 

35. 206, 201 of 1919. 

36. Pd. 20, 59; 279 of 1903, and 285 of 1906. 

37. e.g. Tiruverumbur, (112 and 123 of 1914); Tiraimur (201 and 
216 of 1907) ; Sevalai (362 of 1902) ; Uttaramerur (89 of 1898) and so 
on. The assumption has been made that in the ur and nagaram ‘all 
the conditions pertaining to membership in the Brahmanical sabhas 
prevailed, except perhaps the knowledge of the Vedas’. ARE. 1913, 
II, 23. There is no evidence to support this. 



NOTES 


517 


38. 466 of 1912. 

39. Pd. 198. 

40. 3 and 58 of 1898. 

41. 40 of 1895. 

42. SII. iii, 1; 237 of 1915; 234 of 1929. 

43. 610 of 1902. Nos. 66, 67, 72 and 73-5 of 1947-8 (Chingleput Dt.) 
mention nyayattar and nyaya-mudalis. 

44. Kittel, s. v. vari; 133 of 1914 (Rajak, 5) has the expression : 
ivvandu sri-koyil vari seyginra sabhai-varyar. 

45. 113 of 1928. 

46. 596 of 1904 : vdrigam vaittu vaikkappatta varigarum kanakkum 
irundu. 

47. 43 of 1906. 

48. ‘PerumakkaV literally means ‘Great men’. 

49. ASI. 1905; Studies — ch. vi. 176 of 1930 furnishes another 

example from the reign of Parantaka I of sabhd of Ninravur emphasis- 
ing the importance of the kudumbu (ward) in the conduct of the affairs 
of the sabhd. It lays down that each kudumbu was to be represented 
in all discussions by two persons who had not taken such part in dis- 
cussions before ( pandu man rodi anyadar) . For other provi- 

sions of the record relating to revenue affairs, salary of madhyastha 
and so on, see ARE. 1930, n, 16. 

50. Bits of palm-leaf on which were written the names of eligible 
persons were thrown into a narrow-mouthed pot and well shaken in 
the presence of the whole assembly; and a child was asked to take 
out one after another as many of the bits as were required for the 
purpose of the constitution of the committees. 

51. 12 of 1898. 

52. ARE. 1905, II, 7. 

53. 240 and 241 of 1922. The phrase ‘Sabha-marrah-iollavum’ 
cannot simply mean ‘speak in the sabhd’. The inscriptions often say 
that they are recorded to the dictation ( solid ) of some person who is 
generally a Bhatta; and I think ‘Sabha-marran-jollu’ has reference 
to this process of dictating for record the conclusions reached by the 
sabha. The simple form ‘marram’ occurs in 60 of 1926. 

54. SII. iii, 156, 11. 1-3. 

55. SII. iii, 99. 

55a. No. 5 of 1945-6. 

55b. 496 of 1925; also 480. 

56. 148 of 1927. ARE. 1927, II, 28. 

57. For kuttam (executive) of other assemblies see: 581 of 1907, 
527 of 1918, 231 of 1925. 

58. 113, 120 of 1928— the two numbers being apparently duplicates 
of the same record. 

59. 92 of 1914 — Munbu pannina vyavasthaip-padiye-samvatsara- 
varanamdga amenraraik-kcmdu grama-karyan-jeyyak-kadavdm-aga. 



518 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


60. 500 of 1925. 

60a. 89 of 1932; ARE. 1932. 

61. 30 of 1894; 241 of 1922. 

62. 260 of 1915, also 332 of 1910. ARE. 1910, II. 21; 640 of 1919. 
Studies, p. 94. 

63. 553 of 1921; 85 of 1896; 72 of 1914; 103 of 1897. 

64. 268 of 1921, also mentions Viyapdri-nagarattom. 

65. 243 of 1894. 

66. 165 of 1928. 

67. 66 of 1895. 

68. 6 of 1897. 

69. 76 of 1921. 

70. 40 of 1895. 

71. Pd. 38. 

72. 217 of 1926; 411 of 1912; Pd. 85. 

73. Pd. 36. 

74. 356 of 1924. 

75. 676 of 1905. 

76. 373 of 1914 (Pd. 186). 

77. 109 of 1906. 

77a. 61 of 1936-7, ARE. II. 32. 

78. 556 of 1919. 

79. Co-operation with Sambuvarayar in the reign of Kulottunga II 
—64 of 1900. 

79a. 62 of 1898; Studies, p. 121. 

79b. SII. iii, 77. 

80. 199 of 1907; 154 of 1895. 

81. 18 of 1922. The uvaccar are pipers and drummers who play 
on their musical instruments during the services in temple. 

82. 594 of 1912. See also 28 of 1919 for another such instance 
from Markanam. 

83. El. iii, pp. 145, 147; (Sll. ii, p. 370). 

84. The text is ‘Kilavar’, rendered into 'headman’ by Krishna 
Sastri. See also 39 of 1895 for hrahmadeyak -kilavar. 

85. Sll. iii, p. 402, 11. 2-5; see also El. xv. Anbil plates, 1. 124; Sll. 
iii, 142, 11. 4-8; Leyden grant, 1. 113. 

86. See p. 296 ante. 

87. 103 of 1921. 

88. 321 of 1910. 

89. 222 of 1911. 

90. 133 of 1914; 105 of 1914. 

91. 41 of 1898. 

92. 100 of 1892. 

93. 14 of 1898. 

94. 105 of 1925. 

95. Sll. iii, index s.v. Madhyasthar. 



NOTES 


519 


96. 226 of 1915. 

97. 30 of 1919. 

98. 583 of 1904. 

99. 400 of 1916. 

100. 205 of 1919. 

101. 167 of 1902. 

102. SII. iii, 6. 

103. 199 of 1907; 92 of 1895. 

104. 63 of 1897; 48 and 50 of 1923. Pangu often gives place to pit ram 
or vrtti. 

105. 199 of 1907; 157 of 1905; 398 of 1921. 152 of 1925; 253, 254 
of 1914. 

106. 233 of 1911; 333 of 1923. 

107. 276 of 1925. 

108. 18 of 1898; 202 of 1912. 

109. 29 of 1898. The name not of the purana but of a sutra. SII. 
ii, p. 524, 1. 118). 

110. 33 of 1898. 

111. 194 of 1923. 

112. 36 of 1898; 112 and 113 of 1925; 182 of 1915; 97 of 1928. 

113. TAS. i. pp. 168-9; 260 of 1915; 569 of 1908. 

114. SII. iii, 150. 

115. 188 of 1919. 

116. 221 of 1921. 

116a. 204 of 1938-9; ARE. II. 24. 

116b. 139 of 1935-6, ARE. II. 37. 

117. 276 of 1901. See also 211 and 205 of 1928. 

118. 172 of 1923. 

119. 91 of 1920. 

120. See Studies, iv, v. 

121. Histoire des Institutions Politiques , Quatrieme Edition, Paris 
1914, pp. 244-6 (translated from the French original). 



Chapter XIX 


TAXATION: FINANCE 

The economy of the mediaeval state had little in com- 
mon with that of modern governments, and 
Subjects of the Indian State was no exception. Taxation 
was based partly on custom, and partly, 
especially in the case of new levies, on the consent, tacit or 
express, of the groups affected. Land was the mainstay of 
national economy and the land-tax, collected in cash or kind, 
or as often happened in the Cola State by a judicious mixture 
of both methods, was the chief source of revenue. Customs 
and octroi, profession taxes assessed in various ways, and the 
taxation of gifts of nature worked up by man, such as the 
produce of mines, forests and salt-pans, were also resorted 
to. And the corvee ( vetti , visti ) was exacted with more or 
less regularity. When the cumulative effects of these bur- 
dens became too oppressive, the people abandoned their 
homesteads and betook themselves elsewhere; the fear of 
local depopulation was an ever-present check on the rapacity 
of the tax-collector. 

The nature of the charges on the public revenues de- 
pended upon the agency that gathered the 
Public expendi- tax or the due; for it was not merely the 
‘ king’s government that collected revenue in 

the form of taxes; local bodies and other agencies of a com- 
munal or professional character also raised levies for various 
purposes. The main charge on the revenues of the king was 
the salaries of officials, including the maintenance of the army 
and the navy; in the higher rungs of public service these 
salaries took the form of assignments of particular revenue 
items in particular areas so that what was paid into the king’s 
treasury (tdlam) was a net income that remained after deduc- 
tions on account of such assignments. What remained after 
paying the charges of administration was the property of the 
king and entirely at his disposal. A good part of it no doubt 
went to the maintenance of the king’s personal establishment 



NAMES OF TAXES AND LEVIES 521 

including the numerous queens and their retinues. Members 
of the royal family who commanded the special affection of 
the ruling monarch, like Sembiyanmahadevi in Uttama Cola’s 
reign, Kundavai in Rajaraja’s, must have received very sump- 
tuous allowances from the king’s treasury. A great amount 
of treasure was kept in the form of jewels and precious stones 
which served the double purpose of personal distinction for 
the king and a financial reserve for the state. What Abu 
Zayd notes generally of Indian kings in the beginning of the 
tenth century no doubt applied to conditions in the Cola court 
as well. 1 "The Kings of India wear ear-rings of precious- 
stones mounted on gold. They wear round the neck collars 
of great value made of precious stones, red (rubies) and green 
(emeralds), but pearls have the greatest value and in most 
cases they are used. In fact, pearls constitute the treasure 
of the kings and then' financial reserve. 2 The generals and 
the high functionaries wear equally collars of pearls.’ On a 
smaller scale the assignees who were in the enjoyment of in- 
comes of varying sizes from the areas assigned to them imi- 
tated the model set by the king. All of them distributed their 
resources among hoarding, personal expenditure, and 
‘charity’, which went to meet much of what we should now 
call social expenditure. 

The language of the inscriptions describing the taxes and 
dues is seldom susceptible of complete or 
Revenue terms. sa ti s f ac tory interpretation at present, and 
nothing more can be done than to offer some tentative in- 
ferences from the records which will require confirmation or 
modification in the light of further study. The most general 
term for taxes and dues employed in the epigraphy of the 
period is irai or vari. Two other general terms are manni- 
padu and dandam. The former was of the nature of judicial 
fine incurred for specific offences. 3 Dandam is a closely re- 
lated term and often goes with manrupadu; in one instance 
the former is said to be an instance of the latter. 4 But dandam 
is a term also employed in another sense at least in one in- 
stance. A daiidam of 3,000 kalanju of gold was levied 5 by 
Parantaka I in his 38 year, a.d. 945, on the assembly of Tiruk- 
kudamukkil, and the amount was to be paid by them to the 
Pandip-padai, perhaps the troops (engaged in the) Pandyan 
(war) . Here the dandam has the appearance of a special war- 
C. 66 



522 


TAXATION: FINANCE 


levy, though this is not quite clear. The inscription does not 
give the reason for the levy. The amount was very huge in 
this case, and the assembly was still arranging for its pay- 
ment in the third year of Gandaraditya, by selling some lands 
to the local temple. It is also possible that this was a heavy 
punishment brought down on themselves by the sabha in 
some manner. A record from Alangudi states that Virara- 
jendra levied a special tax of one kalahju of gold per veli of 
land to finance his war against Vengl. 6 

Another general term of somewhat uncertain import is 
Hravu’, which, in one of the few instances 7 so far known of 
it, figures as some sort of a cess paid in kind and amounting 
to a little over 20 per cent of the p uravu, the land-tax. The 
word ‘ iravu ’ (begging) reminds one of a famous saying in 
the Kural which compares to a highwayman the king address- 
ing a request to his subjects (for financial assistance); this 
saying in turn recalls Kautilya’s dicta on pranaya (bene- 
volence) . 

Other general terms in common use were Ayam (re- 
venue) , Kadamai and Kudimai meaning 
Classes of taxes. ] itera j] y ‘duty* an( J ‘tenancy-dues’. ‘Ayam.’ 
had apparently the same wide application as ‘irai’ and a 
number of minor dues were grouped together under the gene- 
ral description of ‘sittayam’ or ‘sillirai’ both sometimes found 
together in the same inscription. 8 But the most significant 
grouping of the taxes and dues, that which provides a key to 
the whole tax-system, is that contained in a phrase like the 
following from an inscription of the twentieth year of Raja- 
raja I: 9 ‘Any kind of Kudimai due at the Sacred Victorious 
Gate, the taxation ( varippadu ) levied by the ur (town or 
village) , and any other type of Kudimai.’ The same inscrip- 
tion expands the last of the three items named into: ‘irai 
on those on which irai was due, and eccoru.’ 10 The ‘Sacred 
Victorious Gate’ ( tiru-kkorra-vasal ) means no doubt the gate 
of the king’s palace, and the first division of the taxes men- 
tioned in this list comprised those levied by the king’s govern- 
ment. 11 Then came the dues levied by the local assembly, 
ur, sabha or nagaram, and these were grouped under the name 
‘uridu-varippadu’, ‘taxes levied by the town (or village).’ 
Lastly, it is to be noticed that the term Kudimai was applied 



TAX COLLECTION AND REMISSION 


523 


to all the groups without distinction; thus understood, Kudi~ 
mat stands for the ‘duties of the kudis’ or ‘burdens of citizen- 
ship’ and is quite close in meaning also to ‘kadamai.’ After 
recording the gift of some fields as eri-patti (tank-land), the 
assembly (iir) of Nerkunam undertook never to exercise their 
rights of taxation in a manner calculated to abrogate the gift. 12 
The expression Ur-ldl-Iraiyili, tax-free under the ur, employ- 
ed of some lands also implies that such lands were exempted 
from all dues because the residents of the village had under- 
taken to pay these dues in the ratio of their holdings in the 
village. 13 

A general order of Rajaraja I issued by him at his capital, 
Tanjavur, and applicable to the Cola, Tondai 
Central control. an( j p^^ya countries shows the extent to 
which the local authorities could rely on themselves for the 
collection of local cesses, and the readiness of the central 
government to come to their aid, when necessary, in enforcing 
their demands. In certain classes of villages, those of the 
Brahmins, Vaikhanasas and Sramanas, persons who held land 
under the service-tenure ( kdni-udaiya ) were slack in the 
payment of dues assessed upon them by the village authorities 
( uriduvarippadu ) . The grounds for the attitude of these 
tenants are not stated; apparently, they held that they were 
not liable to these minor cesses; and there was an attempt at 
concerted action on their part. The dispute became a long- 
drawn affair, and the whole subject went up to the king for 
his decision. The inscription 14 records the royal award which 
went against the tenants and authorised the villages to realise 
the taxes from them as from other villagers ( urgalilar .) Those 
tenants who, from the sixteenth to the twenty-third year of 
the king’s reign, were found to be in arrears for a period of 
two complete years and a third, were declared liable to have 
their lands distrained and sold by the village concerned, and 
the defaulting tenants were forbidden to take any part in 
such proceedings. This award was made by the king on the 
124th day of the 24th year of his reign. 

The names of the taxes and their nature, so far as known, 

„ are generally learnt from the numerous 

Remissions. . , . , 

records or exemptions granted to various 
institutions from the payment of these dues. Although the 
local assemblies are seen to have been responsible for the bulk 



524 


TAXATION : FINANCE 


of such exemptions, examples are not wanting of the king 
granting similar exemptions in particular cases. 15 In either 
case, each authority must be understood to have remitted the 
particular dues which it would have been entitled to levy 
in the absence of the remission. This is expressly stated in some 
instances as when the sabha-viniyogam is said to be remitted 
on some temple lands which were already ur-kll-iraiyili. 16 
Cases of remission must be carefully distinguished from those 
of commutation in which, as has been shown elsewhere, all 
future dues were provided for by the pay- 
Commutation. men t 0 f a lump sum roughly equal to their 
value capitalised at current rates of interest. Though the 
formula of exemption was similar in either case, there was 
an important difference. When taxes were remitted no pay- 
ment was due from anybody; when they were only com- 
muted, the usual rule was for the assembly of the village, in 
which the property or the institution concerned was situated, 
to receive the lump payment made, to hold itself responsible 
to the authorities concerned, including itself, for the payment 
of future dues, and to issue a document to that effect to the 
parties concerned. 17 Such a deed and the lump sum paid 
were alike known as Irai-kaval (lit. tax-guard). 

The village assemblies were held responsible for the land 
revenue due to the central government from 

Responsibility of the lands 

in the village. This arrangement 
assemblies. , , , , , 

was enforced right to the end of our period. 

A record from Kalappal 18 (Tanjore dt.) dated a.d. 1274 des- 
cribes the sale, by the executive body of the village assembly, 
of land belonging to a certain person who had emigrated to 
the Pandya country and died there without having paid the 
dues on his lands for about ten years. That arrears of re- 
venue were allowed to accumulate for so many years gives us 
incidentally a measure of the difference in the method of col- 
lection between now and then. 

The role of custom in governing assessments becomes 
clear from the references to ancient time- 
denftom and prece ' honoured standards in particular matters. 

In an age of active municipal life conscious 
imitation is necessarily one of the methods by which the prac- 
tice of different towns tends to become uniform. One of the 
most conspicuous examples of this process in the Cola period 



EAR-MARKED LOCAL TAXES 


525 


is furnished by the adoption of the ‘ancient standard of Nandi- 
puram,’ in the levy of manru-padu in the towns of Melap- 
paluvur and Tiruccengodu in the reigns of Sundara Cola and 
Rajaraja I. 19 Nandipuram, also known as Ayirattali, 20 was a 
flourishing town in the Tanjore district often mentioned in 
the inscriptions. A verse preserved in the commentary on 
the Vlra-soliyam calls Sundara Cola the king of Nandipuram. 

Besides the regular taxes and dues, occasional contribu- 
tions were also levied for particular pur- 
tions 6Cial contribu ‘ poses by local authorities. An inscription at 
Erode, of the year a.d. 922, records that the 
people of a whole nadu undertook to pay some new cesses 
for providing for the worship of Krsna in a Visnu temple at 
Erode. These new cesses were: half-panam on each house- 
hold ( kudi ) ; an eighth (of a panam) each from either party 
to a marriage; and one manjadi and one kunri of gold as due 
( pattam ) from each crematorium, — indeed a strange assort- 
ment. 21 In the 22nd year of Kannaradeva (c. 962) the manri - 
dis (shepherds) of Bahur-nadu undertook to give one sheep 
to the Perumal (Visnu) of 6rl Mulattanam of Bahur (town) 
whenever any one among them consummated a marriage — 
kattilerappompodu. This rule applied also to those who came 
and settled in Bahur from outside. If any one failed to givo 
the sheep, the ganapperumakkal (executive committee) and 
the devaradiyar (lit. servants of gods — either temple officials 
or dancing girls or both) were authorised to take two sheep 
by force. 218 Again, at Talaiccangadu in Tanjore a sum of 100 
kasus was raised from the professional and religious groups 
of the locality for making certain necessary endowments in 
the local temple in the reign of Rajaraja I. 22 In 1096, the 
people of Kamarasavalli (Trichinopoly district) provided for 
a festival and for certain offerings in the temple by requiring 
the following collections to be made and remitted to the 
temple: one kuruni of paddy per ma of all the fields growing 
paddy, millet ( varagu ) or gingelly (el); one nut from each 
areca tree and one ulakku of oil from the house of every cul- 
tivator (velldn). 23 In the 43rd year of Kulottunga I (a.d. 
1113) the shepherds of Tiruvayppadi-nadu undertook to 
present each a sheep to a Visnu temple, Jalasayanam in Karur, 
on the occasions of nuptials ( kattil-erudal ) of their sons, of 
their daughters setting up separate families, and talaimani (?) 



526 TAXATION : FINANCE 

of their children. 238 At Tittagudi (South Arcot) , an image 
of the goddess Bhumidevi was set up about a.d. 1170, and 
the joint assembly of the Cittirameli-periya-nadu and the 
Tisai-ayirattu-aiimurruvar resolved to levy the following 
contributions for the requirements of services and offerings 
to the new deity: one p adakku of paddy per annum on each 
plough (er), one kuruni on each labourer (al), five kasus to 
be paid by each florist ( malai katti parimaruv&r) , two kasus 
by each of the servants ( pani-makkal ) employed under the 
two corporate bodies assessing the levy, four measures of ghl 
from each family of cowherds in the village. Those who went 
to the villages to collect these dues were to be given by each 
village: half kalam of white rice ( vellai arisi), one kalam of 
puri rice, fifty areca-nuts, two parru of betel leaves, one noli 
of salt, one uri of pepper, and one measure of gingelly oil; the 
collectors were also authorised to enter into dwellings, dis- 
train metal vessels and break mud vessels in the process of 
collection. 24 One may doubt if these sanctions are to be un- 
derstood literally; they might have been no more than an at- 
tempt to impress on the people the high importance and the 
urgency of the contributions thus levied. Four years later, 
in 1174, the guild of the oil-mongers subject to the Great 
Guild ( Managaram ) of Kanclpuram resolved that each oil- 
mill in the premises of a temple should provide for the speci- 
fied number of lamps and offerings in the temple by contri- 
bution of the necessary kadamai and one old kasu per annum, 
and should observe this rule as a caste-ordinance ( jdti-dhar - 
ma). 25 In 1232, the mahesvaras attached to the temple and 
mathas at Tirukkannapuram (Tanjore district) resolved to 
supplement the dwindling resources of the temple by levying 
contributions, in cash and kind from the servants of the 
temples in specified areas and from those who wore the sacred 
cord (punule kuriyaga ); elaborate arrangements were also 
sanctioned for the collection of the dues and for the remu- 
neration of the collectors. 26 The perilamaiydr of Sangendi 
(Trichinopoly district) order the collection of paddy from 
cultivators for meeting the requirements of the local temple. 27 
In the eleventh year of Rajendra III, a.d. 1257, the nagarattdr 
of Kovilur (Tanjore district) made over to the temple of 
Usattanam-udaiyar some of the tolls and other dues, usually 
levied by them viz. the rice they got as nilakkuli on their 



LAND SURVEY 


527 


Incidence. 


lands, and the padi-kdval, kai-vasi and cash dues ( kdsu - 
vargam) on each podi (bag) of rice brought into the town- 
ship. 28 In 1264, an inscription from Alangudi records the levy 
of a voluntary impost by the rathakaras on themselves for 
some purpose that is not clear owing to the damaged condi- 
tion of the record. 29 Lastly an undated record from Tirup- 
palanam contains a resolution of the nddu, nagaram and 
padinenvisaiyam transferring to the temple certain dues 
usually collected by them from the farmers and the octroi 
duties on pepper, areca-nut, bales of cloth, bags of rice and 
so on. 30 

Such instances of local imposts, together with the express 
statement sometimes made that borrowing 
was resorted to because the people were not 
in a position to bear any additional taxation, raise the impres- 
sion that on the one hand taxation in one form and another 
pressed the people rather hard, and that on the other hand, 
for most of the extra or ad hoc taxation resorted to, the active 
consent of the tax-payer was sought beforehand. 

Sometimes particular dues were ear-marked for a certain 
specified purpose such as the payment of interest on a per- 
petual loan given to a sabhd by the local temple. 31 The vil- 
lages situated on the banks of the Kaveri and its branches had 
sometimes to take special measures for keeping the river bund 
in good repair to avert inundation during the floods; such 
villages had to levy a special cess towards this purpose. An 
inscription of the reign of Kuldttunga III from Tiruppambu- 
ram mentions the Kaverik-karaiviniyogam. 32 

Land and houses provided the primary subjects of taxa- 
tion. An accurate survey of land leading to 
lands" veying ° f a careful recording of land rights in govern- 

ment books appears to have been under- 
taken sometime about the middle of Rajaraja I’s reign, and 
from that time, the references to land surveys and measure- 
ments as recorded in them become more noticeable. 33 An 
inscription dated 1184 from Tirumangalam, 34 Tanjore dis- 
trict, is of peculiar interest. It records that discrepancies had 
arisen in course of time between the record of land rights in 
the village and their actual distribution. The reasons were: 
first, the natural tendency to be remiss in maintaining the re- 



528 


TAXATION: FINANCE 


cords fully up to date; second, the encroachments on pathways, 
canal bunds and so on by greedy ryots who had surreptitious- 
ly extended their holdings; lastly, the Vikrama-Colapperaru 
had altered its course causing damage to some fields, and the 
taxes were still being assessed at the old rates without any 
allowance being made for this damage. A new survey was 
undertaken and the results recorded in detail in the inscrip- 
tion under reference. The records include the names and 
boundaries of all the shrines in the villages together with the 
lands they held. Among the entries made in the register, 
the following are noteworthy: land set apart for the sacrifice 
of goats ( kida ) to the pidari; kdnis for houses for ambattar 
and navidar; 35 the potter, carpenter, black-smith, goldsmith, 
washerman, and pallis come in for free shares. The site 
whence earth was dug out for the river bank, and the burning 
ground are declared ranged (excepted). But for the nume- 
rous gaps in this long inscription, it would be a most satisfac- 
tory and complete account of the distribution of land in the 
village at the time of the record. Not one 
as^smenf 110 ” and t ^ le inscriptions, however, contains a 
definite statement of the proportion of the 
produce that formed the normal share of the state. Frequent- 
ly enough the absolute quantity of paddy or other produce 
collected in the form of particular taxes from given units of 
measure is stated; one inscription 36 of the time of Rajadhi- 
raja I, for instance, records that the irai paid to a temple on 
some lands was 28 kalams of paddy per veil while on others it 
was only 19; it is clear that the rate of assessment differed with 
the fertility of the soil. The classification of land into diffe- 
rent grades, as many as twelve or more grades (taram) 37 
and unclassed lands ( taramili ) being alluded to, also points 
to the same conclusion. But in no single instance do we seem 
to have the data for calculating the precise ratio between the 
tax and the yield. In the circumstances, any effort to com- 
pare the incidence of the land-tax under the Colas with that 
in modern times is bound to be unsuccessful. 38 Vague state- 
ments to the effect that the king followed the laws of Manu 
or that he collected one-sixth of the produce of the earth as 
the tax due to him 39 can hardly be accepted at their face 
value. The standard rate of 100 kalams per veil, which figures 
in the Tanjore inscriptions of the reign of Rajaraja I as the 



MINOR DUES 


529 


share of the temple on devaddna lands 40 may, on the assump- 
tion that the fertility of land was then very much what it is 
now, be found to work out at something like a third of the 
gross produce. It is possible that this represents the state’s 
share on these lands made over to the temple; if this conclu- 
sion is correct the land tax under the Colas would compare 
not unfavourably with what it was at other times and in other 
parts of India. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
Munro calculated that in Anantapur the sarkar share was no 
less than 45 of the gross produce from land. 41 

That the revenue from agricultural lands was periodi- 
cally reassessed, and the classification of the land revised 
from time to time in accordance with changes in cropping, 
fertility and so on, is amply borne out by the inscriptions. 42 
Once more, the regular practice in these matters has to be 
inferred from the exceptions which are specially recorded. 
In some instances the natpar or the sabha undertake never to 
raise the land set apart for a charity from a lower grade to 
a higher one in any reclassification in future years. In others 
the tax due from specified areas of land is fixed in perpet- 
tuity as a nilai-irai, a permanent settlement. 
^Permanent assess- j n fifteenth year of a Parakesari, at the 
instance of Kandan-Maravan, a Cola feuda- 
tory, the nattdr of Kunrak-kurram assigned some land to a 
public servant as his janma-bhumi (same as jlvita?) , and 
ordered that he was to pay on the land a fixed tax ( nilai-irni ) 
of 25 kalanjus of gold of the treasury standard of fineness 
(tdla-ccemmai) . 43 From the Tiruvalangadu plates, it is seen 
that Rajendra I fixed in perpetuity 44 the dues to be paid to 
the temple of Mahadeva every year by the devadana village 
of Palaiyanur. 

A brief review of some typical inscriptions will convey 
M , . a general idea of the nature and number of 
taxes, cesses and other dues. Though their 
name is legion, most of them were not general, but occasional 
and restricted in their incidence. In a.d. 944 the sabha. of 
Ukkal resolved that their executive committees 45 were to 
abstain from exacting Vetti (forced labour), Vedilai and 
Valakkanam from the tenants settled in Sodiyambakkam, a 
a hamlet assigned to a Visnu temple in the locality; the temple 
was moreover granted the right to levv and exact fines 
C. 67 



530 


TAXATION : FINANCE 


(manru-padu) from the peasants of the village for their faults 
and sins (kurran-dosam) 46 The Madras Museum Plates of 
Uttama Cola record that the older inhabitants of Solaniya- 
mam in Kanclpuram, an area belonging to the temple, were 
excused the payment of all ancient dues; 47 those residents, 
however, who had come from other towns and villages and 
had settled in it, were required to contribute as irai to the 
god of Uragam a quarter measure of oil and two nalis of rice 
per household per month; even they were exempt from any 
other dues levied by the nagaram. The kol-nirai-kuli and 
kal-alavukuli of Kanclpuram which were assigned as income 
to the temple of Uragam are explained in the Sanskrit portion 
of the Museum plates as tolls on articles measured by weight 
and by capacity. 48 That this was a very small toll is seen 
from the rate of half-nali per kalam recorded in an inscrip- 
tion from Tiruvamattur of the time of Rajaraja I; 49 in this 
place this kuli was given to the pallis of the village who 
measured the paddy due to the temple from its tenants till 
about a.d. 1010, when as a result of an enquiry into the 
affairs of the temple, this kuli was transferred to the uvaccar 
as remuneration for their services in the temple, including the 
cost of clothes to be supplied to a mani (a brahmacarin) who 
officiated at the sri-bali ceremony. Examples of general taxes 
falling upon the residents of Tiruvallam in the fourth year of 
Rajendra I are stated to be : the price of water from wells 
and tanks and the gold of joyous persons. The latter ( ugap - 
par pon ) seems to be a small payment made by householders 
on auspicious occasions like marriages .»> In the sixth year of 
Rajendra I, the Tiruvalangadu plates record a formidable list 
of parihdras made over to the temple; all these parihdras 
the list is a long one and yet said to be not exhaustive 51 — 
were thenceforth to be collected by the temple and not by 
the king. Some years later, in a.d. 1021, the sabha of Vem- 
barrur received sixty-five kdsus& from the Siva temple of 
Sri-Kudittittai, and in lieu of interest thereon, they agreed to 
forgo the following dues from some temple lands: the sidd- 
hdya-kdsu, the pancavdra-paddy, gram and dholl, oil and ghee 
and other vari levied by the town ( uriduvari ), the payment 
for the tank (eri-wti) and the forced labour (vedanai) on 
banks and bunds ( kulai and kurambu ) and other smaller dues 
c silvari ). An inscription of Udaiyar Sundara Cola-Pandya 



DUES IN MONEY AND KIND 


531 


from Tiruvallsvaram 53 states that five veils of land were con- 
verted from brahmadeya into ryotwari land ( vellan-vagai ) 
and required thereafter to pay as land-tax ( iraik-kadan ) 
paddy to the amount of 642 kalams, 6 kurinis 2% nails and 
2% sevidus as measured by the ndrdyam equal to five nalis; 
besides 35% and 3 1 80 kasus as uruvu kol-nilan-kasu and 
5 kasus as katci-erudu-kasu. Among money-dues (ay am) to 
be collected from some lands in Kllur were : maramanjddi , 
padikdval, vendu-kol , manaik-katci-pperu, kuraik-kasu, kidak- 
loasu and others; only these ayams, and no other kind of dues, 
were to be levied from the lands (older devaddnas excepted) 
set apart by two Malaiyaman chieftains for certain expenses 
in the temple at Tirukkoyilur. 54 Of these cesses mara-man- 
jd4i seems to have been the levy of one manjadi of gold on 
each useful tree; padi-kaval was no doubt a payment on 
account of the village watchman’s fee, and kidak-kdsu, a 
small cess on each head of male cattle; the nature of the other 
dues is not easily understood. An important record of the 
reign of Rajadhiraja I from Tribhuvani gives the information 55 
that the annual share of the landlord on 72 veils of land 
was 12,000 kalams of paddy, giving an average of 166 and 
I kalams per veil; and that after remitting this amount of 
paddy, the tenants cultivating these lands were to be held 
liable only for eri-dyam, padi-kaval-kuli, free labour 
( amanji ) on the tank, and not for any other customary dues 
( marijadi ) of the p iddgai (section of village) such as velldn- 
irai, ulavirai, dl and amanji. In the second year of Vlrarajen- 
dra 56 the proceeds from the following taxes in several villages 
named belonging to three nadus were made over to the temple 
of Tiruvenkadu towards the expenses on festivals and offer- 
ings on the king’s birthdays: all kll-iraip-pattam (smaller 
taxes) including urk-kalanju, kumara-kaccdnam , minpdttam , 
drrup-pdttam and tattarp-pattam; tarip-pudavai, dasa-vandam, 
velik-kasu, sevakak-kd.su, valangai-idangai-mahanmai, tingal- 
moham, and ten kasus per head on account of the panmai 
and panda-vetti (free supplies?) dues from these villages. 
Another record of the same reign dated three years later gives 
a very similar list of taxes and dues from places in the Chin- 
gleput district made over to the temple of Accarapakam for 
a like purpose. 57 In this list the term antarayam is applied 
to a number of taxes collected by the sabha including irai- 



532 TAXATION : FINANCE 

yilik-kdsu, panmai, panda-vetti, ugavaipon. kaval-sevagum 
and so on; and others fall under the heads of kudimai and 
kadamai, though the principle of grouping is by no means 
easy to infer from the names of the taxes themselves. 

In a.d. 1100, the dues remitted on some devadana lands 
at Colapuram (South Travancore) included madaik-kuli and 
dasavandam among the pattams, and antarayam and sil- 
kudimai. 58 An inscription from Tenneri (Chingleput) , dated 
1116, exempts the people residing on some lands from the 
payment of vasaltiramam (door-tax) and the provision of 
manai-yiraisoru and vetti-muttai-yal (free food and labour 
on specified occasions) ; the mahasabhu undertake themselves 
to pay nirvilai-antarayam and all sillirai on the same land. 59 
Again, a record of 1123 from Tindivanam mentions that for 
capitalising the due on a plot of land worth 20 kasus, a donor 
had to pay down 100 kasus, from the interest on which were 
to be met dues described as follows : sennir-amanji tiruveluc- 
cik-kudimai peruvari sillirai eccoru vetti muttaiydl kdyil 
vasalil pondakudimai epperppattadum. 59a The same record 
also gives the following as due from the nattakkollai, resi- 
dential part, of the village : uppukkdsu sennir-amanji tiru- 
veluccik-kudimai eccoru kurrunellu epperppattana. The sabhd 
of Madhurantakam sell some land from the gopracdrabhumi, 
grazing common, of the township, and in doing so, they state 
that they forgo the kadamai due on areca-trees growing on 
the land then sold, and in fact, all other taxes (vari) includ- 
ing the manai-irai (house tax) on the houses built upon it. 60 
The names of other dues mentioned in the inscriptions of the 
reign of Rajaraja III are : map-pad akku, kankdni, tari-irai in 
the tirumadai-vildgam (temple premises), maganmai from 
carpenters and smiths and potters, poll tax (pervari) on vdni- 
yar (oil mongers) , and the kadamai on oil-mills— mentioned 
in a record of the thirteenth year from Munnur, South 
Arcot; 61 taniyat-peru and kangdni md-nellu in a record of the 
fifteenth year from Vayalur (Vailur); 62 karttigai-arisi, kdrt- 
tigai-paccai and other cash dues ( kasayam ) , kadai-irai (shop- 
tax) and djivakak-kasu. evidently a tax on Ajivakas— men- 
tioned in an inscription of the twenty-second year from Poy- 
gai near Virincipuram; 63 kanakka-vari , eduttukkotti. arimuk- 
kai— three dues collected in the form of paddy, and vettip-puda- 
vai, mudar-riramam , vagaindaka.su, pattolaik-kdsu, mulladisin- 



WATCHMAN’S FEE 


533 


nam, velip-payaru, tdppadi-arisi, acca-tari, saligait-ta-ri, tusa- 
gat-tari , parait-tari — all apparently small cash dues (kdsuka- 
damai ) mentioned in a record 64 of the twenty-eighth year from 
the same place, with the addition ‘and other dues in cash and 
kind’; and lastly pattit-tendam, mavadai, maravadai in a record 
of the thirtieth year from Tiruvannamalai. 65 Most of these 
terms are still obscure; but they give an idea of the extent of 
local variations and the senseless multiplication of very minor 
dues in the tax system, and almost seem to suggest that the 
number of dues was increasing with the weakness and in- 
effectiveness of the central government. There can be no 
doubt that, judged by any standard, the system especially in 
the later period was complex, confused, vexatious in the ex- 
treme and, most probably, relatively unproductive. 

An inscription 66 of Adhirajendra states that the minor 
dues from the devadana villages of the Tiruvallam temple de- 
tailed under the heads klliraippattam and antarayam, were 
collected at the consolidated rate of 25 kdsus per 1000 kalams. 
But what are these 1000 kalams? Do they represent gross 
produce, or the temple’s share of it? On the former assump- 
tion, the minor taxes would constitute a substantial addition 
to the burden laid on land. As the same inscription states 
that one kasu was equal to four kalauis of paddy, the surcharge 
on account of the minor taxes comes to 10 r v . If this is a rate 
calculated on the gross produce, and if the incidence of land 
revenue calculated above may be presumed to have continu- 
ed to hold in this reign as well, cultivators had to give up in 
one way and another something well over 40 "r of the gross 
produce; a rate that does not compare unfavourably with 
what we know of the land tax under the Vijayanagar or the 
Mughal rulers. 

The term padi-kaval occurring more than once in the 
lists of taxes and dues deserves more at- 
Padi-kaval. tention than most of the other items men- 
tioned; for it refers to a universally 
prevalent system of safeguarding property from theft, espe- 
cially at night. This was the system by which each village 
maintained its own haval-karan who, in return for certain 
regular payments to him, held himself responsible for the secu- 
rity of property in the village to the extent of either recover- 
ing lost property or making it good; this system survived 



534 


TAXATION : FINANCE 


in some measure almost till the other day in the Tamil country, 
and it seems to have been indeed of very ancient origin. A 
special staff of officials entrusted with this duty, and maintain- 
ed from the proceeds of a special cess ear-marked for the 
purpose, the padi-ktival-kuli as it is sometimes called, formed 
a regular feature of the Cola administrative system. In the 
later Cola days, we find these duties increasingly falling into 
the hands of the over-grown vassals whose rise was a symp- 
tom of the imminent dissolution of the empire. Humbler men 
in charge of relatively restricted areas also carried on their 
work more quietly and with less detriment to the well-being 
of the central administration. An inscription from Talaic- 
cangadu (Tanjore district) dated a . d . 1221 states that the pddi- 
kappar were provided with residences in the villages in 
addition to some allowances as their wages. 67 Examples of 
the other type are quite numerous; often an individual is found 
in possession of the padi-kaval-kani of a whole nadu, if not of 
a wider area, and such an individual often gave expression to 
his vanity or piety by remitting the fee due from sacred pro- 
perty belonging to temples, or requiring the temple authorities 
to burn lights or conduct festivals in the manner specified by 
him instead of paying the fee. The Vanakovaraiyas, Malaiya- 
mans, Muttaraiyas, Sambuvarayas and Kadavarayas all fur- 
nish instances of the practice sketched above. 68 The terms 
perumbadi-kaval 69 and mer-padi-kaval 70 are sometimes em- 
ployed, and these are perhaps meant to indicate the wider 
sphere of their police duties, or their higher status as com- 
pared to the ordinary padi-ktival of the villages. 

The term iraiyili (tax-free) so often met with in the 
epigraphy of the period does not appear to 
Iraiyili. have always meant absolute immunity 

from all taxes and dues. The nature and 
extent of the immunity granted was apparently defined in 
each individual case, the use of the term in respect of any 
land simply meaning that there were some such immunities 
to be taken account of in the particular case. This is seen 
not only from the mention in some inscriptions of an impost 
called iraiyilik-kasu, meaning perhaps kasu due from iraiyili- 
lands, 70a but from an explicit record of the time of Rajaraia 
I from Tiruppanmalai in the North Arcot district. 71 From 
this it becomes clear that the village Kurakam-padi was an 



LAND USE IN VILLAGES 535 

iraiyili-paUic-candam in the enjoyment ( bhogam ) of the Jaina 
temple in Tiruppanmalai. The Ilada chieftains ruling in the 
area before the eighth year of Rajaraja, the date of the ins- 
cription, levied the karpuravilai from the temple, and as a 
result the temple did not have enough for its expenses; 72 the 
wife of the Ilada chieftain Vira Sola drew his attention to this 
fact when they went together to worship in the temple, and 
he agreed thenceforth to cease collecting the karpura-vilai, 
and another cess, called anniyaya-vava-danda-irai, of which 
the exact nature is by no means certain. 73 An inscription of 
the reign of Rajaraja III from Tirukkadaiyur 74 furnishes 
evidence that even iraiyili lands had to make periodical pay- 
ments of lump sums on a lower scale than usual for the re- 
newal of their iraiyili status — iraiyili varisaippadi-irai- 
mudar-kasu tandakkadavadana-padi-tavira. The lands dealt 
with in this record are described as kasu kolld ur-kil-iraiyili. 

Again, as noticed already, the term ur-kil-iraiyili sug- 
gests that the ur made itself responsible for the dues thereon; 
another possibility is that the land so described was free from 
the payment of local taxes, but had to contribute to the re- 
venues like any other land. 

The Tanjore inscriptions of the reign of Rajaraja I make 
it clear that in each village some land was 
Non-taxable land. a k so ] u t e iy exempt from all taxes and im- 
posts. Such lands included the sites occupied by the ur-nat- 
tam (i.e., the residential part of the village), the temples, 
tanks, the channels passing through the village, the paraicceri 
(the hamlet of the pariahs), the kammanacceri (the artisans’ 
quarters) and the burning ground (sudu-kadu) , 75 The total 
extent of such areas is stated and subtracted from the gross 
area of the village in order to ascertain the net area of taxable 
land. The existence of different grades of iraiyili lands with 
varying degrees of immunity enjoyed by them is thus clearly 
established. 

A late Cdla inscription from Tiruvorriyur, 76 dated a.d. 
1223, records the fact that some lands which were treated as 
irangal were, on enquiry, found to be only nxngal and that, 
consequently, they had to pay into the treasury of the temple 
a considerable number of taxes and dues which had so far 
not been collected. It is clear that the term irangal means 



536 


TAXATION: FINANCE 


exemption (from taxes) while ningal implies only that the 
taxes were removed from the state revenue registers because 
they had been transferred to some other agency for its own 
use. 77 Again, some cultivable land which was lying unclaimed 
( parrili ) was assigned in 1233 by the sabha of Talaiccangadu 
as iraiyili devadana to three Siva temples of the locality; the 
gift contained the provision that if the land was not entered 
as iraiyili in the olugu and pottagam, title-deed and register, 
but only as tirappu, open (to assessment) , the irai on the land 
was to be borne by the inhabitants of the village. 78 Evidently 
the record was engraved when the status of the land had not 
been finally decided; the assembly had evidently taken steps 
to secure iraiyili status for the land from the central govern- 
ment; but they also provided against the contingency of their 
efforts proving unsuccessful. Records like this give us a 
casual g lim pse of the relations between local and central 
authorities. 

To estimate the incidence of so complex a system of taxes 
and dues, central and local, compulsory and 
ta^sjfstem ° f 4116 °P tiona ^> modified by partial and total re- 
missions of various types would always be 
a difficult task; and in the actual state of our evidence, ut- 
terly impossible. The pressure of taxation in different locali- 
ties must have varied with the number and rates of the local 
cesses added by local authorities to the tax system imposed 
by the central government which may be presumed to have 
been more or less uniform as between different provinces. 
Then, the wide-spread practice of assigning revenues to mem- 
bers of the official nobility, to feudatory chieftains, to temples 
and so on, introduced a new factor; not all of these agencies 
could have adopted equally rigorous methods of exacting 
their dues. An appeal to the centre against local excesses, 
and in the last resort, migration from the locality when it was 
possible were the only remedies open; and it is hard to be- 
lieve that the utmost vigilance even of an efficient bureau- 
cracy could have done much to ensure a 
Processes of tax uniformity of practice among such diverse 
collection. . „ 

agencies of tax-collection. Instances are not 

altogether lacking of oppressive methods adopted in the pro- 
cess of collecting taxes and other dues; the sabha, of brah- 
madeyam Mahendramangalam have left on record 79 the fact 



TAX COLLECTION METHODS 


537 


that in a.d. 1001 the military (padaiyildr) subjected them 
to such torture ( vedanai ) , putting them in water and standing 
them in the sun, that, unable to bear the treatment, they pro- 
ceeded to Tanjavur with an escort to lay the matter before 
Rajaraja-Maharaja; and that the king remitted the matter 
again to local officers. Supporting the man on the spot is evi- 
dently not so modern a device in administration as we are 
apt to think; though incomplete, the inscription seems to re- 
cord the enforcement of the original order without any modi- 
fication being effected. In the village of Jambai, an officer 
demanded some tax from a woman in the third year of Rajen- 
dra II; 80 when she denied her liability the officer did some- 
thing 81 which forced her to commit suicide by taking poison. 
The officer had to expiate the crime by endowing a lamp of 
32 kdsus. 

While thus, in the early period of imperial Cola rule, the 
rigour of collection occasionally tended to become oppressive 
in character, the people were exposed, in later times, to 
another danger. This arose from the increasing autonomy of 
local chieftains who were no longer restrained by a powerful 
central government and often resorted to oppressive fiscal 
methods. An inscription from Tiruvorriyur, 82 dated a.d. 
1213, records in detail a painful episode, possibly typical of 
several unrecorded occurrences of the period. A Yadava- 
raya chieftain either imposed a new tax or revised the assess- 
ment under an old head of revenue — the name of the tax 
involved is pon-vari — and levied a rate of one-fourth mddai 
on each veil of arable land; he did not allow the usual exemp- 
tions in favour of deserted or decadent townships, but insisted 
on all the villages and townships of the nddu, whatever their 
condition, paying the full measure of the dues. The tax- 
gatherer appointed by the Yadavaraya came round to Pun- 
naivayil; and after collecting as much of the tax as he could, 
he caught hold of the members of the local sabhd and bound 
and imprisoned them; the members of the sabhd thereupon 
proceeded to sell away 80 velis of the cultivable land of the 
village together with part of its residential area for a sum of 
two hundred palangasus in order to meet the balance of the 
oppressive impost. It is significant that the man who bought 
the land at once transferred it to the temple of Tiruvorriyur, 
ear-marking it for certain specified purposes, religious and edu- 
C. 68 



538 TAXATION: FINANCE 

cational; this was obviously because of a sentimental dislike 
to use for one’s own private benefit property acquired under 
such distressing conditions. Virtually, therefore, it comes to 
this: that a generous nobleman came to the rescue of the op- 
pressed sabka, and saw to it that though the village became 
distinctly poorer on account of the new impost, the loss it 
sustained was just made tolerable to it, as it led to a definite 
increase in the social amenities available in the neighbourhood. 
In the years 1238 and 1239, we have records 83 from Mannar- 
gudi, in the heart of the Tanjore district, stating in unmis- 
takable terms the oppressive and vexatious nature of the im- 
posts levied on the people by all and sundry authorities and 
the consequent resolution taken by them to abandon all cul- 
tivation until conditions improved. The language employed 
is very clear and furnishes an eloquent testimony to the in- 
ternal condition of the Cola kingdom in its decay: palarum 
kai vandapadi tavdik-kolgaiyale engalukkut-taripparudiydle, 
‘as it has become difficult for us to sustain ourselves on account 
of the arbitrary imposts exacted by several (persons) .’ These 
complaints from the people were heard by the sabha of Man- 
nar gudi met together with the assemblies of five adjacent 
nodus , and the meeting resolved to authorise the people to 
pay only the legitimate dues that were then recorded in detail 
and to resist all other demands in excess of the standard laid 
down by that meeting. It should be noted, however, that 
considering the extent of space and time covered by these in- 
scriptions, the instances of the employment of such oppressive 
methods are remarkably few indeed. 

It should also be noted that protests against unusual 
levies and successful attempts on the part of the people 
to resist them by codifying the standard of normal fiscal 
practice are not unknown. An inscription 84 of the third 
year of Kulottunga I from the Mysore territory is very 
interesting in this connection. The inscription is a record 
of the periya-visaiyam, the Great Assemblage. It opens 
by saying that since the race of Cola rulers began, no 
tax had been laid on cows and she-buffaloes in all the terri- 
tory comprising the 78 nadus of Nigarili-sola-mandala, the 
48,000 pumi of Jayangonda-sola-mandalam, the Rajendra- 
solap-padinenpumi assigned to the Valangai-mahasenai 
of the Great Army, and that consequently, the new levy 



CUSTOM AND TAXATION 539 

on cows and she-buffaloes introduced by Adigarigal Sola- 
muvendavelar need not be paid. Again the government share 
( melv&ram ) was specified as one-fifth of the produce of forest 
tracts and dry crop lands, and one-third of that of rice lands 
under a tank. Further, the rate of tax on the cultivation of 
hill-tracts by hill-tribes ( vedar ) was to be one cloth ( puda - 
vai) for 1500 kulis; the record also laid down the rates for all 
other miscellaneous dues and services, concluded by specify- 
ing the length of the measuring rod to be employed in land 
measurements. We have not many recorded instances of 
such popular attempts to fix the scale of customary taxes and 
dues to government; and such attempts might not have always 
restrained a self-willed and autocratic ruler or chieftain; but 
that they were made, and that in the popular consciousness 
there was a clear limit to the taxing power of government — 
these are facts of some significance and must be noted in any 
account of Cola polity. 

The methods of collection, however, clearly included 
distraint and sale of land for arrears in payment; such sales 
were public in character and called after the king in whose 
reign they took place. In a Rajendrapperuvilai, for instance, 
the assembly of Arinjigai-caturvedimangalam came by some 
land, as the three sons of Narayana-kramavittan had migrated 
elsewhere and not paid the dues on the land for a period of 
about fifteen years. 85 Rajaraja’s order against the Kani- 
udaiyar (service-tenants) of particular classes of villages in 
the Cola, Pandya and Tondai countries, which has been dis- 
cussed above, also sanctions confiscation and sale of land for 
arrears of ur-idu-varippadu. 

The ur of Tirukkaccur (Chingleput district) suffered 
from a failure of harvest, and finding it difficult to pay the 
taxes, they resorted to raising a loan from a nobleman in the 
neighbourhood; they did not repay the sum, perhaps they 
could not, but allowed him to bring under cultivation some 
of the waste land belonging to the village, and then, in lieu 
of the interest on the loan they undertook to pay the taxes on 
the land newly brought under the plough. 86 A similar in- 
stance of crop-failure due to scarcity of water in a village in 
the Tanjore district is met by a reduction of the area under 
wet crop from a.d. 1160, the local temple being required to 



540 TAXATION : FINANCE 

convert some land into a betel garden so as to relieve the 
pressure on the water-resources of the village; 87 the temple 
also advanced some money, and got the land in question de- 
clared a kdsu-kolld-iraiyili. 

Instances are by no means wanting, from the later Cola 
period, of land tax being realised, in the last resort, by the 
sale of the defaulters’ lands. Some Brahmin tenants of Vana- 
vanmadevi-eaturvedimangalam (Tiruccirai) in the Tanjore 
district, unable to pay the taxes, had abandoned their lands 
and left the village, and these lands were sold to a neighbour- 
ing temple in 1117; 88 it is not clear whether the inability of the 
deserters to pay the taxes was due to heavy assessment or 
irregular collection resulting in an accumulation of heavy 
arrears; the sabhd of the village conducted the sale, and this 
favours the latter assumption. Two years later, a very simi- 
lar instance of desertion and sale is recorded in Koneriraja- 
puram, also in the Tanjore district; 89 in this case, it was 
clearly the tenants who deliberately defaulted; there was no 
accumulation of arrears, for only the taxes of the forty-ninth 
regnal year, the year of the record, were involved; and the 
village assembly was required by a letter from the revenue 
officers of the king to sell the lands and realise the tax dues. 
It looks as if an attempt was made to enforce more regular 
collections. 

In the fifth year of Vikramacola, the mahdsabhd of Kari- 
kala-cola-caturvedimangalam resolved to fulfil their responsi- 
bilities in regard to land-revenue due from persons who were 
unable to pay the taxes and from those who had emigrated 
elsewhere, by selling their lands in sabhai-vilai, public sale 
by order of the sabhd, or by making them iraiyili devaddnas 
and, of course, getting the money equivalent from the temple 
treasury. 90 

An inscription of Vikramacola’s reign from Uttattur, 
(Trichinopoly district) is interesting in many ways. 91 It 
records that a person, in possession of a kdni (landed estate) 
which he had bought, was unable to meet the tax dues there- 
on; the sabhd of fSrlkantha-caturvedimangalam, where his 
land was situated, took the matter up. Meanwhile, he was 
found guilty of a minor offence in the temple and sentenced 
to a fine of 20 kasus. His lands were sold, and the taxes and 



THE RICH AND THE POOR 541 

fine realised from the proceeds. These incidents seem to be 
recalled several years later in an inscription from the same 
place, 92 dated 1199, which states that the land had originally 
been held by a Brahmin who, having stolen the jewels of the 
goddess, was compelled to give it up along with his house in 
the nattam and his slaves ( nattamanaiyum adimaiyum ) as 
devaddna. 

Even a temple had occasionally to sell its land to be able 
to meet the revenue dues on its estates; an instance of this is 
recorded in Saluvankuppam near Mamallapuram, about 
a.d. 1215. 93 On the other hand, the temples collected the dues 
owing to them from their tenants by distraining and, if neces- 
sary, selling their possessions with the king’s sanction. 94 

No account of the financial aspect of Cola administration 
can be complete which omits to lay stress 
Social expendi- on the extent to which the excesses to 
ture. which the system was liable corrected 

themselves more or less automatically 
by the social uses to which wealth was put. Hoarding was by 
no means unknown, especially on the part of kings and tem- 
ples; but there was much spending also, and in the conditions 
of mediaeval life the opportunities for extravagant and waste- 
ful expenditure of an anti-social character were much fewer 
than at the present day. No great gulf separated the personal 
habits of the rich magnate and his poorer neighbours. The 
rich had to seek distinction by competing in the service of the 
gods and of the poor. To build a temple or endow a matha, 
to attach a school or a hospital to either, to reclaim land and 
to promote irrigation, — such were the most common roads to 
social eminence and public recognition. The temples which 
by their hoards tempted the cupidity of the foreign invader at 
a later day, were at this period, the mainstay of the people 
and their refuge in times of physical and financial distress. 
They constituted a sort of reserve bank with branches in every 
village which absorbed and retained the surplus wealth of 
the community in normal times, and released it for use in 
seasons of financial stringency, and was ever ready to help 
the community to turn a sharp comer. A destructive flood, 
or prolonged drought might have wrought far more permanent 
damage to the economy of a locality if it were not for the 
assistance its people derived from the resources of the temple 



542 


TAXATION : FINANCE 


accumulated by the piety and industry of generations of their 
ancestors. The king, the nobles and the temples drew largely 
in various ways upon the products of the industry of the com- 
mon people; but much of this wealth was returned to them 
in ways that greatly advanced their common good. It was a 
wonderful social harmony based, not on equality of classes or 
individuals, but on a readiness to give and take, a mutual good- 
will that had its roots deep down at the foundations of com- 
munal life. 


1. Ferrand —Voyage, p. 138. 

2. The Tiruvalangadu plates say that Rajendra I captured the pearls 
of the Pandya King in his Southern expedition. 

3. Note the use of manpa as a verb in this sense. (SII. iii, 27, 1. 9) . 

4. SII. iii, 93 — Dandam-ullittu epper-ppatta manrupadum (11. 28- 
30). The preceding syllables ‘anavay’ have been read together with 
‘daitdam’ by Krishna Sastri, who sees a new duty in the phrase ‘anavay- 
dandam.’ I am inclined to think that ‘anavay’ means ‘as occasion arises.' 
Again Krishna Sastri takes manru-padu to be a duty levied by the 
assembly; if the assembly had a part in its levy and collection, it must 
have exercised its judicial power on such occasions. 

5. 255 of 1911. 

6. 521 of 1920, ARE. 1921, II 35. 

7. SII. iii, 142. 

8. 194 of 1923. 

9. 121 of 1925. Cf. also 388 of 1913; and 140 of 1926 for similar 
phrases. 147 of 1925 has: ‘peru-vari sil-vari tiru-vaialil ponda kudimai 
epperppattadum. See also 149 of 1925. 

10. This is one of the most difficult terms. Does it stand for 
eccoru after all, ‘any kind of meal’ or ‘a meal on any account’ ? It will 
be remembered that the right of some persons to be fed is stipulated for 
in certain conditions. 

11. Sometimes we have only Vaialil-ponda Kudimai for this class 
as in 388 of 1913. cf. Rdjadvdra in 197 of 1923. 

12. 'SII. iii, 93. The phrase used is ‘Kudimai-seyyil’, if (we) levy 
Kudimai. Krishna Sastri translates this into : ‘if we assert our occu- 
pancy-rights’. It seems to me to be a promise meant to stop, not the 
encroachment on the land itself, but on the income from it which was 
to be devoted to the maintenance of the tank. 

13. 109 of 1911 seems to explain the meaning of Ur-ktl-iraiyili in 
the following: innilangalukku ur vilukkattuppadi pottagappadi parn 
vanda nilam engal pergalile erri intkkak-kadavdm agavum; engal pak- 
kal virrukkondarum stri-dhanam permrum marrum pejru udaiySrum 



NOTES 


543 


ippadi irukkak-kadavargal agavum. 224 of 1917 from Korukkai, Tan- 
jore district, dated 1169, furnishes an example of the sabha taking 160 
kasus from the temple treasury and agreeing to pay the taxes due on 
half a nilam which, after years of neglect, was brought under cultiva- 
tion to provide for the supply of a flower garland every night to the 
temple; the sabha agreed to continue to pay the taxes on the land ir- 
respective of any changes in ownership. 

14. SII. iii, 9. 

15. 604 of 1920. 

16. 526 of 1918. 

17. 168 of 1929. 

18. 336 of 1925. 

19. 365 and 367 of 1924; SII. iii, 212. 

20. 145 of 1928. 

21. 167 of 1910. The record is a late copy of a genuine one. 

21a. 177 of 1902 (SII. vii, no. 804). 

22. 198 of 1925. 

23. 73 of 1914. 

23a. 165 of 1936-7, ARE. II, 28. 

24. 21 of 1903. 

25. 261 of 1909. 

26. 537 of 1922. 

27. 327 of 1928. 

28. 204 of 1908. 

29. 4 of 1899. 

30. 187 of 1928. 

31. TAS. vi, pp. 11-12. 

32. 96 of 1911. cf. the term sabha- viniy ogam. 

33. 199 of 1917; 59 of 1913; 413 of 1902, etc. 

34. 113 of 1927. 

35. Both the words now mean ‘barbers’; possibly there was some 
difference between the two classes in the past. 

36. 103 of 1912. 

37. 343 of 1917, 1. 11; 
grade at Mahadanapuram. 

38. IA. Vol. 40 (1911) 
this direction. 

39. SII. iii, 28, 1. 7. 

40. SII. ii, 4, 5 etc. 

41. Letter to the Private Secretary to the Governor, dated Anan- 
tapur, 20th June 1806. I owe this reference to Dr. K. N. V. Sastri. See 
also Moreland, India at the death of Akbar, p. 98. 

42. 3 of 1899 is a very interesting, though fragmentary, record giv- 
ing a vivid idea of the process of re-settlement and the accuracy of the 
land-revenue registers of the time. 

43. 356 of 1924. 

44. Ninryraiyay, 1. 76. 


386 of 1903, dated 1074, mentions the 14th 
, pp. 165-8, contains a superficial attempt in 



544 


TAXATION: FINANCE 


45. The committees named are: samvatsara, eri and tottam. 

46. SII. iii, 12. 

47. II: 89-94. The expression Pit rva-marjjddi-irai recalls purvaca- 
ram of the Uttaramerur inscriptions. 

48. 11. 4, 15-6. 

49. 16 of 1922. 

50. SII. iii, 54. The text is: me-nirum kinarum nlr-kkly vilaiyum 

ugappar ponnum. Hultzsch translates this into: ‘the high level water, 
the wells, the price paid for water, the gold of ugappar.’ Me-riir in 
contrast with kinaru (well) seems to imply ‘a receptacle of water from 
above’, a tank. The whole of the first phrase, therefore, may be 
understood as above. 

51. SIL iii, pp. 410-11, 11. 436-442. Krishna Sastri gives tentative 
renderings of some of these in his translation (pp. 436-37). 

52. 292 of 1908. 

53. 327 of 1916. 

54. 262 of 1902. 

55. 176 of 1919. 

56. 113 of 1896. 

57. 253 of 1901. 

58. 31 of 1896. 

59. 224 of 1922. Note the word tiramam (drachm). 

59a. 205 of 1902. 

60. 128 of 1896. 

61. 57 of 1919. 

62. 421 of 1922. 

63. SII. i, 59. The phrase asuvigal-perar-kasu occurs in 199 of 
1912, a very interesting record. 

64. SII. i, 64. 

65. 495 of 1902. 

66. SII. iii, 57, 11. 8 ff. 

67. 207 of 1925, murkavaludaiya padi-kappar. 

68. 243 of 1929; 177* of 1906; 16 of 1903; 244 of 1901 etc. 

69. 157 of 1902. 

70. 502 of 1904. The term siru-padi-kaval occurs in 199 of 1912 
and 421 of 1922. 

70a. 168 of 1923 from Uttaramerur states that on some lands no 
iraiyilik-kdsu would be collected for the current year and five kasus 
would be collected under this head for every subsequent year. 

71. 19 of 1890. El. iv, pp. 137-40. Venkayya seems to me to miss 
the point that the temple paid certain taxes on its iraiyili lands before, 
and was freed from them in the manner recorded in this inscription. 

72. The text is: i ttarmam-kettuppogiradu. 

73. Venkayya suggests two meanings: tax on unauthorised looms 
or on such quivers (ibid.). 

74. 245 of 1925. This is 
in ARE. 1925, App. B. 


treated 


exemption from irai-kaval 



NOTES 


545 


75. SII. ii, 4, para 1. Among the boundaries of some land in Tiru- 
venkadu we find 'the path along which corpses are taken’. (502 of 
1918). 

76. 199 of 1912. This record mentions a tax ( udamai ) on dyers 
(sivapputtoyppar) . It names several taxes and dues and shows that 
these varied according to the crops raised. It also mentions arisi-kasu 
on salt pans. 

77. Sewell, HISI., p. 136, n. 2. 

78. 206 of 1925. 

79. 159 of 1895. In this case the sabha appears to have suffered 
for the default of an accountant who had a kdni in the village. 


81. The officer’s action on her denying that she was liable to pay 
the tax is expressed in the words: avalai koccai-vikka. ARE. 1907 II, 
42 suggests that this means he put her through an ordeal. ‘Koccai’ 
means ‘ilivu’, humiliation. Or better, kocceydal meaning ‘compel’, as 
in SII. viii, no. 529 1. 3— a suggestion I owe to Desikavinayakam Pillai. 

82. 202 of 1912. 

83. 96, 98, 104 of 1897. 

84. 464 of 1911 = EC. x. Mb. 49 (a); see p. xxviii— ibid. 

85. 189 of 1914. 

86. 274 of 1909. 

87. 191 of 1925. 

88. 620 of 1909. 

89. 647 of 1909. 

90. 4 of 1914. 

91. 512 of 1912. 

92. 490 of 1912. It should be noted, however, that there is a dis- 
crepancy between the sirtt apciradam of the earlier inscription and the 
theft of jewels of the later record; one wonders if that could be called 
a minor ofEence. Again, the earlier record mentions only a fine of 
20 kasus for the offence in the temple, and says nothing about the con- 
fiscation of the house and servants. It may be that the same person 
committed a second offence and lost the house and servants in con- 
sequence, these being all that were left to him after his lands had been 
sold on the prior occasion. 

93. 57 of 1890. 

94. 264 of 1911. 


C. 69 



Chapter XX 


POPULATION: SOCIAL DIVISIONS: 
STANDARD OF LIFE 

Caste was the basis of social organisation and many 
examples of caste organisations have been 
General aspect of incidentally passed under review in the 
Society. course of our study of social and economic 

life. Each caste was more or less a heredi- 
tary occupational group with an active organisation for the 
regulation and protection of its economic and social interests: 
and the Indian society of those days is best conceived as a 
loose federation of strong self-regulating groups which shared 
a common background of social rights and obligations 
making for mutual understanding and accommodation. There 
is practically no evidence of ugly social conflicts and jealousies 
such as those between the right-hand and left-hand castes, or 
between Brahmins and non-Brahmins of more recent times. 
The general impression derived is one of social harmony, re- 
moved alike from the placid content which knows no ambition 
and the blind and ruthless pursuit of class-interests. 

There was on the whole greater social freedom, especially 
among the upper classes, than is now found 
Social freedom, in rural areas, and heredity was not always 
a bar to a person changing his occupation 
and his group-relations with it. This is clear from the fact 
that the Brahmins who took to trade at Ennayiram were 
counted along with the Valanjiya merchants of the South 
bazaar of Ennayiram in one common group . 1 These were 
exceptions, and the Brahmins as a class were still devoted to 
their time-honoured ideals of spiritual culture and plain liv- 
ing, and commanded the voluntary homage of the other clas- 
ses, as may be seen from the numberless endowments in their 
favour made in all parts of the country and by all classes 
without distinction. 



NUMBERS OF THE PEOPLE 


547 


We lack all means of reaching a reliable conclusion on the 
important question of the numbers of the 
Population. population. There is not even a passable 
guess on this subject in any of our records, 
Indian or foreign. And it seems never to have occurred to a 
government, which was very strict about maintaining a very 
minute record of land rights for its revenue purposes, that it 
might order a periodical census of the population under its 
control; for it is extremely unlikely that if such a practice 
had existed, we should have heard nothing of it in the thou- 
sands of inscriptions to which we owe practically all our 
knowledge of the organisation and working of the government 
in those days. We are therefore driven to depend solely on 
rather vague personal impressions derived from a study of 
the records of the age. It is remarkable that most of the 
villages and towns known to us now are mentioned with al- 
most the same names in the inscriptions; some of them, like 
Uttaramerur in Chingleput, Sendalai and Tiruvidaimarudur 
in Tanjore, Tiruverumbur and Lalgudi in Trichinopoly , 2 and 
others that could be named in the Madura and Tinnevelly 
districts, were clearly more populous and flourishing than 
the places that now go by those names. On the other hand, 
there is no evidence that the larger cities were not quite as 
large as the average Indian city of to-day, very large modern 
centres like Madras, and perhaps Madura and Trichinopoly, 
excepted. The average administrative unit in charge of one 
officer of the central government was more or less of the same 
size as the modem Taluq; but it may also be that the size of 
the Taluq is itself the result of an ancient administrative 
tradition. The evidence on the state of agriculture, industry 
and trade, on the army and navy, and on the amount of labour 
and resources applied to the erection of public works of a use- 
ful as well as ornamental nature also tells in favour of our 
postulating a numerous and busy population. Internal peace 
was on the whole well maintained; and there was no great 
difference between now and then in the ideas relating to 
marriage or the standard of life. There cannot be the slightest 
doubt that under the Colas of the Vijayalaya line, Southern 
India was vastly more populous and that social life had 
become far more complex than in the Sangam Age. It seems 
equally clear that the numbers of the people could not have 



548 


POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


been anywhere near what they are now after nearly 150 years 
of pax Britannica. We may imagine that we may find a 
parallel in this respect immediately before the establishment 
of British rule, say about the end of the eighteenth century, 

Caste and group life formed no hindrance to social co- 
operation for common ends. The manner in 
amon'g^ksse” which the burden of maintaining the services 
in a temple and the cost of feeding ten 
Brahmins regularly were shared by all the groups residing at 
Talaiccangadu 3 at the instance of the mulaparudai (of the tem- 
ple) is typical of their readiness to recognise a public interest 
and co-operate in its pursuit. Signs of exclusiveness and 
class-rivalry are not altogether wanting, but these tendencies 
were apparently well under control. Brahmins evinced a 
desire not only to live in separate rural communities with 
sabhas of their own, but as far as possible to exclude other 
castes from ownership of land in their villages; in both these 
respects, their attitude seems to have had the general approval 
of the government and the people. 4 

Other classes also succeeded in obtaining special exemp- 
tions and privileges for themselves. The 
Special privileges, velldlas of Kunra-Vattanakkottam gained 
exemptions from certain local dues in the 
reign of Rajaraja I; 5 the artisans ( silpis ) of the Ovikula of 
Kanci had apparently the privilege of engraving the important 
copper-plate grants of the king in the reign of Rajendra,® just 
as weavers of Kanci were the makers of royal robes in Uttama 
Cola’s reign. 7 On the other hand there were restrictions 
placed on the activities of some sections of the populace. In the 
devaddna of Palaiyanur, the Ilavas were not 
Restrictions. to tap coconut and palmyra palms for toddy. 8 

Apart from such exceptional privileges and 
disabilities which formed the subject of regulation by specific 
agreements, the place and duties of each class in society were 
largely a matter of ancient custom which doubtless underwent 
slow and imperceptible modification under the stress of new 
circumstances. The economic bonds which united the mem- 
bers of each profession or caste come prominently into view 
in the arrangements recorded in inscriptions. The principle 
of collective responsibility was commonly observed, and even 



ANULOMA AND PRATILOMA 


549 


a sort of frank-pledge by which the group guaranteed the pro- 
per conduct of each of its members was not unknown. 9 

Some curious instances of mixed castes and their duties 
are recorded in the inscriptions; these show 
Mixed castes. that the theories of mixed castes, anuldma 
and pratiloma, were not the purely fanciful 
concepts of law-givers that we generally take them to be; 
either they had some basis in the facts of social life, or what 
is perhaps more likely, particular sections of the population 
began to pin their faith to particular sections of what was 
originally a mythical scheme.At any rate it is difficult to be- 
lieve that the scheme of the four original varnas ever conform- 
ed to the facts of South Indian social life; even less credible 
are the theories of particular castes arising from mixed unions 
of particular types. Towards the close of the reign of 
Kulottunga I, the bhattas of Rajasraya-caturvedimangalam 
consulted the sastras and laid down the professions to be 
followed by the anuldma caste of Rathakaras, viz. architecture, 
coach- and chariot-building, the erection of gopuras with 
icons on them and of mavdapas, the manufacture of sacrificial 
instruments and so on. 10 It is to be noted that the decision 
here recorded is in close conformity with the views of 
Vijnanesvara, the contemporary jurist and author of the 
Mitaksara , the celebrated commentary on the Yajnavalkya- 
smrti. From an inscription dated 1169, the class of Ratha- 
karas is seen to have included blacksmiths, goldsmiths and 
stone masons, besides carpenters. 11 Two inscriptions of the 
reign of Vikramaeola give accounts of a class of utkrsta- 
ayogavas or pattinavans which do not seem to fit in so easily 
with the extant legal texts, at any rate, not with the Mitak- 
sara. The two inscriptions differ from each other and from 
Yajhavalkya with regard to the origin of this class; the smrti 
makes them children of Vaisya women and Sudra men; one 
of the inscriptions calls them children of Brahma-Vaisya, 
perhaps Brahmins following Vaisya occupations, 12 while the 
second inscription quotes a Sanskrit verse which says that an 
ayogava is born of the union of a Ksatriya woman with a 
Vaisya; 13 on the whole they seem to have been accepted as a 
pratiloma caste. Their profession was weaving, and it was 
their privilege to supply fresh cloth for upanayana and other 
domestic ceremonies, for dhvaja-patas to the temples during 



550 


POPULATION: SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


festivals and generally to supply all things made of yam and 
required by gods, Brahmins, and kings. In 1127, some fami- 
lies of this caste accepted some iraiyili land at Tribhuvani and 
in return undertook to supply cloths to the local temple on 
specified occasions and in stated quantities; they authorised 
the Sri Vaisnavas of the temple to surround (their dwellings) , 
to imprison them, and take all steps necessary to force them 
to keep the engagement if they were in default. 14 In the very 
next year, 1128, twenty families of this class migrated from 
five different villages to Tirukkannapuram to settle there and 
accept service in the brahmadeya village and its temple; the 
terms of their settlement being placed under the protection of 
mahasabhai elaimbadinmar, the Mahasabha 350, and Sri Vais- 
navas of the eighteen nodus. 15 

Inscriptions from Karuvur and Perur contain records of 
privileges accorded to Kanmalar stone masons, of Vengala- 
nadu and Ten-kongu, and to other artisans elsewhere. 16 These 
privileges were granted by a Cola monarch whose identity 
could not be made out as he is described only as Konerinmai- 
kondan. The privileges were: the blowing of two conches, 
the beating of drums and so on at domestic occurrences good 
or bad; the use of sandals when they went out of their homes; 
and plastering of the walls of their residences with lime plas- 
ter. The construction of houses with two storeys and with 
double doors is also mentioned together with the right to 
decorate the front of their houses with garlands of water- 
lilies. 17 

No picture of the social divisions in South India under the 

Colas will be complete without a reference to 

Right and Left the broad division of the industrial popula- 
hand classes. . 

tion of the country into the Right-Hand and 
Left-Hand, Valangai and Idangai divisions. The quarrels 
among these divisions often threatened to fill the streets of 
Madras with blood in the days of the East India Company. 
The origin of this division is unknown. 18 Legend ascribes it to 
the design of Karikala Cola and also, with more plausibility, 
to a famous occasion when the two sections of the population 
laid their disputes before a Cola king, one party standing on 
the right hand side of the monarch, the other taking a posi- 
tion on the left. 19 Several regiments of the army were count- 
ed as of the Valangai in the reign of Rajaraja I, 20 and this 



VALANGAI-IDANGAI CASTES 551 

section is also mentioned in an inscription of the third year 
of Rajendra I from Tiruvisalur. 21 In the second year of 
Kulottunga I, a clash between the Right and Left hand castes 
resulted in the burning of the village (Rajamahendra-catur- 
vedimangalam, Papanasam tq. Tanjore dt.), the destruction 
of its sacred places, and the looting of the temple treasury by 
robbers. The property left was not safe in the temple. For 
the rehabilitation of the place, the sabha borrowed 50 kalanjus 
of fineness half mattu less than that of Rajendrasolan-madai 
which with interest for one year amounted to 75 kalanjus. Of 
this sum, 5 kalanjus were spent in the third year on renova- 
tion and reconsecration of the temple, and the balance for the 
purchase of some lands and for making them tax free for the 
upkeep of the temple. The inscription giving this decision 
regarding remission of taxes was recorded in the eleventh 
year of Kulottunga I, and, for some unknown reason, at Sri- 
rangam. 21 ® There is a curious inscription of the reign of 
Kulottunga III which gives the earliest account so far known of 
the beliefs of the Idangai classes regarding their origin. 22 They 
claimed to have been created from the agnikunda (fire-pit) for 
the protection of the sacrifice of Kasyapa, and to have settled 
in the C5la country in the time of the emperor Arindama; 
this emperor imported a large colony of holy Brahmins from 
Antarvedi, and the Idangai classes accompanied these Brah- 
min colonists as the bearers of their slippers and their umbrel- 
las. They got some lands in five villages, all of them now in 
the Trichinopoly district, and had long lost the memory of 
their origin when they recovered it about a.d. 1128. They 
then entered into a compact among themselves to the effect 
that they should thenceforth behave like sons of the same 
parents. ‘If anything derogatory happens to the Idangai 
class, we will jointly assert our rights till we establish them. 
It is also understood that only those who, during their congre- 
gational meetings to settle communal disputes, display the 
birudas of horn, bugle and parasol shall belong to our class. 
Those who have to recognise us now and hereafter, in public, 
must do so from our distinguishing symbols — the feather of 
the crane and the loose-hanging hair. The horn and the 
conch-shell shall also be sounded in front of us and the bugle 
blown according to the fashion among the Idangai people. 
Those who act in contravention to these rules shall be treated 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


as the enemies of our class. Those who behave differently 
from the rules (thus) prescribed for the conduct of Idangai 
classes shall be excommunicated and shall not be recognised 
as SriLtimdns. They will be considered slaves of the classes 
who are opposed to us.’ This record was engraved at Uttattur 
and Tiruppahhili by the Srutimans of the area. The ninety- 
eight sub-sects of the Idangai are again mentioned in a later 
inscription from Aduturai, 23 which records the hardships to 
which these sub-sects were exposed at the hands of the Van- 
niya tenants and the Brahmana and Vellala landlords, backed 
by government officials. In 1227 the nattavar of eleven n ddus 
of Miladu (which comprised 79 nodus in all) met in Tiruva- 
lahjuram-udaiyar temple at Varanjuram (Kallakurichi tq. 
S. Arcot dt.) to admit into the Idangai group the two classes 
of people known as Malayamakkal and Nattamakkal, and take 
an oath to keep to this settlement for ever; the same oath is 
taken by other Idangai people of the area — Idangaittanat- 
tom. 23 ® Such are the beginnings of an obscure, but deep* 
seated antagonism between two sections of the populace which 
often burst into open hostilities in later days. At KancIpU- 
ram the Valangai and Idangai sects would not worship in the 
same temple, or use the same pavilion ( mandapa ) for religious 
purposes, 24 and the division affected even the class of courte- 
sans and dancing girls. 25 

Names of individuals very often gave little indication of 
their social status. Thus Arinjimadevadigal, 
Personal names, for example, was not, as her name might lead 
one to suppose, a queen herself, but only a 
queen’s maid ( peruiatti ) ; and her daughter, who lived in con- 
cubinage with a certain Arumolidevan, bore the name Bhat- 
tan Gandaraditti. 26 Numerical names like Munnurruvan, 
irayiravan and so on were apparently borne by members of 
all classes. 

Women were placed under no restraints in their social 
life and activities, though modesty was con- 
Women. sidered the highest among their graces. The 

inscriptions give many examples of women 
of the upper classes owning property in their own right and 
disposing of it as they chose. The influence exerted by some 
of the princesses of the royal family on the public policy of 
ruling princes has already been noticed. Though kings and 



SAT! RARE 


553 


nobles indulged in a plurality of wives, the monogamous family 
was doubtless the normal unit of social life. The employ- 
ment of female labour in the less skilled occupations was per- 
haps quite as common as at present. 

Sati or the self-immolation of a woman on the funeral 
pyre of her husband is occasionally men- 
Sati not common tioned in the inscriptions, but the references 
are so few that it can hardly be regarded as 
a common practice in the Tamil country under the Colas. 
Gangamadeviyar, the wife of Vira-sola Ilangovelar, is said to 
have endowed a lamp before she entered the fire; 27 this was 
perhaps early in the reign of Parantaka I. The Tiruvalan- 
gadu plates 28 mention the case of Vanavan-mahadevi, the 
queen of Sundara Cola, recorded in more detail in an earlier 
Tamil inscription of the reign of her celebrated son Raja- 
raja I. 29 The language of these inscriptions, together with 
the absence of any other instance of a Cola queen practising 
satl, shows that the action of Vanavan-mahadevi was indeed 
applauded, but not often imitated. Three instances of women 
from among the nobility and the common folk committing sati 
come from Mysore country. In 1057, a man killed a relative 
of the king in a wrestling contest, and was sentenced to death; 
his wife, Dekabbe, the daughter of a chieftain of Nunganad, 
followed him in spite of violent opposition from her parents, 
and the whole story is recorded in the form of a pathetic 
Kannada poem in Kavya style. 30 The two remaining instances 
occurred in 1067 and 1068, one of them being just recorded as 
a fact, 31 while the other is mentioned incidentally in an en- 
dowment of a charity by the son of the deceased couple for 
their spiritual benefit. 32 A reverse instance of a father com- 
memorating the death of his son and daughter-in-law who 
committed safi also occurs in the Mysore country in a.d. 1088. 33 
Nothing can more truly illustrate the tragic conflict of feelings 
in a mind tom between the dread of physical suffering and the 
eagerness to live up to an inhuman standard of duty than the 
pathetic declaration of a woman, recorded in an inscription of 
the reign of Virarajendra from South Arcot; she avers that if 
she lived after the death of her husband, she should become 
the slave of the other wives of her husband and utters impreca- 
tions against those who seek to persuade her to refrain from 
immolating herself, nay even against people who do not come 
C. 70 



554 POPULATION: SOCIAL DIVISIONS 

forward to bind and throw her into the fire, imprecations too 
shocking to be transcribed here. 34 Such a record could be only 
understood to indicate the prevalence of an atmosphere nor- 
mally unfavourable to the practising of sati. 

The class of courtesans has always held a considerable 
place in Indian society. From pre-historic 
Courtesans. times the nautch-girl has been a great social 
attraction. Her public appearances were 
usually associated with religious festivals and she was general- 
ly an expert in music and the dance. She mixed freely with 
men and was under no obligation to observe the restraints im- 
posed on matrons in their social intercourse. Her private 
company was given to select friends, and her choice was guided 
at least as much by sentimental and aesthetic as by mercenary 
motives. To judge by the evidence of literature and epigraphy, 
there is little to justify the squeamishness with which the ins- 
titution is viewed by the ‘social reformer’ who derives his 
notions from the hideous traffic in helpless women and girls that 
has grown up in large modem cities. At her best the courtesan 
led a life of cultured ease and pleasure, and like her Greek 
cousin, the hetaera, provided amusement and intellectual com- 
panionship to those who could afford the luxury; at her worst 
she was a temple-drudge who, when she consented to serve a 
passing stranger, still believed that she was performing an act 
of worship. The testimony of Muhammadan writers is clear 
and unanimous that the earnings of the courtesans attached to 
temples were surrendered into the hands of the priests or other 
authorities of the temple for defraying the expenses of wor- 
ship. 35 As these writers, however, were prone to repeat 
uncritically statements made by their predecessors, we should 
be slow to accept their evidence, which is not confirmed by 
indigenous sources. 

The social standing of courtesans in the ancient Cola coun- 
try is clearly indicated by the numerous records registering 
rich endowments made by them for various public benefactions 
and the recognition afforded by local powers to their public 
spirit; in a record from Tiruvorriyur, dated a.d. 1049, a certain 
devaradiyal (courtesan), Catural Caturi, by name, is also des- 
cribed as the wife ( ahamudaiyal ) of a citizen, Nagan Perun- 
gadan. 36 The marriage of another dancing-girl belonging to a 



TEMPLES AND SLAVES 555 

temple in the Tanjore district is recorded in an inscription 
of the reign of Kulottunga III. 37 

That a considerable element in the population, especially 
among agricultural labourers, lived in a con- 
Slavery. dition not far from slavery is clear from the 

literature of the age. There are several ins- 
criptions which show that the most odious form of private 
property, property in human beings, signalized by their being 
bought and sold by others irrespective of their own wishes, was 
not unknown. Free men and women fell into slavery for 
various reasons, and it would appear that there were several 
grades among slaves. Most of the sales recorded in ihe ins- 
criptions are sales of persons to temples. Sometimes they are 
voluntary; two ladies sold themselves and their dependants 
and their relatives to a temple in the Tanjore district; 38 in 
these instances, the religious motive must have been more 
dominant than the economic. But when six persons are sold 
to the same temple in the same year for thirteen kasus by 
another person, neither the voluntary nor the religious cha- 
racter of the transaction is so apparent. 39 There is another 
sale of eight persons recorded in the same place some years 
before, the price not being stated. 40 All these inscriptions are 
dated in the regnal years of some unknown Cola king. About 
a.d. 948, a madhyastha of the village of Nandivarman-mangalam 
presented to the temple of Vayalur (Trichinopoly dt.) three 
women to sing Tirupadiyam and serve as Kavarippina (chauri- 
bearers) to god Paramesvara; he had acquired these women 
six years earlier as Kullal (?) 40a Another record of the reign 
of Rajaraja I from Tiruvadandai (Chingleput) , dated in the 
seventeenth regnal year, a.d. 1002, states that twelve families 
of fishermen ( pattinavar ) were dedicated to the temple of Sri 
Varaha Deva at the instance of two officials serving in the 
locality as nadu-kankatci and nddu-vagai; the families of the 
twelve persons named had each to pay, out of their income 
from weaving and fishing, % kalanju of gold, and to assist in 
the celebration of two annual festivals in the temple, one of 
them being of seven days’ duration and ending with the day 
of Sadaiyam in the month of Avani, the day of the king’s 
nativity. The sabhd and the ur of Tiruvadandai undertook to 
hold them and their decendants strictly to their obligations. 41 
The terms of this dedication are on the whole liberal and do 



556 POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 

not constitute slavery; they even included some privileges of 
the dedicated families such as the receipt of p rasadam (food- 
offering) on the festival days. But the element of compul- 
sion, the hereditary nature of the dedication, the part played 
by two officials of the state and the undertaking of the sabhd 
and ur to enforce the terms, prove that the dozen families of 
pattinavar would not have readily accepted the arrangements 
of their own choice. Kulottunga I ordered in a.d. 1088 that 
some devaradiyar of the temple of Kalahasti who had been 
wrongly appropriated to the palace service should be 
restored to the temple; these persons had been 
stamped with the king’s seed which was erased and the trident 
stamped on their bodies in token of their servitude to the 
temple. 42 At Tiruvallam, in 1119, one of the villikal, (bow- 
men) of Banapuram, dedicated some women of his family as 
devaradiyar after stamping them with the trident. 43 In the 
reign of Rajadhiraja II is recorded a sale, in a.d. 1175, of four 
women to the temple of Tiruvalangadu for a sum of seven 
hundred Jcasus. 44 As the term kasu is applied to coins of 
varying value, it is not possible to compare the price recorded 
here with prices stated in some of the inscriptions cited above. 
An inscription 45 of somewhat uncertain date from Tiruvalan- 
gadu (Tanjore) mentions some facts which bring out the 
general prevalence of slavery and the treatment meted out 
to slaves. A certain Vayiradarayar had a number of slaves, 
some belonging to him and others forming part of the dowries 
of his wives. With the consent of his wives, he sold some of 
these slaves to the local temple which purchased them for 
employment as slaves of a matha ( mada-adimaigal ) . In accord- 
ance with a sale deed, and a royal order (rd)a-sadana ') , the 
mAhesvaras and the authorities of the temple recorded the 
transaction in a stone inscription, marked the slaves with the 
trident-mark, and resolved to assign specific duties to them 
and punish them suitably when they failed in their duty. The 
inscription then states that after some time some of the slaves 
defied the orders of the sthanattdr of the temple and took to 
mischievous and roguish ways, and the matter was laid before 
a general assembly of the authorities of the temple and of the 
mathas. Their decision is not easy to make out owing to gaps 
in the record. In fact the slaves would have been more than 
human had they not chafed at their lot. And as slavery was 



WAGE RATES 


557 


not confined to temples, the idea that slaves consoled them- 
selves by looking on their lives as dedicated to the service of 
God can only have a limited range of application, if it had any 
at all. 46 There are also instances of slavery due directly to 
poverty; in times of famine, destitute persons escaped death 
by literally selling themselves and sometimes their unborn 
descendants for their keep. Only temples seem to have left 
records of this mode of accession to the numbers of their 
slaves; but we cannot be sure that rich and powerful indivi- 
duals did not trade on the necessities of their less fortunate 
brethren. 47 

Some idea of the economic condition of the different 
classes of labourers may be had by a review 
Wages and Prices. q £ ^ <j a t a on wages and prices yielded by 
the inscriptions. 48 No general statement on the standard of 
life of the people is possible; much less can we now trace the 
changes in the standards and tastes of the population. The 
sources of our information are not sufficiently copious or 
precise to allow of such attempts being made with success. 
The permanent staff of village servants and others in the 
enjoyment of hereditary service-holdings are, of course, not 
included in the discussion which follows. So also the serfs 
and slaves are excluded. 

The wages of common labour can be estimated from the 
following instances. The Madras Museum Plates of Uttama 
Cola record a wage of one kuruni per day and two kalanjus 
per annum for clothes for a watchman; and six nalis per day 
with half a kalanju per annum for a gardener. At Lalgudi 
(Trichinopoly district), about a.d. 960, digging was done at 
the rate of fifty kulis per kdsu, each kuli being about 10 feet 
square by two feet and a half. 49 In the village of Kiliyanur 
(South Arcot), the man appointed to sound the bugle for 
summoning the sabha had, from a.d. 1001, a fixed wage 
(nivandam) of two meals a day at the cost of the village, 
besides the supply of such things required for his personal 
use as were sold in the village. 50 In a.d. 1018, the daily wage 
of a wood-cutter at Nattam (Chingleput) was four nalis of 
paddy per day, 51 which was also the daily wage of a Brahmin 
cook. 52 The wage of a palanquin bearer at Tirumukkudal 
(Chingleput) was also four nalis of paddy in the reign of 
Rajendra I. 53 This was obviously not a full day’s wage, for 



558 


POPULATION: SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


we find that garden labour in the same place and about the 
same time commanded a wage of ten nalis per diem. 54 The 
same rate is given in a record of Rajadhiraja I as a sort of 
family wage for the same kind of labour. 55 For lifting water 
and irrigating gardens and fields, and for gathering flowers 
and other like operations, the wage of male labourers was 
eight nalis per day at Tiruvamattur (South Arcot) in 
a.d. 1030; but women employed in making garlands and 
flowers were paid only at half the rate. 56 In the reign of 
Rajadhiraja I, however, the women servants employed in a 
feeding house at Tiruvenkadu earned a wage of two nalis per 
day. 57 A man employed to supply drinking water in a public 
place at Tiruvorriyur in 1077 was paid two kasus per annum 
besides a daily wage of one kuruni. 59 The rather low wage 
of two nalis per day for a potter and for a fuel supplier at 
Kudumiyamalai in 1213 was, no doubt, only remuneration 
for part-time work, 59 the men being free also to work and 
earn wages elsewhere. 

Work that demanded some kind of skill or special equip- 
ment in the workman commanded correspondingly higher 
rates of wages. A certain Tiruvel Araiccakkai was remune- 
rated at the rate of two kalams of paddy for each kiittu, some 
kind of operatic dance, performed by him; and seven such 
performances were guaranteed to him in a year in one temple 
in the reign of Aditya II . 60 Possibly he was free to accept 
other engagements elsewhere. With this may be compared 
the permanent endowment of a house and one hundred kalams 
of paddy per annum for each of the four hundred dancing- 
girls settled by Rajaraja I round the big temple of Tanjore. 61 
Three kurunis per day was the wage-rate fixed by the same 
monarch for each of the fifty persons of the choir established 
by him for singing Tiruppadiyam in the same temple. 62 The 
wages mentioned in another Tanjore inscription of the same 
monarch may also be noted: 63 each mani ( brahmacdri ) serv- 
ing in the temple got one padakku (sixteen nalis) of paddy 
per day and four kasus (two kalanius) of gold per year; 64 ten 
among them who had vowed permanent service in the temple 
were to get an extra kuruni (eight nalis ) of paddy per day; 
twenty others who apparently made garlands were to receive 
one padakku each per day and five kasus per annum. An 



GRAIN VALUE 


559 


accountant received 200 kalams of paddy per annum, and his 
assistant seventy-five, which works out at 6| kurunis and 
2\ kurunis respectively for a day. An accountant of another, 
perhaps smaller, temple at Periyakorukkai, Trichinopoly dis- 
trict, earned 11 kurunis of paddy a day in the reign of Raja- 
raja III. 65 An inscription from Tiruvorriyur 66 of a.d. 1038 
states that two garland makers were employed each on a 
wage of 10 nalis (one padakku and four nalis for both) per 
diem in addition to a kalanju and a half of gold per annum 
for clothes; and four Brahmins to recite stotras and Veda at 
12 nalis ( kuruni and four nalis) each per day together with 
11 kalanju s of gold per annum for clothes. At Ennayiram, 
about the same time, 67 the persons who recited Tiruvaymoli 
were paid, like the reciters of Tiruppadiyam at Tanjore. three 
kurunis per day, which is twice what the Brahmins of Tiru- 
vorriyur got. The rate of three kurunis also obtained at Tri- 
bhuvani for reciting Tiruvaymoli in a.d. 1048 68 whereas the 
officiating priest got only a padakku per day. A Brahmin 
appointed to expound the Sivadharma at Tirunagesvaram in 
a.d. 1054 was also paid seventy-five kalams of paddy in a 
year, 69 the same as the wage of the Junior Accountants of the 
Tanjore temple. A nambi, officiating priest in a temple, got 
two kurunis of paddy per day at Tirumananjeri, Tanjore dis- 
trict, in addition to sixteen kalams per annum in lieu of two 
kdsus. 70 

The currency of money of small denominations did not 
altogether displace the ancient habit of ex- 
Barter. changing things for corn. The earliest Tamil 

poems state that salt and venison were exchanged for paddy; 
to this day, in the villages of South India, housewives may 
be seen pouring out the grain from their stores into the 
baskets of hawkers and dairy-women in return for the veget- 
ables, ghee or curd supplied by them. The picture of economic 
conditions under the Colas will not be complete without some 
idea of the relation of paddy to other commodities and to 
money. Ghee was converted into gold at 9 kurunis per kalanju 
and fifteen kalams of ghee are equated to twenty kalanjus of 
gold. If this rate of conversion followed the prices prevailing 
at Kalahasti in a.d. 1012, the date of the record, 71 the price 
of ghee in those days must have been about a sixth or seventh 



560 


POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


of what it is to-day. A nali and a half of curd was to be had 
for one nali of paddy, 72 and paddy was selling at seven kalams 
per pon-kalanju, a price which to all appearance is slightly 
higher than the prices of 1937. We shall see, however, 
that the price of paddy in gold varied very much with 
time and place. At Nattam (Chingleput) , three nalis of paddy 
fetched forty-eight betel leaves and twelve areca nuts 73 in 
a . d . 1018. In the same year, at Tiruppangili in the Trichino- 
poly district, a nali of good dhal was of the same value as five 
nalis of paddy; one palam of crude sugar as two nalis of paddy; 
and one nali of paddy was required to make one curry-offer- 
ing in the temple. 74 At Tirumukkudal in Chingleput, in 
a . d . 1016, one nali of oil was bought for four of paddy, one 
nali of ghee for 4 kalam of paddy, 75 and one measure of curd 
for two of paddy; milk was had also at the same rate, and 
one nali of turmeric was got for one kuruni of paddy. 76 

Inscriptions recording endowments for charitable feed- 
F ^ ing often lay down schedules of expenditure 

calculated to give an idea of the quality of 
the food supplied and of the prevailing prices of food-stuffs. 
One record of a . d . 1004 from Tiruvadandai 77 states that it took 
ii of a kalam of paddy for providing one meal to twelve Brah- 
mins, the items of expenditure being: 21 nalis of rice at 
If nalis per head, (equal to 521 nalis of paddy); 6 nalis of 
paddy for 1 ulakku and 2\ sevidus of ghee; 5 nalis for veget- 
ables and 5 for curds; i nali for salt; 2 nalis for the man who 
supplied fuel, four for the Brahmin cook, three for the potter 
who supplied earthenware, and two nalis for betel leaves and 
nuts. Considering that this allowance of f kuruni of paddy 
per head sufficed for a square meal for an adult, the provi- 
sion of % kuruni for each of the junior pupils and 1^4 kurunis 
for the seniors in the college at Ennayiram, and of % and 1 
kuruni respectively at Tribhuvani must be considered fully 
adequate to their requirements. An inscription of the reign 
of Kulottunga I, 78 dated a . d . 1115, records that an endow- 
ment for feeding fifty Brahmins in a Vaisnava matha on new 
moon days was made on the basis of one kuruni per head, 
and that this included provision for rice, curry, salt, pepper, 
ghee, curd, earthenware pots, fuel, areca nuts and betel- 
leaves. 



GRAIN PRICES 


561 


Some variations are recorded in the price of paddy and 
the rate seems to have generally differed 
Price of paddy. wit k ^ f erti ^ ty Q f ^ga concerned. 

Often these rates are not temporary prices prevalent at the 
time of the record, but some standardised average rates to 
hold good for all future time. At Tiruvallam in North Arcot 
we find the rate 40 kadis or 13^ kalams per kalanju recorded 
in a.d. 992; 79 and this is repeated in a.d. 1015 in another ins- 
cription from the same district. 80 Yet another record of 
a.d. 1012 from Kalahasti equates one pon to seven kalams, 
and the pon was the same as the kalanju. 61 Differences in the 
measures employed often make close comparison difficult. An 
inscription of Viraraj§ndra’s reign from Tirumukkudal 
(Chingleput) states that 16 kalams of paddy by the Rdja- 
kesari measure was the equivalent of one kalanju. 82 At Tirup- 
pugalur (Tanjore district) eight kalams per ka.su, i.e., six- 
teen to the kalanju, was the price in a.d. 1006. 83 . At Cidam- 
baram the spurious inscription of Rajakesari Rajendra gives 
the rate 81 kalams per kdsu, M or seventeen kalams to the 
kalanju. A Rajakesari record gives 15 kalams per kalanju for 
Pandaravadai (Tanjore); 85 the rate of ten kalams at Tribhu- 
vani in a.d. 1048 is high, though not the highest price recorded 
in the inscriptions of the early period as the basis of a perma- 
nent endowment of charities. 86 Twelve kalams per kalanju 
is found at Nattam (Chingleput district) in a.d. 1018. 87 Early 
in the reign of Kulottunga I, the kasu still equal to half a 
mada, fetched only 2% kalams of paddy at Kolar and 4 kalams 
at Tiru vorr iyur ; 88 the relatively high price must have been 
due to scarcity consequent on the disturbances which caused 
the death of Adhirajendra and led to the war between Caluk- 
ya Vikramaditya VT and Kulottunga. At the end of Kulot- 
tunga’s reign, the kasu paid for thirteen kalams of paddy in 
the Tanjore area; 89 but even the mada fetched only eight 
kalams at Emapperur (South Arcot) in a.d. 1136. 90 

Of the money prices of commodities relatively little is 
learnt from the inscriptions. Only the more 
oney prices. prec { ous articles which formed the staples 
of long distance trade seem to have been bought and sold for 
money. The Tanjore inscriptions tell us, for instance, that 
one kasu (halt-kalanju) fetched towards the close of the reign 
of Rajaraja I, IV 2 kurunis of cardamum seeds, 2 kurunis of cam- 
C. 71 



562 


POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


paka buds, 605 palams of khaskas roots, 2\ to 3 kalanjus of 
camphor, 91 and two palams of sugar which seems to have been 
a luxury at the time. 92 One kasu ( pon ) fetched nine ewes at 
Melappaluvur, (Trichinopoly district) in a.d. 931, 93 and at 
Senkunram (North Arcot) in a.d. 1014, 94 but a Tanjore ins- 
cription gives only three ewes for a kasu. 95 A pasu (cow) 
is valued at fifteen kdsus at Tittagudi (South Arcot) in 1136. 96 
The price of a cocoanut tree was 150 kdsus at Nallur (Tan- 
jore district) in 1221 if it was yielding fruit ( ka-tengu ) and 
100 if it was not; 97 but the kdsu of the time of Rajaraja III 
was a very depreciated coin. 

Of the value of metals we learn incidentally that bronze 
sold at 35 palams per kasu (half kalanju of gold), copper at 
30 palams, tin at 26f palams, and tard (alloy) at 70 palams: 
these rates are found in a record of a.d. 1099 from 
Tiruppanandal. 98 

Some instances of scarcity and famine are incidentally 
recorded in the inscriptions, but they are 
not many. About 1131 (thirteenth year of 
Vikramacola) as the result of a famine in the mountainous 
regions of S. Arcot people began to move out from Arakanda- 
nallur (Tirukoyilur tq.) after selling their lands; the sabhd 
of the place met and redistributed the 24 shares in the village 
to new persons with the condition that no sale or barter to 
outsiders was permissible, and that violation of this condi- 
tion would involve loss of the land besides a fine of 64 kalan- 
jtis. 98a Individuals were sometimes hard hit and had, as 
pointed out already, to seek livelihood at the price of their 
personal freedom. The most outstanding instance of a some- 
what widespread distress and the measures adopted for com- 
bating it is found in an inscription from Alangudi (Tanjore 
district) of a.d. 1152. 99 Its import is unfortunately not free 
from uncertainty. It states that there was a kdladdsam, ‘bad 
time’, in the third year of the reign of Vijayarajendradeva 
who, after taking Kalyanapuram and Kollapuram, died on the 
back of an elephant. The king so described nearly a century 
after his time must have been Rajadhiraja I or his younger 
brother and successor, Rajendra II. 100 The cause of the 
scarcity from which the people of Alangudi suffered is by no 
means clear. 101 But we are told that the people borrowed from 
the treasury of the local temple all the gold jewels and silver 



NOTES 


563 


articles that could be spared to the extent of 1011 kalanjus of 
gold and 464 palams of silver in order to be able to maintain 
themselves and buy seed and manure for resuming cultivation. 
These transactions are recalled on the occasion of a fresh 
agreement with the temple relating to the terms of the repay- 
ment of the loan. 


1. 343 of 1917. 

2. An inscription of a.d. 1219 from Turaiyur (Trichinopoly district) 
mentions the ur-madil (town-wall), and pulakkadai-madil (wall at 
the backs of houses), an indication that towns and houses were some- 
times walled for safety. (701 of 1909). 

3. 198 of 1925. 

4. 46 of 1897; 311 of 1911. 

5. 375 of 1911. 

6. Tiruvalangadu Plates 11. 517-24. The Anbil plates were en- 
graved by a single worker VIra Cola taksan. Leyden grant 11. 107 ff. 

7. Museum Plates, 1. 10. 

8. Tiruvalangadu Plates, 1. 456. 

9. 197 of 1923; SII. ii, p. 251; TAS. v. pp. 29-30. 

10. 479 of 1908. ARE. 1909, II, 45. Also the Mit&ksard on Yajna- 
valkya I, 95. 

11. 189 of 1925. 

12. 208 of 1919. Cf. Brahma-Ksatris of N. Indian inscrr. The 
statement in ARE. that they were the offspring of Brahmins and Vaisya 
women seems unwarranted. 

13. 508 of 1922. 

14. 208 of 1919. 

15. 508 of 1922. 

16. 66 of 1890, (S/7, iii. 25); 562 of 1893; ARE. 1905, II, 43. 

17. 136 of 1905. 

18. M. Srinivasa Aiyangar, Tamil Studies: pp. 100 ff. 

19. ARE. 1921, II, 47. 

20. SII. ii, Intro, p. 10. 

21. 341 of 1907. 

21a. 31 of 1936-7; ARE. II. 27. 

22. 489 of 1912; ARE. 1913, II, 39. 

23. '34 of 1913. 

23a. 184 of 1940-41; ARE. 1939-40—1942-3, II. 42. 

24. ARE. 1921, H, 47. 

25. The real history of the division between the right hand and 
left hand sections of society may indeed date from a much earlier 
time than we suspect or even the Srutimans of the reign of Kulot- 
tunga III believed. A Chinese author of the 3rd century, cited by 



564 POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 

another in the 10th, says of Fu-nan: ‘Les regions vassales ont toutes 
leurs mandar ins; les grands officers de droite et de gauche du souverain 
s’ appellent tous K’ouen-louen’ P. Pelliot, Le Fou-nan, BEFEO, iii. 
p. 282; also vii. pp. 316-17 for the same feature in Campa. 

26. 235 of 1926. 

27. 376 of 1903. 

28. w. 65-66. 

29. 236 of 1902. 

30. 141 of 1898; EC. iv, Hg. 18; El. vi, pp. 213-9. 

31. 174 of 1911; EC. ix, Dv. 14. 

32. 188 of 1911; EC. x, Ct. 161. 

33. 499 of 1911; EC. iv, Hg. 100. 

34. 156 of 1906; ARE. 1907, II, 41. 

35. Abu Zayd, in Ferrand Voyage, p. 124. 

36. 147 of 1912. 

37. 411 of 1925. 

38. 218 of 1925 (seven persons for thirty JcdJus) ; 219 of 1925 (fifteen 
persons for the same amount). ARE. 1925, n, 18. 

39. 217 of 1925. 

40. 216 of 1925. 

40a. 149 of 1936-7, ARE. H, 21. 

41. 274 of 1910. 

42. 141 of 1922. 

43. 230 of 1921. It is not clear what process was adopted for 
impressing the mark (ilaccinai) on the skin. The words ‘ittu’ or ‘Satti’ 
do not necessarily mean ‘branding’ as they are often rendered in the 
Epigraphical reports. 

44. 80 of 1913. 

45. 94 of 1926. 

46. ARE. 1925, II, 18. 

47. Some of the other instances known may be briefly mentioned 
here: Sale by three Vellalas of two women and their descendants as 
devaradiyar at Tiruvakkarai, South Arcot in 1099 (183 of 1904); a 
d harmadana by a maharaya of an uvacca adimai in the Tinnevelly district 
in 1105 (280 of 1928); the gift of two slaves for service in a matha »n 
Draksarama in 1113 (354 of 1893); lists of adimais belonging to the 
temple and matha in Kilaiyur, Tanjore district, dated 1184 (74 and 76 
of 1925); the large numbers of mada-adimais bought and given to the 
matha in Tiruvalangadu by a nobleman in the years 1198 and 1208 (91 
and 90 of 1926); the case of a Vellala and his two daughters who sold 
themselves to the temple at Tiruppamburam to escape starvation in 
1201 (86 of 1911); and the sale by two accountants of a temple of 
number of women who were slaves forming part of their ancestral 
estate — engalukku kramagatamay varuginra adiyar (296 of 1911). Yet 
other instances are found in 499 of 1904 (Vedaranyam, a.d. 1219); 409 
of 1925, a stone mason, his wife and four sons, (Acyutamangalam) , 
a.d. 1219; 223 of 1917, a host of over 100 male and female slaves of the 



NOTES 


565 


temple, (Korukkai, a.d. 1235); 110 of 1892, same as 122 of 1912, (Tiru- 
vorxiyvu - , aj>. 1235); and 216, 217-219 of 1925 (Melapperumbalam, n-d). 

48. See also SII., ii, Intr. 17-8 for a discussion of the data from the 
Tan j ore inscriptions. 

49. 104 of 1929. I have assumed that a p idi is equal to 4". 

50. 156 of 1919. 

51. 263 of 1912. 

52. 267 of 1910, (Tiruva^andai) . Same wage in aj>. 1115 (281 of 
1910). 

53. 175 of 1915: Tiruppallicdvikaik-kavalar in the temple, possibly 
Vaisnava Brahmins. 

54. 172 of 1915. 

55. 45 of 1925. The tapasyar who supplied water for tirumanjanam 
in the temple at Tiruvarur had the same rate of remuneration, 671 of 
1919 (a.d. 1094). 

56. 18 of 1922. 

57. 450 of 1918. 

58. 154 of 1912. 

59. 364 of 1906. 

60. SII. iii, 202. 

61. SII. ii, 66. 

62. SII. ii, 65. 

63. SII. ii, 69. The schedule is unfortunately not complete on 
account of gaps in the record. 

64. A record from Nattam (Chingleput) of AJ). 1018 (263 of 1912) 
gives two Kasus per annum as the price of clothes to be supplied to 
each mini in a year. The Museum Plates of Uttama (11. 44-6) give the 
rate six nalis per day and one kalanju per annum. 

65. 268 of 1926 (aj>. 1243). 

66. 146 of 1912. 

67. 333 of 1917. 

68. 176 of 1919. 

69. 214 of 1911. 

70. 10 of 1914 (undated). A padakku per diem and five kalanjus 
in a year for clothes form a priest’s remuneration in the Museum Plates 
of Uttama Cola, 11. 42-4. 

71. 299 of 1904. Another inscription of a.d. 1038 gives the rate of 
50 nalis per kalanju at Tiruvorriyur (146 of 1912). 

72. Ibid. 

73. 263 of 1912. But 8 nuts and 32 leaves could be had for one 
nali in 1104 at Narasingapuram (same district)— 249 of 1910. 

74. 91 of 1892. 

75. This rate of barter almost looks like a standard rate; it 
occurs in 506 of 1920 (Alangudi, aj>. 1094); 518, 515, and 512 of 1920, 
also from the same place with dates 1116, 1117, and 1125 



566 


POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


76. 175 of 1915. 

77. 273 of 1910; ARE. 1911, II, 21. 

78. 281 of 1910. 

79. 218 of 1921. 

80. 176 of 1915. 

81. 299 of 1904. 

82. 182 of 1915. 

83. 68 of 1928. 

84. 118 of 1888. 

85. 232 of 1923. 

86. 176 of 1919. 

87. 263 of 1912. 

88. 131 of 1892; 106 of 1892. 

89. 44 of 1891. 

90. 533 of 1921. 

91. 3 Kal rate in 146 of 1912 (a.d. 1038) from Tiruvorriyur. 

92. SI1. ii, Intro. 18, Table A. 

93. 378 of 1924. 

94. 149 of 1921. 

95. SII., ii, 64; 63 says six ewes = 3 cows = 1 buffalo, 302 of 1901 
equates one cow with four sheep in the reign of Rajaraja III, year 16. 

96. 15 of 1903. 

97. 58 of 1911. 

98. 46 of 1914; ARE. 1915, II, 23. 

98a. 151 of 1934-5, ARE. II. 14. 

99. 5 of 1899. 

100. ARE. 1899, paragraph 53; SII. iii, p. 191. But see above p. 258 
and n. 86 (p. 279). 

101. Venkayya suggests that failure of rain was the cause and that 
Rajendra II did not come to the rescue of the people because he inherit- 
ed an empty treasury from his war-like and extravagant brother, 
Rajadhiraja I. ARE. Ibid. 



Chapter XXI 


AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


The vast majority of the people lived a rustic life in the 
villages, and agriculture was their principal 
proprietors occupation. The prestige attending the 

ownership of land had a high social value, 
and the independent peasant proprietor was then, as now, the 
backbone of social life. It was the deliberate object of every 
one, whatever his occupation, to have a small plot of land he 
could call his own. In fact, the village was primarily a settle- 
ment of peasants; and the village assembly an association of 
landlords. Part of the land surrounding the village was held 
in common, and the rest was subject till very recently to 
periodical redistribution; 1 even now, this old rule of redistri- 
bution from time to time appears to survive in some of the 
villages of Tanjore. As evidence of com- 
munal ownership of land in Cola times may 
be noticed the terms sabhamanjikkam 2 and 
ur-manjikkam, 3 and nrppodi t, 4 the escheat to the village of 
land that was in arrears for the irai on it, 5 and the sale of 
waste land by the village for being reclaimed and put to some 
specific use. 6 An inscription of the reign of Sundara Cola 
from Madhurantakam records the sale by the Sabha in a 
public manner ( sabhai-vilai ) of some land described clearly 
as part of the unappropriated common land of the village. 7 
Individual ownership of land was clearly recognised also, and 
numberless instances of alienation by sale 
property Ual or 2^ the absolute proprietorship of the 

soil by individuals, and of the inheritance of 
such property from father to son in the normal course, can 
be gathered from the inscriptions. The theory of the law 
books is equally clear on the subject. 8 


Communal 

ownership. 


Besides the land-owners, great and small, there were 
others dependent on agriculture. A fairly 
Agrarian labour. j ar g e c j ass D f landless labourers, an agrarian 
proletariat, some of whom were in a condition of serfdom, 
assisted in the operations and shared the proceeds of agricul- 



568 


AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


ture. In almost all villages the distinction between persons 
paying the land-tax ( irai-kudigal ) and those who did not 
was clearly established, and the former had usually a larger 
share in the tasks of local government. Each village had also 
a staff of hereditary menial servants of the lowest social class 
who were remunerated for their services to the community 
by shares in the common land of the village. The artisans of 
the village had shares also in the communal land; these shares 
were of the nature of retainers, inducements to them to stay 
in the village, ready to take up work whenever it came to 
them, the wage for each engagement forming the subject of 
separate negotiation between the parties. 

Some idea of the life of the poorer classes in the villages. 

those in the lowest rung of the social scale, 
eo t epoor. may f rom the picture of Adanur 

with which Sekkilar opens his account of the life of the Pariah 
saint Nandan. Though somewhat idealised in accordance with 
literary usage, it is clearly informed by an intimate acquain- 
tance on the part of the author with the realities of country 
life at the time : ‘Adanur was a wealthy city of ancient fame 
in Merka-nadu. The rich waters of the Kollidam, (Coleroon) 
seemed to pour out on either side the gems of fertility with 
their waves (hands), and the land appeared to receive the 

gift with its flowery hands (gardens on either side) 

The town of Adanur owed its great prosperity to its fertile 
fields and gardens, and had many tall mansions and a teem- 
ing population. In the outskirts of that town was a small 
hamlet of Pulaiyas studded with small huts under old 
thatches overspread by surai creepers and inhabited by agra- 
rian labourers engaged in menial occupations. In the thres- 
holds of the huts covered with strips of leather, little chickens 
were seen moving about in groups; dark children who wore 
bracelets of black iron were prancing about, carrying little 
puppies whose yelps were drowned by the tinkling bells 
which girdled their waists. In the shade of the marudu trees, 
a female labourer (ulatti) sent her baby to sleep on a sheet 
of leather; there were mango trees from whose branches 
drums were hanging; and under the cocoanut palms, in little 
hollows on the ground, tiny-headed bitches lay quiet 
after pupping. The red-crested cocks crowed before dawn 
calling the brawny pulaiyar to their day’s work; and by day, 



LABOUR CLASS LIFE 


569 


under the wide shade of the Kdnji tree spread the voice of 
the wavy-haired Pulaiya women singing as they were husk- 
ing paddy. By the side of tanks full of warbling birds, the 
music of many instruments accompanied the drinking fetes 
of Pulaiya women who wore on their heads fragrant flowers 
and ears of paddy-corn, and who staggered in their dance as 
the result of increasing intoxication. In this abode of the 
people of the lowest caste (kadainar) , there arose a man with 
a feeling of true devotion to the feet of Siva. He was the un- 
rivalled Nandanar who inherited as his share communal ser- 
vice in the neighbouring township (iir-ppulamai) 

Depending for his livelihood on his share of the communal 
land (land set apart by the town for Pariahs in communal 
employ), and following the profession that was his by birth, 
he used to supply, to the temples of the Lord of the Trident, 
leather and leather straps for making drums, strings (guts) 
for lutes of various types and bezoar for the worship of the 
God of gods.’ Workers of this class were indeed in a con- 
dition of serfdom, adscripti glebae with no freedom of move- 
ment. 

From casual references in the inscriptions, we can dimly 
^ ^ perceive the existence of a class of hired 

0 ' day-labourers who assisted in agricultural 
operations on the estates of other people and received a daily 
wage, usually in grain. 9 There was no clear line of division 
between the absolutely landless agrarian labourer and the 
small peasant hiring himself out in his spare time. Garden- 
labour was hired for service in flower-gardens attached to 
temples at the standard rate of one marakkal and two nalis 
of paddy per diem, a rate mentioned in two inscriptions of 
the years a.d. 1019 and 1053; 10 and eight such labourers were 
regularly employed all the year round in a garden of the 
extent of seven padagams in one case, and two for six md-s 
in the other. In several instances a gift of land for some 
public purpose, to a temple or matha, is found to include some 
portion set apart for the residences of the families of labour- 
ers engaged in its cultivation. Such labourers were not pea- 
sant proprietors by any means, and were nearer the class of 
hired labourers than of tenants; they were entitled to the use 
of a house-site near enough to the place of their work and 
to get wages fixed in advance, the proceeds of their labour 
C. 72 



570 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

on land being altogether the property of the institution that 
owned the soil on which they worked. Tenancy-cultivation 
was also quite common, both on private 
Tenancy. estates and on quasi-public land such as that 

of a temple; after paying the landlord a fixed melvdram 
determined in advance, the tenant usually retained as 
his share what remained after payment of the direct 
expenses of cultivation, and any minor dues assessed 
on the land held by him. The extensive class of service 
tenures may be taken to have invested their holders with a 
temporary partnership in the soil as remuneration for the 
particular services rendered by them to the community or 
the institutions concerned. 

The data to be gathered from the inscriptions are still too 
fragmentary and one-sided to allow of a 
A caution. detailed account of the entire agrarian sys- 
tem of the time. Almost all inscriptions 
record transactions of a religious or eleemosynary character, 
and one can never tell how far the conditions described in 
them can be treated as representative of the general features 
of private cultivation. Considering, however, that cultivation, 
like other industries, was undertaken mainly to supply local 
needs, and that there is no evidence whatever of its having 
attained the capitalistic form in pursuit of profit, it is possible 
that there was little or no difference in this respect between 
private lands and those of public or charitable institutions. 
If the correctness of this surmise may be assumed, much of 
what is said below on tenures, irrigation, land-values and so 
on may be accepted as characteristic of the whole system. 

Communal ownership of land by the villages as such has 
been noticed already; the residuary claim of 
Tenures. the state as represented by the king to all 

unassigned land must have been tacitly as- 
sumed. For the rest, all cultivable land was held in one of 
three broad classes of tenure which may be distinguished as: 
peasant proprietorship called velldn-vagai in the inscriptions; 
service-tenure, comprising all the holdings described various- 
ly as jivita, bhdga, kdni, vrtti, and so on; and eleemosynary 
tenure, such as brahmadeya, devaduna and salabhoga. result- 
ing from charitable gifts and governed by the special terms 



VELLAN-VAGAI 


571 


laid down in each case in a separate document drawn up in 
set terms and engraved on copper plates or stone or both. 
Service-inams were also often recorded on stone, but these 
records were simpler and stated only the extent of land held, 
the name of the person holding it and the particular service 
for which it was the remuneration, the details of the rights 
of the parties to the arrangement being left to be regulated 
by local custom. The three classes of tenure so differentiated 
may now be considered in some detail. 

The term vellan-vagai comprises two words of which the 
first clearly means ‘cultivator’. Of the 

Peasant second word vagai, the meanings suited to 

proprietors. ... < , , , 

the present context are class or manner. 
That vagai is used in the epigraphs in the sense of classifica- 
tion according to tenure will become clear from our recalling 
the phrase nadu-vagai-seyyira applied to revenue officials 
employed in the settlement of land-revenue; the process of 
settlement ( vagai-seydal ) involved the registration of titles 
and tenures including those of the ordinary cultivators 
(vellan) . It may be observed, in passing, that the classifica- 
tion of land in the order of fertility of the soil was called 
taram-idudal, grading. Vellan-vagai is clearly contrasted 
with other forms of tenure in the inscriptions. Karuppur 
was one of many villages appointed by Rajaraja to supply 
fixed quantities of grain to the Tanjore temple; only such of 
its cultivable land as was classed as vellan-vagai, the deva- 
danas and salabhogas being excluded, was taken into account 
to fix its quota of the supply to the Tanfore temple . 11 Again, 
in the Tiruvalangadu plates we are told in the most casual 
manner that the normal type of a tax-paying village was the 
vellan-vagai. The village of Palaiyanur, a brahmadeya in the 
possession of the sabha. of Singalantaka-caturvedimangalam, 
was converted into a vellan-vagai village, the sabha. gettmg 
other land in exchange (talai-maru) . After this conversion 
to vellan-vagai, Palaiyanur was made a devadana of the Tmu- 
valangadu temple. The difference between this village and 
others of the vellan-vagai is clearly stated in the following 
terms : 12 ‘This vr is to be exempted from paying irai like 
other villages (held) by vellan-vagai: for every year from the 
sixth, it is to pay a permanent irai ( ninrirai ) of three thousand 
two hundred and eighty-eight kalams. seven kttrunis and five 



572 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

nalis of paddy and one hundred and ninety-three kalanjus , 
(one) manjadi, and one md of gold as paid before including 
padi and palli; 13 it is to be assessed accordingly and (the 
assessment) entered in the accounts.’ Now, these words of 
king’s order provide a peep-hole into some important aspects 
of the land system under Cola rule. The ordinary ryotwari 
village as we now call it was the velUn-vagai, having direct 
relations with the government and paying a land-tax liable to 
revision from time to time. Whether the settlement was with 
the individual cultivator as at present, or, as seems more like- 
ly from the strength of communal organisations and life, with 
the village as a whole, is not certain. The statement that 
Palaiyanur while it was a brahmadeya under the sabha paid 
an irai of a large amount to the state is proof that a brahma- 
deya was usually subject to certain imposts payable in a lump 
sum of gold 14 to the central government. A brahmadeya could 
also be resumed on the holders being compensated by the 
grant of other land in exchange, and the land so resumed could 
be put to some other use, in this instance converted into a 
devaddna. Quite obviously, Palaiyanur was granted to the 
temple not as an ordinary devaddna , but as a vellan-vagai with 
a permanently settled assessment of taxes which it paid to the 
temple instead of to government. The reason underlying this 
roundabout arrangement is not stated; but one may guess 
that the intention was to leave the actual cultivators of the 
land in status quo. When the land was brahmadeya they 
were remitting in all 3288 kalams, 7 kwrunis and 5 nalis of 
paddy and 193 kalanjus, 1 manjadi and 1 md of gold as the 
landlord’s share, and they were required to continue making 
the same payment to the temple instead of to their former 
landlords. 15 Though in consideration of existing conditions 
a permanent settlement of the dues from the village to the 
temple was ordered, all that it meant was that the assessment 
was not to be altered as often as in the ordinary vellan-vagai 
villages; for though almost every order or resolution was said 
to be perpetual at the time it was issued, there was no lack of 
readiness to reconsider it as fresh circumstances arose. And 
the language of this order which contrasts the payment by the 
ordinary vellan-vagai villages with the fixed annual assess- 
ment of Palaiyanur also suggests the possibility that in velldn- 
vagai tenure the state’s share was in some manner directly 



CONVERSION OF LAND STATUS 573 

dependent on the annual yield. But of this we c ann ot be 
sure. Another example of a similar conversion of brahma- 
deya to a vellan-vagai devadana is found in an inscription of 
the sixteenth year of the Cola-Pandya Viceroy Sundara by 
which five velis of land, originally brahmadeya, were made 
over to the Tiruvalisvaram temple as vellan-vagai with an 
annual assessment of 642 kalams , 6 kurunis, 2 ndlis, 3 ulakkus, 
and 2\ sevidus by the nardyam measuring five nalis, and 40 
kalanjus and 3 kdnis of gold, of which five kasus represented 
katci-erudu-kdsu and the rest uruvukol-nilan-kdsu. 16 These 
instances make it clear that the vellan-vagai villages fell, in 
the reign of Rajendra I, into at least two broad classes — one 
directly remitting a variable annual revenue to the state and 
the other paying dues of a more or less fixed and standardised 
character to the public institutions like temples to which they 
were assigned. Which of these benefited the cultivator more, 
if at all, we lack the means of determining. 

Another conspicuous instance of the conversion of a 
brahmadeya into vellan-vagai is recorded in the eleventh year 
of Kulottunga I (1081) . 16a The record bears close resem- 
blance in its formalistic style to the Tiruvalangadu plates, and 
like them contains many revenue and administrative terms 
which call for study. The formalities connected with the 
change in tenure take many years — the transaction starting 
in the eleventh year of Rajendra II and coming to an end only 
under Kulottunga. The substantive order was addressed by 
Virarajendra to the nattar, brahmadeyakkilavar, the urgalilar, 
of devadana, paUiccanda, saldbhdga and other such charity vil- 
lages, and the nagarangaRldr. The lands so converted were 
constituted into a new village under the name Rajendra-nallur, 
and it was required to pay a fixed tax (ninrirai) of 2000 kalam 
of paddy every year to the temple of Tiruttatakai-lsvaram, 
built by Nakkan Tarani or Panandaj. The new arrangement 
took effect from the eleventh year of Kulottunga I. In the 
third regnal year of Kuldttunga II the village of Aviyanur in 
S. Arcot was converted from nattu-brahmadeya into a tax free 
tmindmattukkani. ieb 

An inscription from Nidur (Tanjore district) dated 
a.d. 1232, 17 records that after the village became free from 
the tyrannical rule of Kopperunjinga, the cultivators went up 



574 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

to the village sabha with complaints regarding their economic 
condition, and that the sabha fixed a new settlement regard- 
ing the dues in cash and kind to be paid by the actual cultiva- 
tors to landlords, perungudigal, who were forbidden to use 
force in making these collections. The rate of kudimai was 
fixed at 22 kasus for each mundirigai (1 ] 320 of a veil) for a 
single crop, while vettik-kdsu and viniydgam amounted to five 
kasus and one kasu respectively; one labourer was to be sup- 
plied free for each kdni held and all extra labour availed of 
was to be paid for at the usual rates. Any extra dues imposed 
on the lands were to be paid by the perungudigal. 

Service-tenures were of various types. The assignments 
in favour of public servants as remuneration 
Service tenure, for their official work under government 
have already been noticed; these assignments 
were, however, only of certain rights to taxes and dues from 
land, and as such must be distinguished from direct assign- 
ments of land in lieu of particular services rendered. Land 
was endowed for instance in 1088 as kuttattuk-kani by the naga- 
rattar and temple authorities of Manambadi (Tan j ore dt.) for 
the performance of five Tamilakkuttns during the festival in 
the month of Cittirai in the temple of Mahadeva at Vira- 
narayanapuram. 17 ® Such assignments of revenues from the 
land and of the land itself formed a normal method of remune- 
rating military service, at least in later Cola times. Two ins- 
criptions from Tiruvaduturai dated a.d. 1117 and 1121 mention 
the grant of a considerable area of arable 
Military grants, land, constituted into a separate unit under 
the name Kulottungasolanallur, as virabhoga 
for the enjoyment of the Kaikkolas, from Merka-nadu, who 
were of sirudanam rank and served in the palace of Gangai- 
konda-cSlapuram. 18 An inscription of a.d. 1125 from Siva- 
puri. Ramnad. 19 states that Sundan Gangaikondan, a vassal of 
the king, promised to give as udirap-patti five ma-s of good land 
and three mas of poor land to the dependants of each of his 
swordsmen ( vdlilar ) who fell in battle. He further promised 
that in case any of the servants of the vdlilar died in war or on 
account of disease, he would not recover anything as his dues 
from their relatives which they were not prepared to give with 
a good grace. Yet another inscription, from Taniore district 
(Kovilkadu), dated a.d. 1256, records an undertaking by Sola- 



SERVICE-TENURE 


575 


gangan of Paiyur in Tondai-mantjalam not to collect any dues 
over and above 600 kasus and two kalams of paddy on every 
rad from all the lands held by him as padaipparru. 2 ** This is 
obviously an instance in which a feudal chieftain was allow- 
ed to enjoy the proceeds of taxes from lands assigned to him 
in return for his maintaining a stated number of soldiers ready 
for service when required by the king. 

Very good examples of service tenure proper come from 
temples and villages, which generally remunerated their ser- 
vants in this manner. The temples often parcelled out their 
lands and assigned them as jivita, bhoga, or kani, all these 
terms are used indifferently, for persons who fetched water 
for bathing the deity, 21 kept watch over the temple premi- 
ses, 22 sounded the conch ( sangu ) f 2, performed the arcana and 
aided at the sri bali, 24 sang in the temple or trained songsters 25 
and so on. The Sabha of Jananatha-caturvedimangalam met 
once in the ninth year of Rajendra I to regulate the occupa- 
tion of the lands of the local temple of Mahasasta by its servants 
and fix the nature and extent of the services for which the 
occupants were liable in each case, such as conducting wor- 
ship (arcana), supplying oil for lamps, and keeping watch 
over the temple. 26 Individual donors often ear-marked their 
gifts of land to temples for particular services; slightly diffe- 
rent in its origin, this type did not differ in any other way 
from the foregoing. The endowment of a nrtyabhdga ( sakkai - 
kani ) for the performance of ariyak-kuttu at the annual festi- 
vals in Tiruvaduturai from the ninth year of Rajaraja I (a. d. 
994) , 27 and that of a tatt&rakkdni, goldsmith’s holding, by queen 
Dantisakti Vitanki attached to the temple of Tiruvarur from 
the fourth year of Rajendra I, 28 furnish instances of one of the 
common methods by which service-tenure on temple lands was 
created from time to time. Many items of service, high and 
low, to the village community were also remunerated in a like 
manner. Here again there was a double process at work; some- 
times the village assembly took the initiative and set apart a 
portion of the common land as bhoga for the performance of 
specified services; there were also rich and generous persons 
ready to meet some pressing local need from their purse, buy 
land from the village community itself to create the necessary 
endowment, and leave it to be administered by the local 
authority. Of the first process there are several examples of 



576 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

bhattavrttis being created by village assemblies for the main- 
tenance of teachers in schools, or of persons who popularised 
culture by expounding the Puranas or philosophies in temples, 
and the ktinis for artisans like goldsmiths, 29 for the village 
physician, 30 or dancing-master. 31 A very common form that 
private benefaction assumed was the gift of land for the main- 
tenance of dredging-boats and of men who kept the village 
tanks in good repair by removing silt, repairing the tank bund 
and in other specified ways. 32 Such land was called eri-patti. 
Another was the ambalappuram, for the maintenance of rest 
houses and public places for the supply of drinking water. 33 
In view of a gift of two md-s of land to each, three carpenters 
of Somanatha-caturvedimangalam agreed to serve in the seve- 
ral hamlets of the village, accepting a reasonable remunera- 
tion for each job. 34 In fact, the universal prevalence of service 
tenure created for all conceivable purposes is most clearly 
established by the inscriptions. Its place in the tax-system 
gave rise to disputes which were settled by the general order 
of Rajaraja issued in his twenty-fourth year. 35 From this 
order, we may conclude that, unless there were reasons to the 
contrary, all lands held under service tenure were subject to 
the usual imposts, central and local, that were levied on land. 
The numerous instances of land being set apart for the main- 
tenance of lamps in temples are also best regarded as exam- 
ples of service tenures. 

The main types of eleemosynary tenure were three: the 
brahmadeya, the devadana and the s&ld- 
Charify lands. bhdga - The two former were sometimes 
combined in the same village, a devadana 
brahmadeya village. 36 The devadana differs 
from tiruvidaiyattam 37 and tirundmattuk-kani, the two latter 
terms being applied evidently to lands held in absolute owner- 
ship by the temple, like any other land-owner. 38 These tenures 
were created generally by purchase of land from previous 
owners and occupants, followed by a ceremonial gift in set 
orm, the gift formula often giving detailed expression to the 
rights and privileges, and the obligations, if any. conveyed 
with the grant; more rarely, it was found possible especially for 
the king and the village assembly to utilise unassigned com- 
mon land for such gifts. When land already owned and cul- 
tivated formed the subject of gift after purchase, the question 



PROCEDURE IN LAND GIFTS 577 

was how to deal with the occupancy rights of the actual culti- 
vators ( kudi ) of the soil. Closely allied was the question of the 
rights of karanmai and miykatci (or miyatci) terms clearly 
corresponding to cultivator’s and landlord’s rights respective- 
ly. As the landlord might himself be the actual cultivator, 
the class of occupant cultivators was sometimes distinguished 
by the name kil-kardnmai-udaiya-kiidigal. i.e. the occupants 
with subordinate cultivation rights. 39 Several inscriptions re- 
cording these gifts contain statements of the manner in which 
these questions were dealt with, such as kiidi-rukkik-kdranmai- 
miykatci 40 or kxidi-nmgdk-kdranmai. 41 It is curious to note 
that this conception of occupancy rights was sometimes ap- 
plied even to movable property; an inscription of a.d. 1006 
from Tiruvaiyaru records that a herd of sheep was taken 
charge of by a person who undertook to maintain two lamps 
in the temple on condition that the sheep were treated as kudi- 
mkka-ccdva-muvd-pperddu. 42 full-grown ewes that neither die 
nor grow old and are held in fixed tenancy. One other subject 
for specific consideration on the occasion of such gifts of land 
to Brahmins, temples and feeding houses, was that of taxes 
and dues to be paid on the land after the date of the gift. 
Often these lands were made iraiyili either by total remission 
by the taxing authorities, central or local or both, or by the 
irai being secured by a lump sum payment made in advance 
as irai-kaval. In the absence of a clear statement to some such 
effect, the lands were liable to the usual taxes. 

The Anbil plates of Sundara Cola record the gift as an 
ekabhoga-brahmadeya of ten velis of land by 
Ekabhoga. the king. The adjective ekabhoga implies 

that, unlike the usual brahmadeya shared by 
a number of donees, this gift was meant altogether to benefit 
the one individual named, in this case Aniruddha Brahma- 
dhiraja. The land given away was marked off in the traditio- 
nal manner by a public ceremony in which a female elephant 
was made to beat the bounds. The Tamil part of the grant 
records in detail the rights and privileges conveyed by the 
gift which are more summarily mentioned in the Sanskrit 
part: ‘we marked (the boundaries of) the land thus defined 
by erecting mounds of earth (karu) and planting cactus. The 
several objects included in this land — such as fruit-yielding 
trees, water, lands, gardens, all upgrowing trees and down- 
C. 73 



578 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

going wells, open spaces, 43 wastes in which calves graze, the 
village-site, ant-hills, platforms (built round trees), canals,' 11 
hollows; rivers and their alluvial deposits, tanks, granaries 
(kdttag&ram) , fish-ponds, clefts with beehives, deep ponds 
( kottagam ) included; and everything else on which the iguana 
runs and the tortoise crawls; and taxes such as the income 
from places of justice (manru pada), the kulam on (betel) 
leaves, the cloths from looms, the kdnam (of gold) on carria- 
ges, the pattam on shops, kdrdnmai and miydtci included, the 
old tenants being evicted ( kudinikki ) ; everything that the 
king could take and enjoy — all these shall be made over to 
this man. He shall be at liberty to erect halls and upper 
storeys with burnt bricks; to dig wells, big and small; to plant 
southernwood and cuscus; to dig channels in accordance with 
watering requirements; not to waste sennlr 45 but to dam such 
water for irrigation; no one shall employ small piccotahs or 
baskets 46 (for lifting such water) . In this wise, was the old 
order changed, and the old name and old taxes removed, and 
an ekabhoga-brahmadeya under the name of Karunakaraman- 
galam constituted’. 

A similar charter of privileges with a few variations is 
found in other brahmadeya grants, as well as in devadanas. 
The Tiruvalangadu plates, for instance, convey these privi- 
leges in almost identical terms, 47 and some others like the 
prohibition of ilavas climbing up cocoanut and palm trees (for 
tapping them) within the area and the right to raise the 
bund of the village tank to its maximum height and to store 
in it the maximum quantity of water that it could hold. Some- 
times restrictions were placed by the terms of the gift on the 
rights of the donee and his successors to sell or mortgage the 
land. 48 

A deliberate attempt seems to have been made in the 
reigns of Rajaraja and Rajendra I to main- 
Exclusiveness. tain the homogeneity of the brahmadeya 
villages by excluding all other classes from 
owning land m them. This policy was dictated, not so much 
y reasons like pride of caste and social exclusiveness, which 
readily suggest themselves to a modem student, as by the 
real difficulty of fitting into the constitutional arrangements 
suited to a sabha other persons whose aims, needs and attain- 



BRAHMADEYAS 


579 


ments were not the same as those of the Bhattas and Krama- 
vittas. It has been pointed out elsewhere 49 that in large vil- 
lages where such homogeneity could not be attained, the 
device was adopted of running two types -of village assemblies 
side by side, the sabha and ur. But in places where Brahmins 
formed the bulk of the residents, and landholders of other 
classes were too few to be constituted into a separate ur, these 
landholders had either to be received as members of a sabha 
which laid down high educational qualifications for taking 
part in debates and for service on the executive committees, 
qualifications not easily attained by the common people, or 
they had to go without exercising any of the privileges nor- 
mally associated with ownership of land in those days and 
without an opportunity of giving adequate expression or gain- 
ing proper attention to their needs. The only other course 
was for them to betake themselves to more congenial surround- 
ings. Possibly difficulties of the character above mentioned 
were not foreseen at first, and no restrictions were imposed 
on ownership of land in brahmadeya villages; as in actual 
practice this policy gave rise in some place or other to the 
sort of inconvenience that was quite natural in the circums- 
tance, the king’s attention was drawn to it, when no satisfactory 
solution was reached by local agreement. There was issued 
by Rajaraja, in the seventeenth year of his reign, a.d. 1002, a 
general order 50 that in Brahmin villages, the estates ( kani ) of 
all persons of castes other than Brahmin be sold out, excep- 
tion being made of servants holding land under some service 
tenure. The Brahmins were apparently expected to buy up 
the land and pay down cash, and a special officer was deputed 
to Rajakesari-caturvedimangalam to get the sabhd to conform 
to the order and make early payment; some of the land sold on 
the occasion was bought by the king’s sister Kundavai, who 
gave it to the local temple. A similar order of Rajendra I 
is recorded in an inscription 51 of the sixth year of his reign 
from Velicceri, a brahmadeya in Puliyurkottam. 

A case of erosion by the Kollidam (Coleroon) river result- 
ing in an unsettlement of the boundaries between the lands 
held by the two temples of Srirangam and Tiruvanaikkaval 
on the island of Srirangam is recorded in the twentieth year 
of Kulottunga III. 51a New boundaries were fixed by royal offi- 
cers puravuvarik-kiiru seyvar and puravuvari-nayakam-sey- 



580 


AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


var, in consultation with representatives of both the temples, 
of the sabha, the accountants of the two villages where the lands 
lay, and the superintendents of both the temples; they took 
into account the holdings of the temples as they were before 
the 19th year of the king (i.e. before the erosion occurred) 
and suggested suitable exchange of lands where necessary. 
The award satisfied the parties and new boundary stones with 
the mark of cakra (Visnu) and sula (Siva) were set up. In 
passing we may note the terms kundigaikkal and niukkwdaik- 
kal for Jaina boundary stones. 51b 

From the reign of Rajaraja III, we have an instance of the 
original land registers of a brahmadeya village. Talaiccangadu, 
being lost in a commotion, and the steps taken by the village 
authorities, with the sanction of the central government, to 
prepare a fresh register of rights based on prescription 
(anubogap-pa.rroli.igiL) . The sabha record their sense of gra- 
titude to the prime mover in this business of regulating titles 
and restoring order after the period of confusion. 52 The ins- 
cription is dated a.d. 1235. 

Devadana lands were often marked off, as just noticed, by 
means of boundary stones bearing the emblems 
Devadana. of the deity to whom they belonged. 53 The rights 
and exemptions enumerated in devadanas 
have a family likeness to those of the brahmadeyas, as already 
noticed. Devadana lands were managed by the authorities of 
the temple subject to supervision and control of the village as- 
sembly on the one side and the central government on the other. 
It was open to the authorities of the temple acting in concert 
with the local assemblies to award fivitas or kanis to the 
servants of the temple as remuneration for the performance 
of services or the supply of articles required for use in the 
temple. Such assignments are sometimes made by the assem- 
bly acting by itself; for instance, the ur of Nerkuppai received 
as devadana to Tiru-mudu-kunram-udaiyar some wet land and 
a house from Uttama Cola; these they gave over as kani in 
the third year of Rajaraja I to a person who was to supply to 
the temple half palam of sandal paste and quarter palam of 
bdellium, besides bathing materials on the days of the ayana- 
sankrdnti. 5 * The temple often came by land of low fertility or 
even waste land which was sometimes dumped on it by village 



TENANCY IN TEMPLE LANDS 581 

assemblies which found themselves under the necessity of 
raising money urgently for some public purpose. Such infe- 
rior land had a much better chance under temples of being 
improved and fertilised by persons who were ready to under- 
take the task as a labour of love; when improved in this manner 
the land usually yielded a better income to the temple than be- 
fore. 55 In the reign of Rajaraja I the lands in a devaddna 
village belonging to the temple of Suclndram were divided 
into two categories, on one of which the rental due from the 
tenants ( kanik-kadan ) was raised from 3 kalams per ma to 3 
kalams and a tuni, while the other which could not pay such 
a rental was to be directly managed by the officers of the 
temple (devakanmigal) On the other hand, in some instan- 
ces the tenants occupying temple lands seem to have held them 
on more favourable terms than others, or, at any rate, to have 
had better opportunities of getting the terms of their lease 
revised when necessary. Thus the kanik-kadan due from 
Manabharana-caturvedimangalam to the Visnu temple called 
after Rajendracola in Mannarkoyil was fixed at 3840 kalams 
and odd; this was found to be too high, and in consequence 
the Cera Rajaraja-deva added ten velis of land to the original 
extent, and fixed 2600 kalams as the annual rental on the 
whole village so extended. 57 Instances like this show clearly 
that a number of extra-economic considerations entered into 
the management of temple lands. The desire of the donor to 
secure the maximum benefit to the temple or its tenants from 
his gift, the readiness of tenants to squeeze themselves to help 
in the attainment of this object, or, what was at least quite as 
common, their readiness to make an honest penny at the ex- 
pense of a public institution if it could be done without a 
scandal, such were some of the forces that exerted a real 
influence on the terms of the lease. At any rate there was 
little chance that the relative economic conditions of the te- 
nants holding of the temples exhibited any tendency to 
equality, such as custom and the methods of production and 
sharing were apt to produce among other classes of tenants. 
A curious inscription of the reign of Aditya II shows the value 
of the periodical audit of temple accounts by the officers of 
the central government; this is a record which details the 
detection of what looks very much like a deliberate fraud by 



582 


AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


which the temple of Tiruvidaimarudil was despoiled of 96 
kalams of paddy every year by its tenants, who remitted only 
160 kalams as pancavaram where 256 kalams were due by 
agreement; the defence set up in the course of the enquiry 
was that the tenure was kudinikkd-devaddnam, i.e. one in 
which occupancy rights still held good; but this turned out to 
be a false statement on a reference to the original deed recor- 
ding the devaddna, and the tenants were thereupon ordered 
to remit the higher rate of pancavaram , 58 

An inscription from Tirumalam, 59 Tanjore district, dated 
a.d. 1112, records that Kulottunga I approved and sanctioned 
the proposal to remove some of the tenants in occupation of the 
devaddna lands of the local temple and lease out the lands to 
other tenants, because the former had allowed arrears of 
melvaram to accumulate and could not command the means 
to grow fresh crops without a break; the sanction of the king 
was obtained beforehand either because tenants could not be 
changed on devaddna lands without such sanction, or possibly 
with a view to forestalling future litigation by the displaced 
tenants. 

A record of 1215 from Narttamalai, Pudukkottah, 60 relates 
to a kudi-ninga-devar danam, created by the nagaram, who 
sold some land to two merchants. The terms of this sale show 
how complex, and yet, how equitable to all parties concerned, 
the regulation of land rights could be. For all the dues to be 
paid to the king on account of this land, ulagudai nayanar tiru- 
vasaldl vanda irai kudimaiyum marram epperppattanavum, the 
nagaram held themselves responsible even after the sale. The 
two persons to whom the land was sold in equal shares had to 
give to the temple 30 kalams of paddy each in any year in which 
the yield of the whole land was normal; in lean years, they 
had to remit 2Vz kalams on each md of land actually cropped 
(vilamja nilattukku) . The land was declared to be in the last 
grade ( taram ) , and was assessed as such for all time. Clearly 
here the rights of the temple were confined to the melvdram 
at a rate fixed beforehand, the tenants keeping the balance of 
the yield and not having to pay the taxes due to the central 
government, as these were paid by the nagaram. 



IRRIGATION TANKS 583 

The prosperity of an agricultural country depends to a 
large extent on the facilities provided for 
Irrigation. irrigation, and the importance of securing 

an adequate water supply was recognised in 
South India from very early times. Natural streams and de- 
pendable channels leading off from them were the first source 
of supply: but for the passing mention, in an inscription at 
Tiruvaduturai, 61 of a Parakesari Karikalacdla who raised the 
banks of the Kaveri, we hear little, in inscriptions, of the 
methods adopted to turn natural streams to account. Much 
literary evidence can be cited to show that the prosperity of 
the Cola country proper was a gift of the Kaveri, and parti- 
cularly all the names now known of the many branches of 
this great stream in the delta country are traceable in the Cola 
inscriptions. In the absence of natural streams, recourse was 
had to tanks, and the bulk of the evidence on irrigation from 
the inscriptions relates to the care bestowed on the proper 
maintenance of the tanks. The Cola-varidhi of Sholingur, the 
Kaliyaneri near Anaimalai in Madura, the Kallinangaikulam 
at Solapuram, the Vairamegha-tataka of Uttaramerur dating 
from Pallava times, the ‘big tank’ of Bahur, and the Rajendra- 
solap-periya-eri at Punganur are only the leading examples of 
a very large number of irrigation tanks mentioned in the ins- 
criptions. The primary care of the village assemblies was to 
get the silt removed (every year before the rains set in) from 
the tanks under their control in time for them to secure the 
proper depth needed to store the full supply for the next year. 
Often special endowments were created in relation to each 
tank to safeguard this important work from the neglect or the 
penury of village authorities. Even where, as in Bahur or 
Tribhuvani, 62 the annual repairs were not provided for by 
specific endowments, a special cess, the eri-ayam, ear-marked 
for this purpose was collected from the ryots in the village, 
the rate in the instances mentioned being one padakku of grain 
per ma of cultivated land. The water-rights attaching to par- 
ticular plots of land were often enumerated on the occasion 
when they changed hands by sale or gift. Where natural 
levels were not favourable for the flow of water, and it had 
to be lifted, piccotahs and baskets were commonly employed 
for the purpose. The water lift worked by bulls may have 
been known, but finds no place in the inscriptions. About 



584 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

a.d. 1010, the sabha of Nemali (S. Arcot) which was then 
called Calukki-kula-kala-caturvedimangalam set apart certain 
incomes as eri-ayam for the maintenance of a local tank; one 
of these was a small charge of % yon levied on men and women 
of the Brahmin community at death. 623 In a.d. 1110 there is 
recorded a breach of the tank of Tirukkanji in a storm and 
the repairs effected to it by a local Araiyan; the 
repairs included the construction of a stone revetment to 
the banks ( karpadai ) .^A tank near Tirukkaccur was extend- 
ed, and a fresh sluice erected at the cost of a temple, in order 
that the lands of the temple may be properly irrigated; the 
tank originally belonged to the people of Sengunram, and 
their consent was obtained before the extension of the tank 
was undertaken. The water in the tank was to be distributed 
between the villagers and the temple in the ratio of their 
holdings. 64 In the 12th year of Vikramacdla owing to the 
silting of an irrigation channel, the assembly of Nerkunram 
had to divert water from a spring in a neighbouring village 
after giving compensation to it. 643 Again, in the fifteenth year 
of Rajaraja II the mula-parisat of Tiruvayppadi (Tanjore Dt.) 
sold away some fallow common land of the village to be able 
to make a bund and dig a channel for the irrigation of some 
of the cultivable land of the village. 641 * Such examples, which 
may be easily multiplied, furnish clear evidence of the vivid 
realisation by the people of the importance of irrigation and 
of their readiness to meet and solve irrigation problems in a 
reasonable spirit. 

Another aspect of agriculture that deserves special men- 
tion is the steady progress of reclamation of 
Reclamation. forest and waste land that was being brought 
under the plough. Popular tradition as- 
cribes to the Pallava kings ( kddii-vettis ) or to Karikala the 
early Cola monarch, the credit of having disafforested large 
tracts of South India and made them fit for agriculture and 
human habitation. Whatever the historical value of such 
traditions, epigraphy gives unmistakable proof of the delibe- 
rate efforts made from time to time and by easy stages to 
increase the area under the plough and the inducements 
offered to encourage such efforts on the part of the people, 
by way of concessions in taxes, favourable terms of lease in 



YIELD AND VALUE OF LAND 585 

the initial years, and so on. It is needless to reproduce here 
details which may be easily gathered from the inscriptions. 65 

The evidence on the yield of land and land values is by 
no means clear or copious. The number of 
Yield of land. crops raised each year on paddy lands was 
two, sometimes three. 66 No direct statement 
on the gross yield of land can ordinarily be traced in the 
inscriptions and the landlord’s share called melvaram. bhdgam 
or even irai at times, is expressed in different ways. One ol 
the very few instances where the gross yield is set down is 
the Cidambaram inscription of Rajakesari Rajendra 67 which 
says 44 velis of land yielded in all 4500 kcilams of paddy, and 
that the Melvaram on this was fifty per cent of the yield. A 
Mysore inscription of the time of Rajadhiraja gives the mel- 
varam rate as two-fifths for w T et land and one-fourth for areas 
under dry cultivation. 68 The inscriptions of Tiruvorriyur show 
clearly that waste land newly brought under cultivation 
could not yield more than was enough to justify the rather low 
melvaram of 30 kalams per veli in one instance, and 28 kalams 
and 19 kalams for two different classes of land in another. 69 
An inscription of the sixth year of Rajendra I from Nattam 
(Chingleput) states that the landlord’s share per kuli of cul- 
tivated land was a kuruni and five «aZis. 69a In 1124, land 
(ninety veils) was given as devadana and madappura irahjili 
at Vrddhacalam, on the basis of an irai, tax payable to govern- 
ment, of forty kalams of paddy per veli by Rajakesari measure 
(marakkdl) 70 From an inscription at Erumur, South Arcot 
district, dated 1152, it is seen that some devadana land, appa - 
rently of very good quality, was assessed at 26% kalams per 
md, equal to 525 kalams per veli or nilam. inclusive of kada- 
mai, pddi-kdval. silvari and any other taxes and cesses due 
therefrom. 71 Lastly, a record from Periya-korukkai (Trichi - 
nopoly district) of the reign of Rajaraja III shows that some 
devadana lands there paid an all inclusive tax of 20 kalams of 
paddy on wet land ( nansey ) and 10 kalams on dry land 
( punjai ) , 72 

Figures bearing on the value of land reveal equally dis- 
parate conditions. The prices stated differ 
Land value. so widely from place to place and among 
different transactions that it is impossible to 
attempt a detailed explanation of such differences without an 
C. 74 



586 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

accurate knowledge of the quality of the land concerned, or 
to institute comparisons with present conditions in respect of 
land-values. A rough idea may be gathered from a few ex- 
amples chosen at random which will show not merely the dif- 
ference in values, but wide divergences in the rates at which 
future dues on land were capitalised for the advance payment 
of the irai-kaval, the ‘tax-fund’ as it may be called. At Tiru- 
vaiyaru (Tanjore Dt.), in a.d. 1006, one veli of land was sold 
for 100 kalanjus of gold. 73 At Kuttalam in Tinnevelly, 8 mas 
of land including the tax-dues on it were valued at 43 kasus 
in the fourth year of Rajendra I. 74 Two years later, in the 
Tanjore district, 2 velis and 8 mas of wet land including a tank 
together with dry land of the same extent were sold for the 
low amount of 10 kasus, though the irai-kaval on it was 190 
kasus. 75 The low sale price in this instance was perhaps due 
to the sale being that of common land ( sabhiap-podu ) and to 
the temple. In the same year and place, another sale records 
the price of 40 kasus and irai-kaval of 90 for just one veli of 
land, which looks more normal. 76 One Madhurantakanmadai 
fetched two hundred and fifty kulis of land or one-eighth of a 
a veli at Tiruvorriyur in the thirtieth year of Rajendra I. 17 
Land of the extent of three and a half velis and two mds was 
sold for 50 kasus and an equal amount provided for bringing 
it under the plough at Tiruvarur in the eighth year of Rajen- 
dra II. 78 One veli of land was sold at 20 kasus at Kancipuram 
in 1073, and for a little less at Tiruvorriyur. 79 In 1126, dry 
land of the extent of 4250 kulis was sold for twenty kasus at 
Tiruvottur, North Arcot. 80 In 1133, four velis of land fetch- 
ed a price of 90 kasus at Uttattur, Trichinopoly district, each 
kasu being equal to three-fourths of a kalanju of gold 81 Land 
yielding a melvaram of 120 kalams per veli was valued at 40 
kdhis and 45 kahis at Tiruvarur, Tanjore district, in the tenth 
regnal year of Kulottunga II, a.d. 1143. 81a 

In the fourth regnal year, Rajaraja II issued an order to 
several villages in the Tanjore district, a smuddya tirumugam 
as it was called, regulating the prices of land sales in the whole 
of Virudarajabhayankara-valanadu; the settlement resulting 
from this order was to supersede the tenancy conditions that 
had obtained till the fifteenth year of his predecessor. The new 
terms which were fixed by a number of high officials acting 
together applied to different categories of tenure such as 



DIFFICULTIES OF VALUATION 587 

devadana, brahmadeya, palliccandam, rdjakulavar-kanipparrti 
etc. 81b 


The kasu, as pointed out elsewhere, underwent a rather 
steeply progressive debasement, or more probably the term 
came to be applied in later inscriptions to a new coin of much 
lower denomination. The price of land as stated in terms of 
this new coin will not bear any direct comparison with the 
prices mentioned above. Thus at Tiruppalanam, one ma of 
land was valued at 2000 fcostis, working to 40,000 kasus per 
veil, in a.d. 1214, 82 and the price of one veil, at Kumbakonarn 
in 1220 is said to have been 25,747 kasus. 83 About the same 
time, one ma of land which stood in need of reclamation was 
valued in Tiruvenkadu at 1334 kasus, the cost of reclamation 
being estimated at 500 kasus. 8 * Again land of the extent of 2 
veils and 19 mas was sold at Kumbakonarn in a.d. 1221 for a 
sum of 450,000 kasus. 85 About the same time, house-site was 
valued at 40 kasus per kuli at Nallur and 16 kasus at Tiru- 
valangadu (Tanjore) . 86 It would seem that the kasu became 
a coin of somewhat higher value after the close of the reign 
of Rajaraja III; for the inscriptions of Rajendra III record 
prices of landed property that suggest such a conclusion. Two 
house-sites of the total extent of twelve manaik-kol were sold 
for 700 kasus at Kuttalam (Tanjore) in a.d. 1261; 87 one veil 
and 16 mas of agricultural land were exchanged five years 
later, at Tirukkannapuram, for 5350 kasus, which, we learn, 
was the equivalent of thirteen kalanjus of gold; 88 lastly, at 
Tiruvilimilalai, nineteen mas of land found a sale for 1000 
kasus and a house-site of 10 kulis for 300 kasus, in 1267. 89 
Rajendra III made a great effort to resuscitate the Cola empire, 
and a reform of currency must have been part of his plan. It 
will be noted also that most of the records of the later Cola 
period come from the Tanjore district, proof of the waning 
and disappearance of the direct influence of the central gov- 
ernment in the outlying parts. 

In comparing the figures cited above with one another, it 
should be borne in mind that neither the unit of measurement 
nor the unit of currency was constant, and that owing to local 
variations in the length of the measuring rod and the number 
of kulis that went to the ma, and owing to the currency of 
various types of old and new money of varying weights and 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


fineness, any attempt to make a detailed comparison is render- 
ed altogether fruitless. 

Closely allied to agriculture was cattle-raising and dairy- 
farming, an industry pursued generally by 
Cattle. the manradis or shepherds. Here again, we 

depend much on the temple records for our 
information. The manradis seem to have been organised in 
a professional caste group ( kalanai ), and generally taken 
charge of the cattle donated to the temples for the maintenance 
of lamps under stated conditions. Though the pasu (cow) 
and adu (ewe) are sometimes used only as units of reckoning, 
still in the majority of instances there is no doubt that live 
animals are meant, and often enough, breeding bulls and 
rams form part of the gifts. The importance of cattle-farming 
may also be inferred from the names of several imposts the 
exact nature of which is not fully known, such as nalld , nalle- 
radu. alagerudu-kdsu and so on. 


1. See SII. i. 40. An inscription of the reign of Kulottunga I from 
Lalgudi (142 of 1929) mentions the fact of the annual redistribution of 
village-lands (nammurk-karaik-kani-yandu torum kurittu varugai- 
ydle) and the disadvantages to agriculture resulting from the practice. 
Also 441 of 1912— lands held by Saliya nagarattar of Tiruppatturai. 

2. SI I. iii, 156, 181. Is sabhamadhyama of SII. iii, 7 the same 
word? 

3. 4 of 1890; 266 of 1901. 

4. 42 of 1903. 

5. SII. iii, 162. 

6. 220 of 1901. 

7. 396 of 1922. See also 157 of 1922. 

8. Moreland’s doubts on this subject (The Agrarian Systems of 
Moslem India, p. 4) are altogether misplaced. 

9. 114 of 1928 from Ayyampettai records that, early in the thir- 
teenth century, there was unusual need for employing hired labour as 
the Vellalas had dwindled in numbers owing to various causes, and that 
the daily wages (in paddy) of hired labour were mounting up. 

10. 172 of 1915; 45 of 1925. 

11. SII. ii. 5, paragraph 2. In the next succeeding paragraph the 
same term occurs among other phrases which are not easily understood. 
A careful study of the text shows, however, that on any interpretation 
of it, the term vellan-ragai has to be understood in the sense of peasant- 
proprietorship. Its translation into 'the portion of the cultivators’ 



NOTES 


589 


(Hultzsch) does not quite bring out the technical character that un- 
doubtedly attaches to it. 

12. SII. iii, 205, Part III, Tamil, 11. 19-25. 

13. The words : ‘Ivvur mun irutta padiyum palliyum ut-pada' 

are rendered by Krishna Sastri into: "as paid before by this village 

inclusive of palli’. In other words, he takes iruttapadiyum to mean 
'in the manner in which payment was made’, and the words in 1. 71: 
‘ivvur palli ut pada irai kattina nellu may be quoted in support of 
this view. But the W in ‘padiyum’ is a real difficulty in its way, and 
I have preferred to take ‘padi’ like ‘palli’ to be some kind of tax or due, 
of which the nature is not clear. Seeing that it is omitted in 1. 71, one 
may think that it is either negligible or closely analogous to ‘palli.’ 

14. How much of the 598 kaljanjus and 1 kumri, the total assess- 
ment on Singalantaka-catm. was due from Palaiyanur is not certain: 
possibly it was the amount of 193 kalanjus and odd mentioned further, 
on. If that was so, the paddy mentioned along with this sum was the 
net share of the Brahmin donees who had rights in Palaiyanur. A 
nagaram sometimes paid its dues in gold (SII. ii. 4, paragraph 13). 

15. Krishna Sastri, however, suggests that this was the tax paid 
before the village became a brahmadeya. SII. iii. p 390, n. 1. 

16. 327 of 1916. 

16a. 74 of 1931-2, text in ARE. II 14. 

16b. 260 of 1939-40. 

17. 536 of 1921; ARE. 1922 II 25 has 1,32 by mistake. 

17a. 90 of 1931-2; nos. 93 and 94 of the same collection are similar 
gifts to the same temple for other services including a kiittu, in the 
same festival. 

18. 72 of 1926; 69 of 1926. 

19. 47 of 1929. 

20. 194 of 1926. Padaip-parru is also mentioned with jivitap- 
parru and vanniyap-parru in 556 of 1919. 

21. 276 of 1923. 

22. 112 of 1914. 

23. 58 of 1895. 

24. 384 of 1913. 

25. 141 of 1895. 

26. 386 of 1922. 

27. 120 of 1925. 

28. 216 of 1894. 

29. 210 of 1919. 

30. 36 of 1898. 

31. 361 of 1924. 

32. 27 of 1893; 252 of 1921. 

33. 170 of 1894. 

34. 405 of 1925: also 205 of 1919. 

35. SII. iii. 9. 

36. 127 of 1925; 388 of 1913. 



590 AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 

37. 126 of 1896. An inscription from Uttattur (525 of 1912) gives 
the following classes of iraiyili parry, in the village viz., devadana, 
tiruvidaiyattam, palliccandam, aiyan pdtti, madappuram, agarapparru, 
bhatta-vrtti. 

38. In 1222, a tenant in occupation of some devadana land in 
Talaiccangadu, having fallen into arrears with his annual kadatnai, 
agreed to the land being made tirunamattukkani and leased out to new 
tenants, in lieu of his clearing the arrears: en peral anjavadin edira- 
mandu kar-varai sigaiydna kasum vellaip-piiri nellum karra i vaikkol 
tiraiyum enndl pokkarukkap-pdgddenxum innilam veliyum pasdn mudal 
vittu vidu-tittu tandu innilattukku munbu koyil purappatta mulasada- 
nangalum tarukkiren enru nan vinnappanjeyya. (209 of 1925). 

39. 75 of 18%; El. v. p. 45. 

40. SII. ii, 92. 1. 1. 

41. Ill of 1905. Also ARE. 1929, II, 16. 

42. 218 of 1894. 

43. Manru, which Gopinatha Rao translates into ‘halls’. 

44. 'odaiyum udaippum’, G. Rao has ‘ponds, breaches in rivers.’ 

45. Rain-water? 

46. I have adopted kudai-nir. See El. xv, p. 72, fi. 3. The Tiru- 
valangadu plates (11. 445-6) confine this restriction to persons other 
than the grantees ( anniyar ). See also 103 of 1921. 

47. 11. 426-58 far more elaborate in details than the Anbil plates. 
Also 103 of 1921 and others. 

48. 118 of 1902. 

49. Studies, p. 78; ante pp. 492 ff. 

50. 46 of 1897. 

51. 311 of 1911. 

51a. 113 of 1938-9, ARE. R, 23. 

51b. ARE. 1939-40—1942-3, II. 36 (end). 

52. 213 of 1925. 

53. 'SII. i, 59; ii, 6, 61. 5 of 1909. Instances are not unknown of 
cash and the right to collect some dues being made devadana iraiyili 
-363 of 1899. 

54. 57 of 1918. For other instances, see ‘service tenure’, ante. 

55. 495 of 1918. 

56. TAS. iv, p. 129. Kadan panada ni lam (1. 21) does not mean 
lands exempt from taxes as understood by the editor of the inscription. 

57. Ill of 1905. 

58. SII. iii, 203. The fact that 160 kalams were pancavaram and 
800 kalams the tenant’s share of the produce (1. 2), suggests that pan- 
cavaram was a one-fifth part surrendered by the tenants of devadana 
lands on their share of the produce. But we cannot be sure of this, 
as 256 kalam rate has no relation to any figure in the record. But there 
are important gaps in the inscription. I have used the words occupant 
and occupancy wherever the term kudi is used in the original as it 
implies the actual cultivator of the soil, and not merely a lessee. 



NOTES 


591 


Krishna Sastri, however, uses the words tenant and tenancy in the 
same context, as e.g. in the passage cited at p. 577-8. 

59. 93 of 1910. 

60. Pd. 170. 

61. 110 of 1925. 

62. 178 of 1902; 192 of 1909. 

62a. 156 of 1942-3. 

63. 215 of 1919. 

64. 295 of 1909. 

64a. 152 of 1934-5. 

64b. 88 of 1931-2. 

65. 357 of 1924, 287 of 1911, 385 of 1903, 485 of 1902, 506 of 1902, etc. 

66. 271 of 1915. 

67. 118 of 1888. This record, though faulty in many ways, may, 
nevertheless, be accepted as genuine in this part. 

68. 505 of 1911. 

69. 103 of 1912. ARE. 1912, II, 22. Also 228 of 1912. 

69a. 263 of 1912. 

70. 63 of 1918. 

71. 397 of 1913. 

72. 266 of 1926; ARE. 1926, II. 29. 31 of 1891 gives the rate five 
kalams on puhjai lands at Jambukesvaram, a.d. 1117. 

73. 219 of 1894. 

74. 104 of 1926. 

75. 102 of 1925. 

76. 109 of 1925. 

77. 156 of 1912. 

78. 677 of 1919. 

79. 522 of 1919; 133 of 1912. 

80. 88 of 1900. 

81. 509 of 1912. 

81a. 553 of 1904. 

81b. 103 of 1931-2, ARE. II, 16. 

82. 180 of 1928. cf. 6 mi at 13,000 kasus (Tiruvaduturai), 156 of 
1925— aj>. 1238. 

83. 298 of 1927. 

84. 504 of 1918. 

85. 229 of 1927 — nalu nurayirattu aimbadinayiramum. cf. munnur- 
dyirattarupadinayiram of 626 of 1920. The lakh was evidently un- 
known. 

86. 58 of 1911; 96 of 1926. 

87. 495 of 1907. 

88. 522 of 1922. 

89. 399 of 1908. 



Chapter XXII 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

In most of the common industries the rule was produc- 
tion for the local market. The existence of 
Conditions of a brisk internal trade in several articles is 

Trade. Cti ° n and indicated by the evidence of the movements 

of individual merchants and the highly 
organised state of the mercantile corporations in various parts 
of the country. A merchant from the malai-nadu (Malabar) 
is seen trading in Tiruvadandai in the Chingleput district , 1 
and one from Mylapore is found in Tanjore ; 2 and a man from 
Ceylon endows a lamp in the temple at Sucindram (South 
Travancore) , 3 These are not isolated instances, but repre- 
sentative of a large class of similar facts recorded in the in- 
scriptions which show that there was a free and active busi- 
ness intercourse between the different parts of the empire. 
The expansion of Cola rule was followed by the organisation 
of a strong centralised administration under a single political 
power. Except for a few local risings leading to punitive 
expeditions from time to time, peace was maintained for 
successive generations over a wide area, which had been cut 
up till then into a number of independent warring states. In 
the more settled conditions of the new era, the industrial 
arts obtained greater encouragement and the opportunities 
for trade increased. 

The metal industries and the jewellers’ art had reached 
Metal work 3 ^Sb state of perfection. Household 
utensils made of metal were apparently con- 
fined to the rich, earthenware being often mentioned in con- 
nection with cooking and eating in salas, charitable feeding 
halls. The detailed descriptions of the images and utensils 
of the Tanjore temple recorded in the inscriptions, and the 
bronzes of the period that have survived to this day give proof 
of the mastery attained by the braziers of the time in the 
art of manipulating alloys of metals and casting them into 
the most elaborate and graceful forms. Copper, bronze and 



HOARDING, SALT-MAKING 


593 


brass were employed in such work, besides gold and silver. 

The variety of jewels and ornaments of gold 
Jewellery. an( j precious stones, and the careful record 

of the numbers and classes of the stones and pearls mounted 
on each of these would be enough to enable a modern jeweller 
to reproduce most of them if only he knew their general 
formation; many of the ornaments mentioned have long since 
gone out of use, and no really old ornament has survived the 
ravages of invasion and war; the Tanjore inscriptions how- 
ever enable one to see that the jeweller’s art reached its high- 
water mark under the Colas, and that the Tanjore jewellers 
produced the most pleasing results by studying the disposi- 
tions of precious stones and pearls with a view to their colour 
effects. If it is remembered that temples were only glorified 
palaces, that gods received all the honours due to kings 
( rajopacara ) , that kings were the models for their subjects 
to follow, and if, further, it is realised that the Tanjore temple 
differs from the hundreds of other temples only in its greater 
size and in the accuracy and completeness of its surviving 
inscriptions, it will be seen that it is not easy to exaggerate 
the importance of the amount of wealth held in the form of 
jewels or of the flourishing state of the goldsmith’s trade. 
Neither the depredation of invading hosts nor the security 
of established government has succeeded in weaning the 
people from the hoarding habit. Pax Britannica was hardly 
more potent in this respect than Malik Kafur and Hyder Ali. 

The inscriptions contain only a limited number of refer- 
ences to the daily occupations and arts of 
Salt the population, and we have to eke out this 

scanty information from literature and sculpture. The manu- 
facture of sea-salt was carried on under government super- 
vision and control, and subject to considerable imposts in 
kind and money, local and central. The salt-pans of Mar- 
kanam, Kanyakumari, Variyur, and Ayturai were among 
the more important centres of salt manufacture, which was 
a widespread industry all along the sea coast. 4 Some of the 
salt pans at Bapatla were lost in 1112 5 owing to encroachment 
by the sea. 

C. 75 



594 INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

A conspicuous example of particular industries obtaining 
special recognition in court or in a big temple is furnished by 
the weavers of Kancipuram. There were 
Relation of four wards ( pidis ) of the city inhabited by 
court try and° the class of weavers known as Pattasalins; 

temple. they had the distinction of being appointed 

weavers of royal garments, and Uttama 
Cola appointed them to the management of the financial af- 
fairs of the temple of Uragam in Kancipuram. The poor 
residents of Solaniyamam were exempt from the payment 
of all royal dues in return for their undertaking to maintain 
the temple accounts properly and submit them to monthly 
audit by the weavers who had the management of the temple, 
an arrangement ratified by the nagaram of Kancipuram as 
well. 6 


Of the conditions of transport in internal trade it is not 
possible to give a detailed account. In South 
Transport. India there was very little scope for the use 

of natural water-ways for the carriage of merchandise in the 
interior, and there is no evidence that canals were made for 
any purpose other than the irrigation of agricultural lands. 
Roads are mentioned in several inscriptions from all parts 
of the country, when the boundaries of lands and villages 
are described. To maintain these roads, great and small, in 
good repair was part of the duty of local authorities and 
the villagers were often expected to give freely the labour 
(vetti, amanji) required for it. Two classes of roads may be 
distinguished; the vadis were only slightly better than foot- 
paths and apparently not suited to wheeled traffic. One such 
vadi in Uttaramerur was washed away by the floods and the 
path became unfit for use even by cattle; in remaking the 
path, the sabhd decided to widen it and purchased the ad- 
joining lands from the ryots to whom they belonged. 7 The 
better class of roads is called peru-vali, the great road, in the 
inscriptions. These were the trunk roads leading from one 
large division of the country to another, as is seen from their 
names like the Andhra road, Vadugapperuvali or Andhra- 
patha , 8 the great road to Kongu ( Kongapperuvali ) , 9 the big 
road to Pennadam, 10 the Tanjavurp-peruvaXi mentioned in 
an inscription from Aduturai, 11 and, most significant of all, 
the great road leading to Kalyanapuram mentioned in an in- 



TRADE ORGANISATION 


595 


scription from the Tanjore district. 12 The breadth of one 
of these roads is stated to have been two rods (kol), about 
twenty-four feet. 13 

Trade was carried on by merchants banded together in 
powerful guilds and corporations. The 
Merchant Guilds. ^^-nigrdmam G f Kodumbalur endowing a 
charitable trust in Salem, 14 the Valanjlyar of Tiruppuram- 
biyam, 15 are examples of such associations. There were also 
the Teliki of Bezwada mentioned in the inscriptions of Raja- 
raja II; 16 the satyavacakas (truth-tellers), also called dhanma- 
vdniyar (the just merchants) who maintained a matha called 
after themselves and supplied the tiruk-kodi (the holy flag) 
at the three annual festivals at Tiruvannamalai; 17 the sucakar 
karunakara vlrar or the valanjlyar of Tennilangai who paid 
contributions from 1189 for the maintenance of a Vaisnava 
matha at Tirukannapuram; 18 and the valanjlyar of Tinnevelly 
who had the kdranmai of the lands of the local temple, on 
condition that they provided for certain specified require- 
ments for the services in the temple. 19 About a.d. 1207 the 
merchant communities of Nellur, Narayanapuram, Arkatfu, 
Mayilappur, Tiruvorriyur, Pundamali, Nedumpirai, Damana- 
kacceri, Perungalur and Tirunlru co-operated together in ac- 
quiring a whole village and giving it as devadana to the 
temple of Tiruppasur, for constructing a madil, an enclosing 
wall; the village was left by the merchants in charge of 
Tammu Siddhi. 20 Again, an inscription of 1235 from Anbil 
mentions an assemblage of the Cittira-meUpperiya nattar, the 
tisai-dyirattu aihhurruvar, the Settis of the nadus in many 
mandalas, davanac-cettis, Jayapalas, munai-vlra-kodiyar, the 
excellent silpis, and the mudar-padai-kalanaiydr; the assembly 
described themselves by the phrase Rdjarajap-perunlrdviydm; 
the object of the meeting is unfortunately not clear, for the 
inscription is damaged. 21 Lastly, the valanjlyar and the 
ndnadesiyat-tisai^yirattainnurruvar built a part of the temple 
at Tiruvilakkudi. 22 

Nanadesa-Tisaiyayirattu Ainnurruvar formed the most 
celebrated of these guilds. This long name 
is susceptible of two interpretations; the 
Five Hundred of the thousand directions in all countries, or 
the One Thousand and Five Hundred from all countries and 



596 INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

directions. Seeing, however, that the guild is described 
sometimes by the terms nanddesis or ainnurruvar, the first 
interpretation seems to be the correct one. This guild had a 
long and notable record of achievement. Its importance may 
be taken to antedate the rise of the Imperial Colas of the 
Vijayalaya line; for two short inscriptions from Munisandai 
in the Pudukkottah state, most probably of the time of Vija- 
yalaya and Parantaka I, show that this corporation was al- 
ready well established, the tank at Munisandai being called 
after it; the inscriptions record endowments for the periodi- 
cal repair of the tank. 223 Members of this corporation ob- 
tained some houses assigned to them about a.d. 1015 by the 
sabhd of Nigarili-sola-caturvedimangalam for being used as 
residences or warehouses. 23 In a.d. 1033 is recorded a gift 
of land for a service in a Siva temple at Ambasamudram for 
the benefit ( sirappu ) of the same guild. 24 

The fragmentary Tamil inscription from Loboe Toewa, 
in Sumatra, mentions this body of merchants and bears the 
date Saka 1010 (a.d. 1088), clear proof of the active share of 
the guild in the extensive over-seas trade of the time. Some 
inscriptions from the Mysore area 25 furnish important and 
interesting details of the myths relating to the origin and 
organisation of the guild, the articles of merchandise in which 
its members carried on trade, the countries with which they 
traded, and the means of transport employed by them. Bom 
of the race of Vasudeva, Kandali and Mulabhadra, they were 
favoured by the goddess Bhagavati, and comprised many 
sub-divisions, born to wanderers over many countries. They 
visited ‘the Cera, Cola, Pandya, Maleya, Magadha, Kausala, 
Saurastra, Dhanustra, Kurumba, Kambhoja, Lala, Baruvara, 
Nepala, Ekapada, Lambakarna, Stri-Rajya, Ghola-mukha, and 
many other countries,’ and by land routes and water routes 
they penetrated into the regions of the six continents. Their 
trade was in superior elephants, well-bred horses, precious 
stones of all sorts, spices, perfumes and drugs. They sold 
them wholesale or hawked them about on their shoulders. 
They often carried their merchandise on the backs of asses 
and buffaloes ‘adorned with red trappings.’ They were famous 
for their ‘five Hundred vira-sasanas.’ One such vr ra-sdsana is 
found recorded in an inscription 26 of the reign of Rajadhi- 
raja I. dated in his thirty-second year c. a.d. 1050. By a reso- 



NANADESIS 


597 


lution of their body, the ndnadesis and their followers re- 
solved to convert the village of Siravalli into a ndnddesiya- 
dasamadi-erivirappattina and to confer certain privileges on 
its residents. The record also describes the merchant guild 
as a samaya and states that it was served by ( samayattu tiru- 
vadikkup-pani-seyyum ) regiments of foot-soldiers and swords- 
men. There was another meeting at Mylapore of the same 
body of merchants which decided to convert Kattur, origi- 
nally an Ayyapulal, into a virapattina, a status which implied 
a privileged position in the country’s trade. 27 Again in 1199 
a meeting of the nddu and nagaram of Uttattur (Trichinopoly 
district) granted the village of Venmanip-padi, converting it 
into a mercantile town called Tayilu-nalla-puram. 28 

The ndnadesis then were a powerful autonomous corpora- 
tion of merchants whose activities apparently took little or 
no account of political boundaries. They visited all countries 
in the course of their trade, and everywhere they enjoyed a 
respected and privileged position. In the Cola kingdom they 
received recognition alike from the central government and 
from local agencies like the village sabkds. They had their 
own mercenary army, doubtless for the protection of the 
merchandise in their warehouses and in transit. They also 
concerned themselves in the details of local administration 
in the places where they were settled. In Malurpatna they 
undertook to cooperate with the Sri-Vaisnavas in enforcing 
the regular collection of the interest due to the temple on a 
perpetual loan from the members of the sabhd of Vandur. also 
called Sola-madevi-caturvedimangalam. This was early in the 
reign of Rajendra I. 29 Their success and prosperity were to 
some extent independent of the vicissitudes of war and peace 
among the states in which they carried on trade. In the 
thirteenth century, there was at Pagan in Burma a Visnu 
temple built by the ndnadesis and gifts were made to it by a 
merchant from one of the port towns on the Malabar coast. 30 

A recent writer has pointed out the differences between 
mercantile organisations in Europe and in 
Merchant guilds the East. 31 Speaking of European trade with 
State China, he contrasts the radical weakness of 

the Chinese commercial class as compared 
with the European. ‘The great chartered companies of Europe 



598 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


had monopoly rights and state hacking; they sinned against 
the light of free trade no less than the Chinese guilds, but 
they stood for the self-organisation and autonomy of the 
merchant class, not the mere rapacity of government officials. 
In China the merchant was powerless against officialdom; 
politically he was nothing; there was no tradition of city-state 
commercialism to teach him his potential strength. In Europe 
the bourgeois was rising to be master of the state; in China 
he was but the servile agent of the mandarins.’ In South 
India, the merchants had certainly more freedom and scope 
for initiative, and a better capacity for voluntary organisation 
than in China; they were less at the mercy of government 
officials, and exercised a great deal of autonomy in the regu- 
lation of their own affairs. The state was not eager to inter- 
fere in their transactions, and would not do so except on invi- 
tation. On the other hand, the state did not, it could not, 
give the strong backing to its merchants engaged in foreign 
trade that the European state provided. Neither the mer- 
chants nor the state in South India had any idea of the possi- 
bilities of economic imperialism. Trade to them was an end 
in itself; they were willing to carry on trade if conditions 
were favourable; it never occurred to them that foreign lands 
may be compelled to buy and sell at the point of the bayonet. 

There were also local organisations of merchants called 
nagaram in big centres of trade like Kanci- 
Nagaram. pur am and Mamallapuram. 32 What the rela- 

tion was between these local bodies of traders and the more 
general groups like the Manigramam and the Nanadisis or 
Valanjiyar cannot be determined with precision. That Brah- 
mins also occasionally engaged in trade becomes clear from a 
direct mention of the Brahmins who engaged in trade along 
with the Valanjiyar in the South bazaar of Ennayiram, 33 a 
large centre of Vaisnavism and education in South Arcot. 
The nagarams used to raise voluntary contributions from their 
members for specific purposes. To give just one example : in 
a.d. 1037, the nagaram of the town of Valaiyur 34 resolved that 
the lamps to be maintained by them in the local temple and 
the interest due from them on moneys borrowed from the 
temple were to be met from the proceeds of a regular pay- 
ment in future of certain dues laid on their commercial tran- 
sactions in accordance with a schedule,— the buyer and seller 



CREDIT 


599 


each giving a kal-alavupattam of one noli per kalam (on 
grains), a kol-kuli (weighment-cess) of one palam per nirai, 
ten betel-nuts for every thousand exchanged and so on. Many 
other instances can be traced in the inscriptions of a similar 
exercise of the privileges of autonomy in the regulation of the 
internal affairs of the groups. 

On customs and octroi duties in this period we have little 
direct evidence. Kulottunga I is celebrated 
Sungam. in contemporary literature and epigraphy 

for abolishing the sungam. We seem to have no detailed 
account of this most important transaction of the reign, and 
there is no means of knowing how this was managed, and 
what steps, if any, were taken to fill the gap in the revenues 
of the government caused by the remission. The word sungam 
is explained generally as including all the imposts on articles 
of merchandise imported in ships and carts, that is to say, 
from across the seas or the interior. 35 

The T.O.U.’ as an instrument of borrowing was appa- 
rently in common use. It is mentioned quite 
Pro-note. casually in an inscription from Tiruvadu- 

turai of the reign of Rajaraja I. 36 The sabha of that place 
owed some money to a Kaikkola which they had borrowed 
from him on a promissory note (kaiyeluttolai) . For some 
reasons not recorded, the entire property of the Kaikkolan be- 
came rdjasvam, that is, it was confiscated by the king who 
naturally sought thereupon to realise the money due from the 
sabha. These facts are recorded in explanation of the assign- 
ment to the temple of some of the village lands in lieu of the 
money then borrowed by the sabha for paying off the king. 
Another instance of borrowing on a promissory note is the 
loan of 100 kasus from a temple in Punjai to the mula-parudai 
of Talaiccangadu mentioned in an inscription of the reign of 
Rajendra I. 37 

Wide divergences are traceable in the rate of interest on 
loans, and also in the manner in which the 
Interest rate. rate eX p resse< j an( j calculated. The rate 
of 12%% per annum, of 4 kalanju per kalanju of gold, was 
for long the standard rate on the investment of religious 
endowments, 38 though 15 per cent or 3 mcmjadis per kalanju 39 
also obtained in many instances. The lowest rate met with 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


is 5 per cent or one mamjddi per kalanju, though this rate is 
coupled with the reign of Yijaya Kamapavarman, and not a 
Cola king. 40 Higher rates of money interest are also found 
though not so frequently as the normal 12V2 or 15 per cent. 
Thus we have rates like 12% per cent per half-year (pit) 
working to 25 per cent per annum; 41 four hundred kalanjus 
yielding one hundred and fifty per annum, 37 % per cent; 42 or 
even a 50 per cent rate expressed as half kasu per annum 
per ka.su. 43 These rates cannot be explained easily at present; 
it is certain, however, that they are not due to differences 
either in the purpose of the loan or investment or in the 
political conditions affecting social security. The Rastrakuta 
invasion made little difference in the prevailing rate of interest 
as can be seen from inscriptions quoting Krsna’s regnal 
years; 44 the higher and the lower rates of interest alike prevail 
in the reign of Rajendra I, when there was little or no distur- 
bance to internal security. Very often the rate of interest is 
expressed in terms of commodities and sometimes even 
the principal of the loan is also a given quantity of some 
commodity, usually grain. The divergences in the commo- 
dity-rates are quite as wide and as unaccountable as in 
money-rates. The lowest grain-rate of interest per kalanju of 
gold is one kalam per annum; 45 the highest rate goes up to 
3 kalams 46 and even four; 47 the more common rate is in the 
neighbourhood of a kalam, or a kalam and third. In one and 
the same region and at the same time, two village assemblies 
are seen borrowing from one creditor, a temple, at the dif- 
ferent rates of ?, kalam and one kalam per kalanju per 
annum. 48 Generally high rates of interest, seldom less than 
25 per cent, are quoted when the principal is expressed in 
terms of grain, 49 and in one case there occurs the impossibly 
high rate of 75 per cent per annum. 50 Another way in which 
different rates of interest find expression is by means of the 
adoption of different rates of capitalisation for purposes of 
endowments of the same service; thus the supply of a quarter 
measure of oil every day is provided for by the endowment 
of 18 kalanjus 3 manjddis and 1 kunri of gold in one instance, 
and by that of just 10 kalanjus in another. 51 

That there must have been a great amount of borrowing 
and lending among traders and merchants in the normal 
course of their business we may take for granted; but of such 



CHARITABLE INVESTMENTS 601 

transactions no record seems to have survived. Almost all 
the investments recorded in the inscriptions are of charitable 
funds generally ear-marked for specific purposes, and some- 
times a certain stability is imparted to these purposes by the 
investments and the terms governing them being made irre- 
vocable. Thus a merchant from Malai-nadu invested 161, 
kalanjus of gold in a vadakkadan, permanent loan, from the 
interest whereof twelve Brahmins were to be fed for one 
month ( Kumbha ) every year in the temple of Varahadeva at 
Tiruvadandai (Chingleput) , 52 Again the ur of Koneri accept- 
ed a loan of five kalanjus from a temple in Kancipuram sub- 
ject to the conditions that they should pay interest at If 
kalam per kalanju per annum and that they should at no time 
offer to return the principal of the loan. 53 An inscription 
from Malurpatna (Bangalore) of the reign of Rajendra I pro- 
vides another example which is of great interest for the 
sanctions it lays down to enforce conformity to the terms of 
the loan. 54 The grain-principal ( nellu-mudal ) of the perpe- 
tual loan was 320 kalams and the rate of interest 3% kurunis 
per kalam per annum yielding in all 100 kalams in a year, to 
be remitted in two instalments, 50 kalams at each of the two 
harvests. The borrowers were the members of the sabha of 
Vandur who agreed to give two meals a day to the persons 
delegated to collect this grain-interest; these persons might 
resort, if necessary, to processes of distraint such as stopping 
the supply of water and fire, surrounding the habitation, and 
impounding cattle. Nothing is stated in explanation of these 
rather drastic sanctions and we cannot say if they ever were 
actually enforced. The problem of modem finance is to fund 
public debts in order to secure stable interest charges; the 
problem that the temples of South India had to face once was 
that of securing a fixed income as interest on their invest- 
ments, of funding their loans as it were. 

The transfer of immovable property by sale or gift was 
Transfer of generally attended with more formalities 
property. than that of movables. The ordinary tran- 

sactions among individual owners are seldom represented in 
the records before us. Only those of public interest are found 
recorded in inscriptions, and an analysis of the sales of land 
so recorded reveals that at least four types were distinguished 
among them. They are : (1) djnakrayam, (2) the peruvilai 
C. 76 



602 INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

(great sale) of some king (named) , (3) the peruvilai of Can- 
desvara and, (4) sabhaivilai or ur-vilai. The first of these was 
sale by ajna or royal order of the properties of persons found 
guilty of treason against the king or his family. The leading 
example of this class is the sale recorded in the Udaiyargudi 
inscription 55 of the properties of persons involved in the 
murder of Aditya II. The peruvilai of the kings was the sale 
of the lands of cultivators in the processes of revenue-collec- 
tion when other means of collection had failed. The Candes- 
vara-peruvilai was the sale of land by Siva temples, Candes- 
vara representing Siva as his adi-dasa, first devotee, in such 
transactions. The corresponding term, if any, for describing 
sales by Visnu temples was sendpati-vilai . 55a The sabhai- or 
ur-vilai was, as the name implies, the sale of land from the 
common land of the commune effected by the local assembly 
of the village. A careful study of the prices mentioned in 
these different classes of sales points to the conclusion that 
they were often governed by extra-economic considerations, 
and this may be the reason why the nature of the sale was 
specifically mentioned in each such case. The rates specified 
had apparently little or no relation to the market value of 
land in the neighbourhood. It is probable that in the peruvilai 
(lit. great sale) something like a public auction was the 
method of sale followed, the usual procedure being to cry out 
the upset price in a public place at a time fixed in advance, 
and await the response of those present at the sale. It is 
doubtful if it was a real auction where bidding against one 
another on the part of the buyers was allowed; the formula 
in the inscriptions suggests only the announcement of a fixed 
price together with the other terms, if any, on which the pro- 
perty was offered, and the acceptance by the buyer. 5 ® 

The main features of the formulae adopted in documents, 
sale or gift deeds, conveying property in land may be briefly 
noted. The minute care with which the boundaries were des- 
cribed in each case may be seen from the copper-plate grants 
like those of Anbil, Anaimangalam, Tiruvalangadu and 
Karandai (Tanjore). The same feature marks the stone ins- 
criptions as well, though the description is often more sum- 
mary in form and therefore much shorter than in the copper- 
plates. Then the phrase ‘ mikudik-kurai-uUadanga ,’ ‘including 
excess or shortage,’ is invariably employed, and this implies 



LAND SALE AND GIFT FORMS 


603 


that the boundaries rather than the measurements stated 
formed the decisive factors. Then there occurred phrases which 
excluded other properties like old devadanas, canals, roads 
etc., which were not meant to be conveyed. Like gift-deeds, 
sale-deeds also often contained details of the rights inherent 
in the property conveyed. These included the ownership of 
the subsoil, trees, hills, wells etc., irrigation-rights, easement 
rights and so on. The document usually concluded with a 
declaration that the price agreed upon had been fully paid 
and the land duly conveyed, and that the document concerned 
was to serve as the acquittance for the sale price 57 and that 
no other receipt or acquittance was to be demanded in the 
future. One sale deed from Arpakkam 58 dated a.d. 1232 con- 
tains the following provisions : a declaration that the land sold 
was subject to no encumbrance and that if, in future, the 
existence of any encumbrance was discovered, the vendor 
would release the land from it; the usual clause about acquit- 
tance for the sale price; a declaration that the purchaser 
acquired all the rights over the land including the rights to 
sell, mortgage and give away; that the vendor was not to raise 
objections at a later stage and plead that the document was 
void on the score of imperfect wording, illegibility of letters 
and so on. An inscription from Tiruvannamalai (1204) 59 
records a resolution of the mdhesvaras that houses built on 
sites in the Tirumadai-vilagam (temple area) were to be sold 
at a price to be fixed by a superintendent ( kankani ) from the 
temple treasury, and that half the sale proceeds must be 
remitted to the temples, the owner of the house being entitled 
only to the balance. Very often a payment is made in addi- 
tion to the price of land to cover the future taxes and dues 
on the land so that it may be conveyed tax-free; in these cases 
this further payment is also mentioned in the documents and 
the taxes intended to be remitted specified in detail. Some- 
times the ircii-kaval was a separate document, that is when 
the taxes were commuted some time after the purchase of 
the land. 

From very early times Southern India carried on a 
flourishing commerce with the nations across the seas on 
either side of the peninsula. From the fourth century a.d. or 
thereafter, the Persians, rather than the Arabs, were the most 
venturesome mariners of the Indian Ocean. In the 



604 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


Chinese annals of the fifth, sixth and early seventh cen- 
turies, all the products of Ceylon and India, with others 
from Arabia and Africa, are classed as ‘products of Persia .’ 60 
The direct sea-route between China and India is, however, 
known to have come into common use by the close of the 
seventh century, and I-tsing mentions no fewer than thirty- 
seven Chinese pilgrims who took this route to India in his 
time . 61 At no time had Indian merchantmen ever ceased to 
frequent the shores of the Malay peninsula and the islands 
of the archipelago, even Indo-China and China. Mahabali- 
puram, Kavirippumpattinam, Saliyur and Korkai on the east 
coast, and Quilon on the west were great emporiums fre- 
quented by the traders of other countries; Ceylon and the 
Nicobars in the East, the Laccadives and the Maldives in the 
West furnished good halting places for ships bound on long 
voyages. 

Towards the ninth century a.d. the countries of Southern 
Asia had developed an extensive maritime and commercial 
activity, and attained a prosperity unequalled in history . 62 
The Tang empire in China, Sri Vijaya under the powerful 
line of the Sailendras, and the Abbasid Kha- 
Gdf 6 Persian lifat at Baghdad were the chief states out- 
side India that flourished on this trade. The 
political troubles in China in the latter part of the ninth cen- 
tury interrupted the established trade relations for a time. 
China became unsafe for the foreign traders who now retired 
to the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra, whither the Chinese 
ships had to go for the purchase of foreign goods. This was 
the beginning of the Chinese navigation of the high seas. In 
the twelfth century, Cantonese sea-going junks went as far 
west as Quilon on the Malabar Coast . 63 Siraf on the eastern 
coast of the Persian Gulf 64 was the chief emporium in the 
West in the period. ‘Here’, says Ibn Hawqal, a contempo- 
rary Arab writer, ‘there is not any husbandry or cultivation 
of the ground; and they bring water from a distance. There 
are not any trees immediately about Siraf; and the inhabitants 
devote their whole time to commerce and merchandise .’® 3 
Such was the importance of the trade of Siraf, that, despite 
the disadvantages of its situation and climate, the town was 
covered with very fine edifices and was very populous. The 
sailors and merchants of the entire Indian Ocean, Chinese, 



TRADE MISSIONS TO CHINA 


605 


Javanese, Malay and Indian, came frequently to Siraf for 
exchanging their products. Siraf then was a cosmopolitan 
city, and its chief merchants, when they received strangers as 
guests, took scrupulous care to conform to their manners and 
customs. After mentioning the existence in India of a caste 
of which the members never ate off the same plate or at the 
same table, Abu Zayd tells us : ‘when these sectaries resort 
to Siraf and one of the principal merchants invites them to 
a repast in his house, at which about 100 persons assist, it is 
necessary that the host causes to be placed before each one 
of these sectaries a plate in which he eats and which is exclu- 
sively reserved for him.’ 66 The use of separate plates for 
eating was, of course, not confined to any single caste or sect, 
as Abu Zayd thought, but was the universal rule in India. 
The statement is valuable as evidence of the trade and social 
relations maintained by Indians with the rest of the world in 
the ninth and tenth centuries. 

At the end of the tenth century, the political situation in 
China had become normal again, and the 
* ‘ n Sung government of the day evinced a great 

interest in the foreign trade of the country. The trade was 
made a government monopoly, and strenuous efforts were 
made to increase its volume. ‘A mission was sent abroad by 
the emperor with credentials under the imperial seal and pro- 
visions of gold and piece-goods to induce “the foreign traders 
of the South Sea and those who went to foreign lands beyond 
the sea to trade” to come to China. Special licenses to import 
goods were promised them.’ 67 How eager the Colas were to 
take advantage of the extended opportunities thus opened to 
them is evident from the missions sent to China by Rajaraja 
and Rajendra. The great distance between the Cola country 
and China, and the novelty of the direct connection now 
started, prevented the proud Chinese government from giving 
adequate recognition to the position and importance attained 
by the Colas. Their envoys took with them very valuable 
presents, but they were only ranked with those of a vassal 
state in Eastern Turkestan. 68 The Cola embassy which reached 
China in 1015 after spending over three years on the way 
must have left the Cola country towards the close of the rule 
of Rajaraja, Lo-tsa-lo-tsa of the Chinese chronicles. Chau 
Ju-Kua says of this embassy : 69 ‘In former times they did 



606 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


not send tribute to our court, but “in the eighth year of the 
ta-chung and siang-ju periods (a.d, 1015), its (of Chu-lien) 
sovereign sent a mission with pearls and like articles as tri- 
bute. The interpreters, in translating their speech, said they 
wished to evince the respect of a distant nation for (Chinese) 
civilisation.” They were ordered by Imperial Decree to remain 
in waiting at the side gate of the Palace, and to be enter- 
tained at a banquet by the Associates in the College of Court 
Annalists. By Imperial favour they were ranked with the 
envoys of K’iu-tz’i. It happened to be the Emperor’s birth- 
day, and the envoys had a fine opportunity to witness the 
congratulations in the Sacred Enclosure.’ Fewer details have 
survived of the other embassy from Shi- (lo) -lo-cha yin-to-lo 
chu-lo (Sri raja Indra Cola) which reached China in a.d. 1033. 
The trade thus started with China appears to have been car- 
ried on without interruption in the eleventh century, and in 
the language of the Annalists of the Celestial court, the Cola 
kings continued to send ‘tribute’ to that court. The naval 
expedition of Rajendra against Sri Vijaya and the success 
achieved by that expedition rendered communication with 
the ‘Southern seas’ and the empire of China more easy and 
regular than it was ever before. The appeal to Virarajendra 
for help in the settlement of the political affairs of Kadaram 
confirms our view of the relations between the Colas and the 
kingdoms of the east. Another Cola embassy to China of the 
year 1077 is also mentioned and the name of the contemporary 
Cola king, Kulottunga I, is given in a corrupt form in the 
Sung annals. 70 

The chief articles of merchandise that entered into this 
Articles of lon S distance trade were necessarily goods 
Trade - that carried great value for small bulk. Of 

Siraf, the Arab writer, Istakhri (tenth century) says 71 : ‘The 
imports are aloes wood (for burning), amber, camphor, pre- 
cious gems, bamboos, ivory, ebony, paper, sandalwood, and 
all kinds of Indian perfumes, drugs and condiments. In the 
town itself excellent napkins are made, also linen veils, and 
it was a great market for pearls.’ From the middle of the 
eleventh century Siraf began to decline in importance, and 
the island of Qais or Kish began to take its place as the 
entrepot of Indian trade. The Jewish traveller from Spain, 
Benjamin of Tudela. relates that about the middle of the 



ARTICLES OF TRADE 607 

twelfth century a.d., the island of Kish marked the limit of 
the voyages of Indian merchants trading with Persia and the 
West. ‘Kish,’ he says, 72 ‘is a considerable market, being the 
point to which Indian merchants and those of the islands bring 
their commodities; while the traders of Mesopotamia, Yemen 
and Persia import all sorts of silk and purple cloths, flax, 
cotton, hemp, mash (a kind of pea), wheat, barley, millet, 
rye and all other sorts of comestibles and pulse, which arti- 
cles form objects of exchange; those from India import great 
quantities of spices, and the inhabitants of the island live by 
what they gain in their capacity of brokers of both parties. 
The island contains about five hundred Jews.’ 


The rise into importance of the Arab trade in horses 
which flourished for many centuries on a large scale must be 
traced to the period of the growth and ex- 
Horse trade. pansion of Cola dominion in Southern India. 
The important role of cavalry in the Cola army and the armies 
of other powers opposed to them is clearly brought out by the 
inscriptions. There are also frequent references in them to 
kudiraic-cettis , 73 dealers in horses, who no doubt imported 
horses from abroad, particularly Arabia and perhaps Pegu, 
and distributed them among the princes and nobles in the 
land. As these Cettis are often said to come from malai- 
nddii 74 it is reasonable to infer that Arabia supplied the bulk 
of the horses imported into South India. The extensive trade 
described by Marco Polo and Wassaf in the beginning of the 
fourteenth century could not have sprung up suddenly, and 
its beginnings must be traced to Cola times if not to an earlier 
period. 


‘The imports into China in this trade,’ says Rockhill, 73 
‘consisted of two distinct categories of goods, the one manu- 
factured textile fabrics (mostly of cotton), spices and drugs, 
and the other, and by far the most valuable intrinsically, 
"jewels and semi-precious substances, such 

Chinese as i vor y_ rhinoceros’ horn, ebony, amber, 

imports. , , . 

coral and the like, and various aromatic 

products and perfumes, used either in the preparation of in- 
cense or for perfuming the body.’ The high value of the 
second category of goods and the increasing demand for them 
led the Chinese government to declare their sale a govern- 



608 INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

ment monopoly. Trade in these articles was open only to 
licensed vendors who bought their supplies at government 
warehouses in quantities and at prices fixed by government. 
Trade in cotton fabrics, spices and drugs was under no res- 
trictions, and subject only to an import duty payable in kind 
and varying from one-tenth to two-tenths of the goods im- 
ported. Besides this import duty collected at the time of 
their entering the port, these goods had also to bear a fixed 
tonnage tax on the ship. This trade was felt on the whole 
to be beneficial to China and caused no anxiety to the gov- 
ernment. In course of time, however, grave abuses developed 
in connection with the trade in luxuries, and the drain of 
currency and precious metals resulting from its expansion 
was such as to cause the government very serious concern. 
These evils came to light in the twelfth century, and the 
Chinese government had to embark on legislation calculated 
to prohibit the exportation of precious metals and coined 
money and to restrict the volume of trade with Ma’bar and 
Kulum (i.e., the Coromandel coast and Quilon). 

In the face of strong discouragement from the Chinese 
government, the commercial relations between China and 
South India appear to have been sustained, with more or less 
regularity, to the end of the thirteenth century. The Loboe 
Toewa (Sumatra) Tamil fragment of S. 1010 (a.d. 1088) 
which mentions the Tisai-Ayirattainnurruvar shows that the 
merchants of South India had settlements outside Tndm , and 
it is quite possible that small settlements of these traders 
were found in all important entrepots of the Persian Gulf 
and the China Sea. Hindu sculptures of decidedly South 
Indian origin have been discovered in a Chinese temple in 
the port-town of Ch’uan-Chou, opposite to Formosa; these 
sculptures represent Puranic themes like the Gajendra-moksa 
and Krsna tied to a mortar between trees and so on, and are 
best placed in the twelfth or thirteenth century. It seems 
possible therefore that a colony of South Indian merchants 
had settled m the port-town of Ch’uan-chou, which has been 
identified with the Zayton of the mediaeval travellers. 753 

The list of the products of the Cola country given by 
Chau Ju-Kua shows that the list of articles imported by China 
from there remained practically unchanged at the beginning 



QZJILON 


of the thirteenth century. He says : 76 ‘The native products 
comprise pearls, elephants’ tusks, coral, transparent glass, 
betelnuts, cardamoms, opaque glass, cotton stuffs with 
coloured silk threads, and cotton stuffs.’ The same author 
notes also that the taxes and imposts of the Cola kingdom 
were numerous and heavy and that consequently traders 
rarely went there; the criticism is obviously based on a gene- 
ral comparison with Chinese customs duties and should not 
be pressed far; for we have much other evidence on the 
flourishing condition of the foreign trade of South India and 
on the presence of small settlements of foreign merchants in 
port-towns. There are in existence accounts of several ex- 
changes of missions between South India and the Mongol 
emperor Kublai Khan, all of which followed the sea-route and 
were partly commercial and partly diplomatic in character, 
but as these relate almost exclusively to the period of Pand- 
yan ascendancy and have little direct connection with the 
Cola kingdom, they need not be detailed here. For the same 
reason, the account of Ma’bar given by Marco Polo, very in- 
teresting and important in itself, deserves only a passing 
mention in a study of Cola history. 

Benjamin of ' Tudela states that Chulam was seventeen 
days by sea from Kish; Chulam may therefore be Quilon or 
some other port more to the north on the west coast of India 
and probably subject to Cola rule. Of the people of this 
place, their government and country, Benjamin observes : 77 
‘They are descendants of Khush, are addicted to astrology 
and are all black. This nation is very trustworthy in matters 
of trade, and whenever foreign merchants enter their port, 
three secretaries of the king immediately repair on board the 
vessels, write down their names and report them to him: the 
king thereupon grants them security for their property, 
which they may even leave in the open fields, without any 
guard. One of the king’s officers sits in the market, and re- 
ceives goods that may have been found anywhere, and which 
he returns to those applicants who can minutely describe 
them. This custom is observed in the whole empire of the 
king.’ Regarding the hours of business, Benjamin also says: 
‘From Easter to new year (from April to October), during 
the whole of the summer the heat is extreme. From the 
third hour of the day (nine o’clock in the morning) people 
C. 77 



610 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


shut themselves up in their houses until the evening at which 
time everybody goes out. The streets and markets are lighted 
up and the inhabitants employ all the night upon their busi- 
ness which they are prevented from doing in the day time, 
in consequence of excessive heat.’ 

There is perhaps no better evidence of the partial nature 
of our Indian sources than our being thrown almost exclu- 
sively on Arab and Chinese sources for our knowledge of 
this most important aspect of national life, viz. the foreign 
trade of the Cola empire. 


1. 263 of 1910. 

2. 147 of 1895. 

3. 71 of 1896. 

4. 23, 24 of 1919; TAS, i, pp. 162-4, 247-8; 239 of 1925. 

5. 207 of 1897. 

6. Museum plates of Uttama Cola. 

7. 9 of 1898. 

8. SII. ill, 64. 

9. 281 of 1911. 

10. 233 of 1915. 

11. 363 of 1907. 

12. 203 of 1908. 

13. SII. iii, 15, 1. 2. 

14. 47 of 1888. 

15. 71 of 1897. 

16. 189, 192 of 1897. 

17. 547 of 1902; 550 of 1902. 

18. 505 of 1922. 

19. 28 of 1927. 

20. 120 of 1930. 

21. 601 of 1902. 

22. 131 of 1926. 

22a. Tijdschrift voor Ind. Taal — , Land — en Volkenku nde. Deel; 
lxxiv, 1934, pp. 614-8. 

23. 651 of 1916. 

24. 82 of 1907. 

25. EC. iv, Hg. 17; vii, Sk. 118. 

26. 342 of 1912. Another eri-vlra-pattina was Muttukura in the 
Same neighbourhood (321 of 1912). 

27. 256 of 1912. The part of the inscription recording these privileges 
is very obscure in its language. 

28. 521 of 1912. 

29. 512 of 1911. 



NOTES 


611 


30. EL vii, pp. 197-8. 

31. Hudson — Europe and China, p. 265. 

32. S1I. iii, Museum plates of Uttama Cola and 171 of 1894. 

33. 343 cf 1917. 

34. 82 of 1906. 

35. Parimelalagar on Kural, 756. 

36. 105 of 1925. 

37. 187 of 1925. 

38. SII. ii, Intr. p. 17, 255 of 1921; 8 of 1897— grain rate. 147 of 1906 
gives the rate Vs kasu per kasu; 1 of 1893 gives % tiramam per kasu per 
month, 

39. 75 of 1893; 164, 169, 172, 179 of 1912; 176 of 1915; 216 of 1921. 
19 of 1907 calls the rate dharmap-polisai. 

40. SII. hi, 128 — 11. 36-7. 

41. 16 of 1899. 57 of 1928 gives the rate 10 kdsus on 40; also 518 of 
1920. 

42. 203 of 1925. 

43. 193 of 1925. 281 of 1910 also gives a 50% rate. 

44. 179 of 1912. 

45. 316 of 1903. 

46. 58 of 1897. 

47. 90 of 1928. 

48. Museum Plates, 11. 28-34. 

49. 30 kalams per 100 called dharmap-polisai in 506 of 1920. 

50. 232 of 1923. 

51. SII. I, 84, and 67 of 1895. 

52. 273 of 1910. 

53. 54 of 1893. 

54. 512 of 1911, (EC. ix, Cp. 129). 

55. 577 of 1920; also 379 of 1922. 

55a. SII. iv. No. 504; v. No. 885; vi. Nos. 59, 63, etc. (references 
supplied by S. Desikavinayakam PiUai). 

56. 458 of 1905. 

57. 219 of 1894; 305 of 1911, 522 of 1922 etc. 

58. 137 of 1923. 

59. 486 of 1902. 

60. Chau Ju-kua, pp. 7-8. 

61. ibid., p. 9, n. 1. 

62. Ferran d— Voyage, pp. 14-15. 

63. Chau Ju-kua, p. 18. 

64. The modem Tahiri, 27° 38’. N., 52° 20' E. 

65. Wilson — The Persian Gulf, p. 94. 

66. Ferrand— Voyage, p. 138. 

67. Chau Ju-kua, p. 19. 

68. Chau Ju-kua, p. 101, n. 11. 

69. p. 96. 

70. Chau Ju-kua, p. 100. 

71. Wilson— The Persian Gulf, p. 94. 



612 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


72. R. H. Major: India in the Fifteenth Century, Intm. pp. xlv — 1. 
Also Wilson, op. cit. pp. 98-9. 

73. 556 of 1994. The import of war-horses may have begun earlier 
under the Kadambas and the Pallavas. The reference in Pallavdsva- 
samsthena kalahena of the Talgunda inscription of Kakusthavarman 
(EL viii, p. 32 1. 4) and some ancient sculptures may be recalled in this 
connection. Also Pattinappalai, 1. 185. 

74. 196 of 1928; 182 of 1926. 

75. T'oung Pao, xv, p. 419. 

75a. Ostasiatische Zeitschrift (1933), pp. 5-11. 

76. p. 96. 

77. R. H. Major, i bid. 



Chapter XXIII 


COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


The absence of prominent land-marks in the numismatic 
history of Southern India, and the small proportion of inscrib- 
ed specimens of coins discovered so far have stood in the way 
of a scientific treatment of the coinage of the South. At the 
same time the relative richness of epigraphical material has 
contributed to make the study of South Indian history large- 
ly independent of the always difficult and none too certain 
conclusions of numismatics. 

Two weight systems are traceable from the ancient coins 
of the South. ‘The gold gadyana coin of 
stf^ardT 61Sht ® eccan averages 58 grains, the heaviest 

reaching 60 -1 grains’; this was the standard 
unit called gadyana or kalanju in the Tamil country. 1 If the 
weight of the lost gold coin of Uttama Cojan figured by Elliot 2 
is correctly recorded as 50 to 60 grains, this coin must have 
followed the old gadyana standard and must have remained 
in circulation late in the tenth century. The survival to late 
times of a small cess called Kumarakaccanarn 3 may be ac- 
cepted as confirmation of the same fact. But in the Cola 
period the more usual standard was the kalanju of twenty 
manjadis equal in theory to 72 grains, but sometimes going 
up to 80. 4 It is apparently this unit of bullion weight that is 
employed in an inscription of the thirtieth year of Parantaka 
I which equates the kalanju with the niska (Sanskrit). 5 
When exactly the Cola currency was brought into line with 
this weight standard does not admit of precise determination. 

By the side of several inscriptions which seem to employ 

the kalanju in recording payments bv 
Pon: nmdai. . , . ... 

weight, there are some which mention the 

pon and equate it to the kalanju, implying thereby that the 
pon was coined gold of the full weight of one kalanju. 6 This 
coin was also called madhurantakadevan-madai, served as 
the standard of fineness for testing gold, 7 and yielded the 
same interest as one kalanju of fine gold. This coin is men- 



614 COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

tioned in the thirty-first year of Rajarajadeva, 8 and if this 
king was Rajaraja I, as seems likely, its issue must have been 
commenced under his predecessor Madhurantaka Uttama 
Cola. 

Exactly half of this mddai was the Rajarajan kasu, 9 is- 
sued apparently by Rajaraja I. But the 
' ' kasu of this weight and fineness was cer- 

tainly in use earlier than the time of Rajaraja I. A record 10 
of the fourth year of Aditya II mentions that twenty k&sus 
were equal to ten kalanjus. It was in vogue after Rajaraja 
also, as the same relation between the kasu and kalanju re- 
appears in some of the later inscriptions. 11 In fact both the 
md^ai and the kasu, the standard gold coins of the realm, were 
issued by each one of the Cola kings of the period before 1070 
—the different issues being distinguished in epigraphy by the 
names of the kings being prefixed to those of the coins in ques- 
tion: thus we have expressions like the mddlai of Rajaraja, 12 
the mddai of Rajendrasolan, 13 a phrase which by the way 
makes it more likely that the madhurantakadevan-madai was 
issued by Rajaraja’s predecessor, anrddu-ndrkasu meaning 
‘good current kasu’, and palangasu (‘old kasu ’) 14 and some- 
times even anradu- (nar) -palangasu, current (good) old kasu, 
in later inscriptions. 15 

The madhurdntakan mddai was still current in the reign 
of Kulottunga I; 16 and it is said to have been equivalent to 
the kalanju of the fineness of 9% man or two kasus. 17 That 
this high standard was not maintained at all times in the 
actual currency goes without saying, and the inscriptions give 
valuable evidence on the extent of the departure from the 
standard at different times and places. 

An accidental discovery in 1946 in the village of Dhava- 
lesvaram (E. Godavari Dt.) brought to light a fine hoard of 
which only 127 gold coins could be recovered. Here is a 
genuine collection of ancient gold coins which have 
elsewhere mostly disappeared in the goldsmith’s cru- 
cible. The coins are all of fine gold — thin round 
discs bearing a Idnchana in the middle, and letters 
round the margin, all punched on one side of the disc, the 
other side being left blank. There are 49 coins of Rajaraja I. 
the Eastern Calukya king (Nos. 5 and 6 on the plate) which 



DHAVALESVARAM hoard 


615 


call for no remark; they bear the regnal years 33, 34 and 35 
corresponding to a.d. 1055-57 as Rajaraja is known to have 
celebrated his coronation in 1022 with the aid of Rajendra 
I Cola. The remaining coins fall into two sets with different 
inscriptions in Tamil-grantha but one and the same lanchana 
in the centre of the field which is clearly the Cola mark. The 
inscriptions on one set (Nos. 1 and 2) read : 
kam-gai-ko-nda-co-lan 

and bear regnal years ranging from 28 to 33; these are ob- 
viously issues of Rajendra I and the regnal years correspond 
to a.d. 1040-45. There are other figures above the regnal 
year such as 4000 and 11 of which the significance is not clear; 
so also there are some letters with the lanchana in the centre 
which await explanation. The second set of 46 coins bears 
the inscription: 

ma-la (i) -na-du-ko-nda-co-lan 

and bears regnal years ranging from 34 to 36. From their asso- 
ciation these coins are easily attributed to Rajakesari Rajadhi- 
raja I who was recognised as heir apparent by his father Ra- 
jendra I in 1018 and who continued to rule jointly with his 
father till about 1044 and then for ten years more in his own 
right till he fell on the battle-field of Koppam. It will be recall- 
ed that Rajaraja I Calukya had a troubled reign and had to ap- 
peal for Cola aid on many occasions against the aggressions 
of the Western Calukyas and Vijayaditya VII. Rajadhiraja 
must have taken the title malai-nadu-konda by virtue of the 
wars he waged for his father in Kerala, and the title must 
have been chosen for being put on his coins to distinguish 
them from Rajendra’s issue. It is not known if these coins 
which closely follow the fabric of Eastern Calukya coins were 
minted for circulation in the Vehgl country only or went into 
more general use. 

From the reign of Kulottunga I, several other types of 
madais make their appearance in the inscrip- 
oca issues. tions, and these were undoubtedly issued by 
local rulers who were feudatories of the Cola empire. Ex- 
amples of such issues are: the jayamada mentioned in a re- 
cord from Cebrdlu dated !§. 998; 18 the uttanrn^andUi-mdda 
of a Bapatla inscription; 19 the camara-mdda and the biruda- 



616 COINS; WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

mdda in somewhat later records from the same place; 20 the 
nakki-mada mentioned in an inscription from Kanclpuram, 
dated in the fourteenth year of Rajadhiraja II, 21 and recording 
a gift from a chieftain from Ganga-mandalam, who had the 
title Bhujabalaviran; the Bhujabala-madai, first mentioned in 
an inscription of the third year of Kulottunga, perhaps the 
third of that name, from Nandalur; 22 and in later records from 
Kanclpuram and Tiruppalaivanam; 23 the palam-pulli-mddai 
of a record from Tirumullaivayil dated 1232; 24 and the ganda- 
gdpalan-mddai obviously issued by the Telugu-Coda chief- 
tains of Nellore who were contemporary with Rajaraja III 
and Rajendra III. 25 

By a dexterous use of two inscriptions of the same time 
and locality, Codrington seeks to establish that the fineness 
of the madhurdntakan-mddai was roughly about 8| matt u; 26 
but this contradicts the express statement of the inscription 
of Kulottunga’s reign cited above, and it is not improbable 
that two different kdsus are meant by the two records though 
they stand so close to each other, and that the standard of fine- 
ness adopted in both cases was the same, in other words, 
that sembon of one of these records was of the same fineness 
as the madhurantakan madai of 9 V 2 mdttu. Codrington adds: 
‘Now none of the Cola coins even approach this standard, 
and it seems possible that this madai was a unit of account 
equal to a kalanju of gold of the touch mentioned, and had 
ceased to have any connection with the progressively debased 
coinage.’ This conclusion can hardly be accepted as correct, 
if it implies that the kdsu of proper fineness was not actually 
issued from the royal mints for circulation. Considering that 
as late as the thirty-fifth year of Rajadhiraja I 27 , a.d. 1053, 
the standard kdsu was still current and that a heavier kdsu, 
equal to 2 kalanju and 3 manjadis, is sometimes mentioned in 
the records, 28 while a lighter kdsu of seven manjadis was also 
known, 29 the real explanation for the prevalence of different 
units of currency must be sought elsewhere. As Codrington 
has himself observed ‘it seems probable that each province 
of the empire retained its local currency’ and its relation to 
the standard currency was a matter for calculation on each 
separate occasion. That few coins of the high standard of fine- 
ness of the madai have reached us is perhaps due to no other 
reason than this, that no old coins that were at all fit for the 



INFLUENCE OF CEYLON 


617 


gold-smith’s brazier had any chance of survival through many 
centuries; it is probable that a good part of the Dhavales- 
varam hoard mentioned above has also disappeared in this 
manner. 

The standard kasu, moreover, derived ultimately from 
Ceylon which had a more ancient and continuous currency 
tradition than the Cola kingdom which came up in the ninth 
and tenth centuries. The ilak-kasu, Ceylon kasu, which was 
also half-a-kahmjit of the fineness of the mtidai 30 , was current 
in the island as early as the seventh and eighth centuries; 
it is also mentioned in Cola inscriptions from about a.d. 937 
in the reign of Parantaka I. 31 There was close contact be- 
tween Ceylon and the Madura country for centuries before 
Parantaka’s conquest of Madura, and the introduction of this 
coin into Cola currency must have been the result of Paran- 
taka’s invasion of Madura and the island of Ceylon. 32 From 
the actual specimens of coins known, the Ceylon type ‘with 
a rude human figure standing on the obverse, and seated on 
the reverse’ and the traditional Cola type with the seated 
tiger, fish and bow emblems, both may be seen to have exist- 
ed side by side almost from the beginning, the Ceylon type 
being specially suited for circulation in the Pandyan country 
where it may have been long known before. However that 
may be, the main thing was the adoption of the Ceylon stan- 
dard, and this took place apparently much earlier than the 
time of Rajaraja. 33 

Besides the gold coins rn&dai and kasu and others of 
local provenance and uncertain standard, 
Karungasu. the inscriptions mention ‘Karungasu’ or 
‘Ilakkarungasu’ , the black kasu of Ceylon. 34 This coin is also 
apparently traceable to Ceylon, where the ‘nila kahd- 
pana’, a silver coin of the gadydna standard in weight, is 
known to have been in circulation from very early times. 35 
Some of the impure silver coins of the Colas now known may 
be assigned to this series, full-weight or half, as the case may 
be 36 Copper coins issued by the Colas conforming more to 
the standard of the gadyana than of the kalanju are figured 
by Elliot and other writers. 

In an inscription of the thirty-third year of Parantaka I 
from the Madura district, 37 we are told that the Ilak-kasu 
C. 78 



618 COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

was the equivalent of 7\ new akkams. What sort of a coin 
the akkam was is not easily decided. It is again mentioned 
in a record 38 of Aditya II, but without any relation to other 
units. In the days of Rajaraja, however, the akkam was 
definitely a twelfth of the kasu, 39 and therefore a twenty- 
fourth of the Kalanju. It is obvious that the term akkam is 
applied to coins of different value in the Madura and the 
Tanjore inscriptions of Parantaka and Rajaraja; for there is 
much support, as we have seen, from epigraphy for holding 
that the Ilak-kdsu of Parantaka’s time and Rajaraja’s kasu 
were of the same value and fineness. 40 


With the growth of the Cola empire as a result of the 
conquests of Rajaraja I, the currency system 
currency ° f C °' a Colas was extended over the whole 

empire, including its feudatory provinces. 
The new standard was adopted for instance in the Vehgl 
country about a.d. 1000; 41 ‘the weight of Rajaraja’s coin is 
found also beyond the limits of his empire, for example, in 
the gold pieces of the Western Calukya Jagadekamalla and 
of the Kadambas of Goa. 42 The adavalam gadydna of the 
Kongalvas 43 in the eleventh century as opposed to gadydna 
perhaps refers to the Cola reformed gold coin.’ 44 On the 
other hand, the local varieties of other areas are found in- 
truding on occasions into the heart of the Cola empire; about 
a.d. 1049, an Eastern Calukya prince presented to the temple 
at Tiruvaiyaru a sum of 300 Rajarajamadas equal to 3371 
kalanjus by the kudinaikal. 45 


An inscription of the tenth year of Kulottunga I from 
the Chingleput district gives the ratio bet- 
goW^and^si^er 11 ween the standard and silver bullion 

by stating that 433 kalanjus of silver 
formed the equivalent of 100 kasus, so that 1 kalanju of gold, 
probably of the standard fineness of 94 mdttu, was equal to 
8-66 kalanjus of silver. 46 


Examples of various types of the gold kcisu deviating 
more or less from the standard have been given already. The 
gold content of the kasu is clearly stated in several inscrip- 
tions, and it seems probable that in such statements, the 
standard of fineness adopted was that of the madai; this is, 
however, expressly mentioned only in some cases. About 



VARIETIES OF KASU 


619 


a.d. 1063, inscriptions from the North Arcot district seem to 
mention two varieties of kdsu containing 8-356 and 7 manjd- 
dis respectively of standard gold; 47 a kdsu of a little over 6 
manjadis occurs in an inscription of 1077 from Tiruvorriyur, 48 
of 6-813 manjadis in a record 1111 from Tiruvaduturai; 49 and 
of exactly 63, manjadis in 1122 at Tiruvarur. 50 Another ins- 
cription from the Tanjore district, a.d. 1133, mentions a kdsu 
of the weight of three-fourths of a kalanju, 51 a coin which 
seems to have still kept up the weight of the old mddai of the 
gadyana standard. Even so late as 1152 a kdsu of the gold 
content of a third of a kalanju is mentioned in an inscription 
from Alangudi. 51a 


These coins with a substantial gold content are, however, 

exceptional instances of the survival of old 
Debasement. . , . . . . 

issues or very limited new issues minted 

from time to time; for the general history of Cola currency 
seems to have been marked by a progressive deterioration. 
While the ‘Ceylon type’ issues of Rajaraja I are usually of 
fairly good gold, all the available specimens of later monarchs 
beginning from Rajadhiraja I are of very base gold, ‘or rather 
silver washed with gold.’ 52 


From the time of Kulottunga III, the term kdsu comes to 
be applied to a copper coin of rather low value 
The new kasu. its content must have varied greatly 

from place to place, or, what seems equally likely, with each 
issue. While two to three palangasus were quite enough to 
endow a lamp in this period, 53 1100 current kasus were 
needed for a lamp being maintained during services in a 
temple, and 9000 for a perpetual lamp. 54 In another case, 200 
new kasus sufficed for a lamp. 55 An inscription of the twen- 
tieth year of Rajendra III states that the kalanju of gold was 
then equal to 411 7|13 kasus. 56 And a Pandya inscription of 
the thirteenth century from the Salem district (Aragalur) 
states that one hundred Soliya kasus went to the fanam. 57 
Coppers of various sizes usually with the legend Rajaraja on 
them can still be picked up easily in the bazaars of South 
Indian cities, and they, no doubt, are the kasus of these later 
Cola inscriptions. Of the copper issues of the later monarchs, 
Codrington says 58 that they are ‘of the same design as the 
coins of Rajaraja I, but the human figure is more degraded 
and the legend roughly executed, the Ja sometimes being 



620 


COINS . WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


reversed. In the degradation of the type various stages are 
visible, and it is probable that the coins were issued by var- 
ious later kings following the old model without alteration 
of name. The better executed and presumably older speci- 
mens with a flat blank about -76 inch in width, and a weight 
of some 63 grains, may be the new kdsu or rather its double.’ 
The tiramam is occasionally found mentioned in inscrip- 
tions; it is not clear if it was a coin or only 
a smaller unit of reckoning. At Kaiiclpuram, 
in a.d. 1076, six tiramams went to the ka.su while more than 
forty years later, the kdsu was the equal of seven tiramams 60 
in the Ramnad district. 

Though the weight and fineness of the standard gold coin 
of the realm were fairly determinate, there 
wef^t* systems? 1 sti11 existed a lar § e variety of systems of 
weighing and assaying. Without stopping to 
give an exhaustive account of these systems, a few examples 
may be given to illustrate the general conditions that pre- 
vailed. The mention of Videlvidugu-kal used for weighing 
gold at Kumaravayalur in the Trichinopoly area 603 in an ins- 
cription of Aditya I may be some indication that continuity 
in the system of weights and measures was ordinarily sought 
to be maintained irrespective of dynastic changes. In the 
Tanjore inscriptions of Rajaraja, two different weight units 
are found used, the adavallan for weighing gold and the 
daksinameruvitankan for jewels. Outside Tanjore may be 
noticed the ‘stone used for weighing Rajarajan-kasu’ at Tiru- 
varur, 61 the vaiyagattdr-kal at Tirumalavadi, 62 the videl- 
vidugu-kal at Tiruccendurai 63 and Paluvur 64 and the kempd- 
ndgarasu-nirai at Tadi-malingi 65 or simply the stone used in 
this village of Srlkantha-caturved i-mangalam (Tiruverum- 
bur) The absolute weights of these different units are not 
easily determined, but they all used the same denominations 
of kalaiiju divided into 20 mmijadis , each manjddi being the 
equivalent of two kunris. The fineness of gold is likewise 
expressed in different ways. The fineness of 
offine a ne d ss r of the mS ^ ai and that of sembon (red-gold) 
gold have already been mentioned. Of these, the 

term red gold’ was applied to gold purified 
and tested according to certain prescribed methods; 67 appa- 
rently it was the same as tulai-pon or tulai-nirai-pon. Some- 



DIVERSITY OF MEASURES 


621 


times, the fineness is explained in terms of touch — as nine 
mattu by the kasu-nirai-kal. 68 ‘Of the fineness of palangasu’ 
and ‘of the fineness prescribed by the (royal) treasury’ (talac- 
cemmai) 69 are other expressions that are employed in the 
early inscriptions of the period. There was thus no uniform- 
ity either in the actual units of gold currency in circulation 
or in the standard of weight and fineness adopted in different 
areas for the regulation of local transactions. The need for 
‘gold committees’ which were set up by different village- 
assemblies for testing gold is thus clear. 

The same diversity of usage marks the systems of land, 
liquid and grain measures adopted in dif- 
Other measures. f eren {. areas The nilam or veli, called 
vatika in Sanskrit in the Anbil plates, was the unit measure 
of land. 70 It was divided into -1, -}, 1120, 1'80. and 1 320, a 

secondary series (the first Ml) of 1|320 of this primary series, 
and a tertiary (1|320) 2 (the second kil) of the same; 71 even 
a third Ml series (11320) 3 seems to be occasionally 
employed. 72 

How exactly the measurement of land was carried out to 
such minute accuracy is not known. But the system of 
measurement by veli which was an ancient one in the Cola 
country spread over the other parts of Southern India with 
the Cola empire and apparently disappeared with it. Cola 
inscriptions in the Pandya country for instance used this 
system, which is not found there either before or after the 
Colas. For all the minute care bestowed in the inscriptions 
from Tanjore and elsewhere on the fractional sub-divisions 
of the veli, the extent of the veli seems itself to have been 
somewhat indeterminate. The length of the rod ( kol ) used is 
gathered from expressions like the 16-span-fcof 73 the kadigaik- 
kalattu-k5l, u sri-pada-kol, 75 the maligai-kol , 76 and so on. Not 
only did the extent of the kuli differ with the length of the 
measuring rod used, but the number of kulis that made up a 
ma or seru , 77 the twentieth of the veli , also varied consider- 
ably. In Kilur in South Arcot, the ma contained 256 kidis by 
the 16 span rod in the sixth year of Rajendra I; 78 in the same 
year in the Tanjore district (Tiruvaduturai) one hundred 
kulis by the maligaikol made up the ma. 19 About twelve years 
later, in Tiruvamattur not far from Kilur, 200 kulis by the 
16 span rod were reckoned to the ma. 80 In land-measures, as 



622 COINS , WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

in currency, therefore, the same tendency to standardisation 
on the part of the central government can be traced by the 
side of the persistence of local usage. The maligai-kol (the 
rod of the palace), and the 100-kuli-ma as well as the spread 
of the ueh-unit outside the Cola country proper may be taken 
as evidence of the attempt to impose a uniform system on the 
provinces. In the temple at Tiruvalangadu in the Tanjore 
district the length of the standard kol (rod) is marked on the 
stone wall and on the gopuram, to conform to the kol found 
engraved on the wall of the Tanjore temple. 81 

How little these efforts at standardisation succeeded is 
clear from the chaos of measuring standards revealed by the 
later Cola inscriptions. At Tiruvorriyur, in a.d. 1072, the veil 
comprised 2000 kulis by the sixteen-span rod; 82 while in 1204 
it is equated to padagams in Uttaramerur. 83 The ma was 
made up of 138 kulis in 1097 at Tirukkadaiyur, 84 and of 128 
kulis by the standard of the sabha of Tiruvaduturai in 1110, 85 
the same sabha employing in the very next year another 
measure by which the ma was 100 kulis. 96 Again, in the South 
Arcot district, the ma was reckoned at 512 kulis by the 
fourteen span rod in 1138; 87 and the same number of kulis to 
the ma is found in a record from Muniyur (Tanjore district) 
in 1220, the length of the rod, however, not being specified in 
this case. 88 And a ma of 513 kulis is found in Valuvur in the 
same district in the reign of Rajadhiraja II. 89 This list is by 
no means exhaustive; it is seldom that we have the data for 
converting one unit into another as is found in some records 
of the sabha of Tiruvaduturai which equate 4V2 mas of their 
measure to six mas of the survey, and six mas and a kani 
to eight mas according to the general survey which took 100 
mas to the kuli 90 

The same characteristic marks the liquid and grain 
measures used in different places, and numerous kinds of noli 
and marakkdl find mention in the inscriptions. From the 
Tanjore inscriptions it becomes clear that the Adavallan equal 
to Rajakesari was adopted as the standard in the accounts of 
the capital city and perhaps of the empire in the time of 
Rajaraja I. Possibly, the same measure is referred to as 
Arumolidevan in the reigns of Rajendra and Rajadhiraja. 91 
though the name Rajakesari also continued in use. 92 The dis- 
tinction between this standard measure Rajakesari and an- 



LENGTH OF THE YEAR 


-The a$u. 


other called Vldividangan is clearly brought out in a record 
of the twenty-sixth year of Rajaraja I from Tiruvamattur stat- 
ing that a surplus was left as a result of measuring paddy by 
the Vldividangan instead of by the Rajakesari. 93 Kdmalam 
(Covelong) and Kacci-ppedu-ninran were other measures 
used in Chingleput. 94 It would seem, however, that better 
success attended the effort to standardise liquid and grain 
measures than in other directions; at any rate, after the reign 
of Rajaraja I the inscriptions seem to mention fewer varieties 
of these measures than of land measures or gold weights. 
Another standardised unit of value was, strangely 
enough, the ddu (lit. sheep) which was the 
equivalent of a sum enough to yield one 
measure of ghi per annum as interest; in the sixteenth year 
of Rajendra I, 25 kasus were equal to 22\ such adus, 95 giving 
as many measures of ghi in the year. The fractional adus 
(sheep) mentioned in inscriptions 96 can be understood only 
if they are taken to be fractions of a monetary unit, and not 
of the live animal. 

The year is reckoned generally at 360 days, but instances 
also occur where calculations are based on 
e year ‘ a year of 365 days. 97 It is well known that 
Hindu astronomical works like the Suryasiddhanta and the 
Siddhdnta Siromani mention, among others, both these 
reckonings and prescribe the particular purposes for which 
each may be used. In the Cola inscriptions, however, we find 
both reckonings used for the same purpose, e.g., for calculat- 
ing the quantity of ghi necessary for the maintenance of 
lamps. 



624 


COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


TABLES OF MAIN WEIGHTS AND MEASURES IN THE INSCRIPTIONS 
1. Liquid and grain measure : — 


2 sevidu 

= 

1 pidi 

5 sevidu 

= 

1 alakku 

2 alakku 


1 ulakku 

2 ulakku 

= 

1 uri 

2 uri 

= 

1 nali 

8 nali 

m 

1 kuruni 

2 kuruni 

= 

1 padakku 

2 padakku 

= 

1 tuiji or kadi 98 

3 tuni 

= 

1 kalam 


2. Weight of gold : — 

One manjacli = 2 kunri = 10 ma = 40 kani. 

Twenty manjadi = one kalaiiju (about 68 to 72 grains) . 

Note. — The ma and kani are usually lj20 and 1|80 when ap- 
plied to a veli of land. Hultzsch conjectures (SII. 
ii, p. 65 n.) very plausibly that originally the ma and 
kani had the same fractional value even here, and 
were subdivisions of a unit of 2 mahjadis or a tenth 
of the kalaiiju; coins called janams were usually a 
tenth of the standard kalaiiju in weight; and the 
pana-tukkam (panam-weight) has always been a 
tenth of the kalaiiju. In 273 of 1927 (Vik. 3, Siva- 
puram) the ma is really 1 ;20 kdsu. 

3. Linear measure used in measuring icons: — 

8 torai (rice-corn) = one viral (finger). 

12 viral — one san (span) . 

2 sab = one mulam (cubit). 



NOTES 


625 


1. Codrington — Ceylon Coins and Currency, pp. 6-7. 

2. CSI. No. 151. 

3. TAS. i, p. 165; 182 of 1915. 

4. Codrington, pp. 3 and 7. 

5. SII. iii, 104; also 181 of 1912. 

6. 49 of 1888, 54 of 1893, etc. contra Codrington. — The early 
mediaeval p on seems to be a kalanju of gold, and not necessarily a coin’, 
(p. 52). 

7. 140 of 1912; ARE. 1913, II, 22. 

8. 252 of 1915. 

9. 141 of 1912. Mentioned also in 484 of 1925, a.d. 1054. 

10. 241 of 1923. 

11. 203 of 1925; 228 of 1923. 

12. 104 of 1925. This madai is used as the standard of fineness :n 
671 of 1919. 

13. 203 of 1925. 

14. 629 of 1916; 484 of 1925. 

15. 71 of 1926; 217 of 1901; 329 of 1929. 

16. 17 of 1893; 180 of 1911. ARE. 1936-7 II. 27. 

17. 90 of 1928. 

18. 151 of 1897. 

19. 236 of 1897. 

20. 210 of 1897; 176 of 1897. 

21. 48 of 1893. 

22. 586 of 1907. 

23. 360 of 1919, 311 of 1929. ARE. 1929. II. 38. 

24. 674 of 1904. 

25. 266 of 1921, and several others. 

26. op. cit. p. 86. 

27. 228 of 1923. 

28. 105 of 1925; also 571 of 1904 tor a kasu of slightly less value. 

Both of Rajaraja I. 

29. 5 of 1890. 

30. 25 and 156 of 1895; also 252 of 1915. The word llam came to 
mean ‘gold’ in Tamil; and this sense is known to the Divakaram ; but 
I have not come across any early use of the word in this sense. Can it 
be that the meaning was derived from the fact that the Ildk-kasu was 
a gold coin? 

31. 435 of 1904. 

32. Codrington, p. 73. 

33. Contra Codrington, p. 84. It is perhaps worth noting that the 
so-called Lankesvara type of Rajaraja I (Desikachari, South Indian 
Coins, p. 183) is not a Cola coin, but most probably belongs to the 
Ceylonese Kahavanu series and that the legend on it is now read as 
‘Sri Lanka Vibhu’. Codrington. op. cit. p. 54. Unfortunately, Desika- 
chari does not give the weight of his specimen of this type. The copper 
‘Kodandarama’ coins (Desikachari, p. 66) are also clearly Pandyan, not 
Cola. 

34. SII. iii. 120, 242 of 1907; 238 and 266 ot 1923. 

35. Codrington, pp. 13-4. 

C. 79 



626 COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

36. Elliot, No. 152 is full weight; so also Nos. 26 and 27 described 
by Hultzsch at IA. 1896, p. 321 which from the title Cola-narayana may- 
now be ascribed to Rajaraja who gets the same title in one of the Mysore 
inscriptions. One coin at p. 317 IA. 1896 is half weight, 30 gr. Another, 
in the same place, of 5112 grains, is near Elliot No. 153 which is 52-2 
grains. 

37. SII. iii, 106. This kasu is also mentioned in 435 of 1904, year 30. 

38. 275 of 1923. The Aka was again a fraction piece of the Ceylon 
Kahavanuva, and, like the kasu, may have been derived from there. 
Codrington, p. 58. 

39. SII. ii, 7. 

40. Codrington has demonstrated conclusively (pages 71-74) that 
the Colas borrowed their standard from Ceylon where it had a long and 
continuous history before the Cola occupation. The older view that 
'its use was established in Ceylon, as a result of the Cola occupation of 
the island’ (Rapson) is therefore the exact reverse of the truth. See 
also Smith ( Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum) IMC. I, pp. 327-8. 

A careful study of the epigraphical evidence, however, does not 
seem to support Codrington’s theory of the reform of the coinage by 
Rajaraja I, (sect. 23, p. 7) which rests so far as I am able to see on 
two facts: (a) the mention of paUingasu in 629 of 1916 of the 27th 

year of the king and (b) the weight of the lost gold coin (Elliot No. 151) 
with the grantha legend Uttama-solan (pages 7 and 74). These facts 
are susceptible of other explanations, and the fixed relation of the Cola 
kasu = Ilakkasu = V2 kalanju is anterior to Rajaraja’s time as is seen from 
25 of 1895 of the 24th year of Parantaka I, 156 of 1895 and 241 of 1923, 
of the time Parantaka II (Sundara Cola) and Aditya II respectively. 

The ndgari legends on the Cola coins seem to appear first under Raja- 
raja I replacing grantha legends of the earlier period, cf. the woodcut of 
the Uttama-Cola gold coin in CSI. It is not possible to decide if this marks 
a further stage in the growth of Ceylonese influence on Cola coinage, 
or, what is equally, if not more, probable, the result of North Indian 
gaiva influences beginning to operate in the Cola court. On the latter 
hypothesis, the nagari script must have first been employed on the 
mainland, and thence spread to Ceylon. 

41. IA. xxv, p. 321. 

42. IMC. I, pp. 313-4. 

43. EC. i, 49. 

44. Codrington, p. 8. 

45. 221 of 1894. The Cola mada was just one kalanju by this kal. 
144 of 1925. 

46. 211 of 1922. 

47. 157 of 1916; 5 of 1890. 

48. 401 of 1896. 

49. 150 of 1925. 

50. 563 of 1904. 

51. 509 of 1912; Codrington, op. cit. p. 85. 

51a. 521 of 1920. 

52. Codrington, op. cit. p. 73. 

53. 40 of 1900; 449 of 1902. 



NOTES 


627 


54. 264 of 1913; 63 of 1892. 

55. 449 of 1902. 

56. 522 of 1922. 

57. 439 of 1913. 

58. op. cit. p. 85. 

59. 1 of 1893. 

60. 284 of 1923. 

60a. 141 of 1936-7, ARE. II. 20. 

61. 680 of 1919. 

62. 1 of 1920. 

63. 316 of 1903. 

64. 353 of 1918. 

65. 491 of 1911. 

66. 100 of 1892. 

67. SII. iii, p. 229 n. 5. 

68. TAS. iv, pp. 139-41. 

69. 50 of 1925; 356 of 1924. 

70. The Tanjore veli today is 6-7 acres. Possibly the ancient unit 
was not different. 

71. SII. ii, p. 48 nn. 

72. SII. ii, p. 64, paragraph 15. 

73. 261 of 1902 ; 344 of 1912; 18 of 1922; SII. iii. 64. Fourteen spans 
in 229 of 1910, twenty in 413 of 1922; twelve in 104 of 1928. 

74. 160 and 172 of 1921. 

75. 87 of 1900. 

76. 99 of 1914; 102 of 1925. 

77. 250 of 1902. 

78. 261 of 1902. 

79. 102 of 1925. 

80. 18 of 1922. 

81. 93, 97 of 1926. 

82. SII. iii, 64. 

83. 76 of 1898. 

84. 243 of 1925. 

85. 155 of 1925. This record says that 4 V 2 mas of this measure 
were equal to six mas by the general survey; is this only an approxi- 
mation? 

86. 150 of 1925. 

87. 179-81 of 1918. 

88. 607 of 1902. 

89. 428 of 1912. 

90. 155 and 144 of 1925. 

91. 401 of 1921; 262 of 1921. 

92. 140 of 1912. 

93. 21 of 1922. 

94. ARE. 1911, II, 21. 

95. 78 of 1895. 

96. 40 of 1888. 

97. 556 of 1904, 731 of 1909. 504 of 1918. 

98. 219 of 1921 (Rajaraja I. 22). 



Chapter XXIV 


EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


Universal education is a modern ideal. Modern India 
does not appear yet to have quite accepted 
The old ideal. The ancient ideal of education in India 

was ‘to each according to his capacity’, capacity being measur- 
ed by the teacher in accordance not only with the pupil’s 
individual aptitudes but his birth and station in life. What is 
now known as industrial or technical education was largely 
carried on in the homes of the artisans under conditions 
governed by caste rules and custom. 


Little evidence of a direct character is available on the 
spread of literacy or the extent to which it 
Liteiacy. W as generally valued. But one may hazard 

the conjecture that the percentage of literacy in the popula- 
tion was not lower, it was probably higher 1 than the extremely 
low level revealed by recent censuses. The village school 
assembling under the shade of a tree or in the verandahs of 
temples and mathas was a common institution, and its teacher 
( vatti ) 2 was among the staff of employees remunerated from 
the common land held by the village. The free school at 
Panaiyavaram , 3 South Arcot, mentioned in an undated record, 
belonged, most probably, to this type. Stone masons and cop- 
per smiths were to be found everywhere to engrave inscrip- 
tions on stone and copper, and the work was often done with 
remarkable accuracy and art. The corrupt and colloquial 
forms of words and phrases in several of the inscriptions show 
that the work was generally entrusted to workmen who were 
just literate, but were no scholars. The maintenance of the 
complex records of the government, local and central, and the 
employment for this purpose of a considerable staff of officers 
and clerks may have stimulated then as now the resort to 
scholastic education as an avenue to public employment. 
There can be no doubt that the elaborate bureaucracy set up 
by the growing Cola empire perceptibly increased the demand 
for the services of such men. 



EDUCATIONAL ENDOWMENTS 


629 


Popular education in a wide sense was amply provided for 
by the recitation and exposition in temples 
education and other public places of the national epics 

like the Ramdyana and the Mahabharata, and 
the Puranas. Sometimes the elements of philosophy from the 
stand-point of particular sects were also similarly expounded, 
for instance the Sivadharma, 4 Somasiddhanta. and Ramanuja- 
bhasya. 

Higher education was generally denominational in 
character and pursued in schools and col- 
education leges attached to mathas and temples. The 

matha, the palli and the viharn were centres 
of learning which often owned large libraries and transmitted 
by successive copyings a vast mass of manuscript literature on 
a variety of topics which increased in volume and diversity 
from generation to generation. Besides numberless little 
endowments for the pursuit of particular branches of study, 
like the Mlmamsa of Prabhakara, 5 and grammar (Vya- 
karana) , 6 under the guidance of individual teachers, there 
were in existence colleges for general higher education, which 
provided instruction in various branches of study and com- 
prised a large number of teachers and pupils commanding all 
the facilities for intellectual intercourse pi'ovided by a com- 
mon life in the same place, if not also under the same roof. 
Even these large institutions were fully endowed and all the 
places in these colleges were free places filled by the most 
deserving pupils chosen from a group of competitors for 
admission to each course of study. These mediaeval South 
Indian colleges have not had the advantage of a full descrip- 
tion from the pen of a curious and observant foreigner like 
I-tsing, or of having been buried underground for centuries 
and then suddenly revealed by the spade of the excavator. 
But contemporary inscriptions bear eloquent testimony to the 
great work done in their day by some of these Hindu centres 
of higher learning and the extent to which they enlisted the 
sympathy and appreciation of a thoughtful and generous 
public. The existence of a Vedic school, Chandoga -kidaip- 
puram, endowed by a member of the village executive 
( alunganam ) of Kamappullur (Kappalur, N. Areot) with land 
he bought from the sabha , is attested by two inscriptions of 
the reigns of Parantaka I and Sundara Cola. 6a About a.d. 999. 



630 


EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


the Mahasabha of Aniyur (now Anur, Chingleput Dt.) pro- 
vided a bhattavrtti for the teaching of Veda, grammar ( Asta - 
dhyayi) and other subjects. The bhatta, it was laid down, 
must be well-versed in the Vedas and should be able to teach 
Panini-vyakarana, the Alankara, and the twenty-chapters of 
the Mimamsa. He was not only to teach his pupils but also 
feed them. The mention of twenty chapters of Mimamsa is 
notable; we have now only sixteen, the rest are believed to 
have been lost, but were still current in the reign of Raja- 
raja I. 6b In the reign of Rajendra I, the 
Ennayiram. sabha of Rajarajacaturvedimangalam (Enna- 
yiram) , in South Arcot, resolved in the presence of an officer 
of the king’s government, to arrange for the feeding of the 
pupils and the remuneration of the teachers of a college in 
accordance with the terms of an order made by the king him- 
self. 7 From the words of the inscription it is not easy to say 
whether the college was founded on this occasion, or had been 
in existence for some time before Rajendra came forward to 
give it such splendid support. However that may be, the 
details recorded in the inscription give an accurate idea of 
the strength of the college, the popularity of the different 
courses, the relative esteem in which teachers of different sub- 
jects were held in so far as this may be judged from their 
respective salaries, and the average cost of maintaining pupils 
of different grades. The provision in this record contem- 
plates 270 junior students and 70 senior students and a teach- 
ing staff of 14 persons. Among the junior students, Brahma- 
caris, forty studied the elements of grammar according to the 
Rnpavattira, and the rest were learning the Vedas by rote — 
75 devoting themselves to the Rg- and 75 to the Yajur-veda, 
twenty to each of the Vajasaneya-, and the Chandoga- and 
Talavakara- samas, ten to the Atharva-Veda and the remain- 
ing ten to the Baudayana -grhya, -kalpa, and gana. Each of 
these junior pupils was allowed six ndlis of paddy per diem. 
The seventy senior pupils ( chdtras ) had an allowance of ten 
ndlis each, and were studying three advanced subjects — Vya- 
karana 25, Prabhakara Mimamsa 35 and the Vedanta 10. It 
will be noticed that, in the courses of study, while all the four 
Vedas are represented, there is only one sutra of Rgveda. 
The use of the Rupavatara as an introduction to the elements 



ALLOWANCES TO TEACHERS AND PUPILS 631 


of Sanskrit grammar in Rajendra’s reign, 8 the popularity of 
the Mimamsa of Prabhakara almost to the exclusion of the 
Bhatta school, 83 and, if the whole college was a Vaisnava 
institution, as most probably it was, the mention of Vedanta 
of the Visistadvaita school as a subject of study long before 
the great Bhasya of Ramanuja came into existence, should 
also be noted as of particular significance to the history of 
Sanskrit learning in South India. Among teachers, the largest 
daily allowance in grain of one kalarn and a third went to the 
professor of Vedanta; the nambis who taught the Mimamsa 
and Vyakarana came next, getting one kalarn each. All the 
others were on the same level receiving only three kurunis 
or a fourth of a kalam per diem. Besides these daily allow- 
ances of grain, all the teachers and chatras (senior pupils) 
except the professor of Vedanta got other allowances in gold 
— at the rate of one kalanju per adhydya taught in the case 
of Vyakarana and Mimamsa teachers, entitling them to 
8 kalanjus and 12 kalanjus respectively for a whole course, 
and a half kalanju per head per annum for all the rest. To 
make money by teaching Vedanta was prohibited by law and 
custom, and this, apparently, was the reason why no payment 
in gold was offered to the teacher of Vedanta. Another col- 
lege, quite similar to that at Ennayiram, was maintained at 
Tribhuvani, near Pondicherry. 9 There were in it 260 students 
and 12 teachers. The subjects of study were 
Tribhuvani. generally those prescribed at Ennayiram; 
the Prabhakaram is not mentioned, but other new subjects 
come in, like the Satyasadha sutras, Manu sdstra and Vai- 
khanasa sdstra, besides Bhdrata, Rdmayana. these last being 
expounded to popular audiences rather than taught as school 
subjects. The daily allowances to students and teachers were 
all in grain; the junior students were allowed six measures 
each and the senior eight; among teachers, the professor of 
Vedanta got a kalam and a sixth, while the others received 
varying allowances ranging from one kalam to a fourth of it. 
The inscription of the thirtieth year of Rajadhiraja, a.d. 1048 
which records these facts, also exempts the teachers and stu- 
dents of the college from active service on the committees of 
the village-assembly in accordance with a resolution of the 
sabha. 



632 


EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


Next we have the celebrated Tirumukkudal inscription 
of Virarajendra, a.d. 1067. 10 This inscrip- 
Tirumukkudal. ^ on contain a V ery detailed account of the 
entire budget of receipts and expenses in the local temple of 
Mahavisnu, and the schedule of expenses included provision 
for a college and a hospital. The college was a comparatively 
small institution and only two Vedas (Rg and Yajus) and 
Vyakarana with Ruptivattira were taught in it. Provision 
was made for one teacher and ten pupils for the studying of 
each of the two Vedas, and for one teacher and twenty pupils 
in the Vyakarana school. The Veda teachers were remune- 
rated at the rate of one padakku of paddy per day and four 
gold kasus per annum, while the teacher of Vyakarana was 
paid a tuni — twice a padakku — per diem and ten kasus per 
annum. It is clear that the Veda school was only what is now 
called an adhyayana-patha-sdla, a school where pupils are 
trained to repeat the text by rote. The pupils were provided 
not only with food on the basis of nalis of rice per diem 
and suitable side dishes, but with mats for sleeping on, oil for 
their heads on Saturdays (fifty-one Saturdays being counted 
to the year), and a night light. There were also two women 
servants who looked after the menial service required by the 
schools and their pupils. 


An inscription of the third year of Vikramacola, 
a.d. 1121, 11 from Tiruvaduturai, mentions that among persons 
who were to be fed in a matha in that place 


learners of Vagbha|a’s Astdngahrdaya, of 
Carakasamhita and of the Rupdvatdra. In the thirteenth 
regnal year of Kulottunga II twelve velis of land were set 
apart for ten Bhattas versed in Veda and sastra , one Sivacarya, 
and one vaidya (physician) at Peruvelur in S. Arcot; they 
were all provided with houses to the north and west of the 
temple; the endowment was made by Rajendrasola Sambuva- 
rayan who also provided lands for the Vellala tenants of these 
Bhattas and remitted the pa.dikd.val fees on the devaddna and 
agaram lands. 113 Another inscription of a.d. 1213 from Tiruvor- 
riyur recapitulates the legend of Siva expounding the four- 
teen Vyakarana sutras to Panini, localises 
Worriyto SCh001 ' the legend “ the Vyakarana-dana-mandapa 
in the temple of Tiruvorriyur, and records 



LIBRARIES. MATHAS 


633 


an endowment of sixty-five veils of land towards the mainte- 
nance of a school of Vyakarana in the mandapa and of the 
rrwndapa itself in proper repair. 1115 From Tiruvidaikkali in 
the Tanjore district, we have yet another inscription, dated 
a.d. 1229, which provides for the free feeding in the local 
matha of Brahmin students of the Vedanta from the Malabar 
country. 12 An undated inscription which may be assigned 
to the latter half of the thirteenth century mentions the 
foundation of a library ( Sarasvatl-bhanddram ) in the Srlran- 
gam temple by Palapalli Nilakantha Nayakar who also set up 
the image of Hayagriva, Sarasvatl, and Veda-Vyasa in the 
mandapa housing the library and provided for their daily 
worship. 123 There were, besides, several endowments for 
rewarding merit and distinction attained in these scholastic 
pursuits, like the one at Kamarasavalli, dated a.d. 998, to those 
who recited portions of the Talavakara-sama. 13 There 
were also other organisations of a learned character like the 
Ghatikd of Vembarrur 14 of which only the names have come 
down to us. 

While we thus find much evidence on the nature and 
organisation of higher studies in Sanskrit, it 
Taiml Studies. . g somew h a t disappointing that we are left 
with practically no tangible evidence on the state of Tamil 
learning; yet there can be no doubt that the numerous mathas, 
the names of which are recorded in inscriptions all over the 
country, did serve as more or less important centres for the 
promotion of learning, religious and secular, in the Tamil 
language. We may be certain that then, as now, it was one 
of the principal tasks of the mathas to train the bands of cho- 
risters who sang the Tiruppadiyam in the temples, 


1. Cf. Elphinstone — History of India ,5 p. 205. 

2. 17 of 1920. 

3. 323 of 1917. 

4. 321 of 1917; 403 of 1896; 493 of 1919. 

5. 233 of 1911; 333 of 1923. 

6. 18 of 1898; 202 of 1912. 

6a. 268 and 270 of 1938-39, ARE. II, 12. 

6b. 76 of 1932-3, ARE. II, 22. N. L. Rao refers me to Mtmdmsa- 
Darsana. ed. Prajna Pathasala-mandala-granthamala, about the twenty 
chapters. 

C. 80 



634 


EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


7. 333 of 1917, ARE. 1918. 

8. Dharmaklrti, the author of the Rupavatara, must have lived 
much earlier than the 12th century, the date assigned to him by 
M. Rangacharya in his edition of the Rupavatara, p. xv. 

8a. This may have been due to the common epistemological stand- 
point of the Vaisnava Visistadvaita and Prabhakara mimamsa in hold- 
ing that all knowledge is valid. 

9. 176 of 1919. 

10. 182 of 1915, EL xxi, pp. 220 ff. 

11. 159 of 1925. 

11a. 512 of 1937-38, ARE. II, 38. 

lib. 202 of 1912. 

12. 276 of 1925. 

12a. 139 of 1938-9, ARE. II, 70. 

13. 76 of 1914. 343 of 1917 from Ennayriam provides for presents 
to reciters of all the Vedas. 



Chapter XXV 


RELIGION 

The temple and the matha were the two great gifts of 
mediaeval Hinduism to Southern India. It 
Temple and was un( j e r the Colas that these institutions 
ma * ha - entered on a process of gradual expansion 

and adaptation, which attracted the imagination of the popu- 
lace and the benefactions of the rich; they thus reached a 
secure position of ascendancy over the Buddhist vikara and 
Jain palli, and this position they retained almost unimpaired 
till our own time. In the stress of the conflict with heretical 
rivals who denied the sanctity of the Veda and questioned 
the existence of the Deity, there arose within Hinduism a 
tendency to close up its ranks, and foster a religious syncre- 
tism which found room within the fold of its orthodoxy for 
all forms of theistic belief. This syncretism was based on the 
conception of Trimurti, the threefold manifestation of the 
same godhead. 

In the eighth and ninth centuries, Southern India pro- 
duced the two great Hindu champions 

e ackgroun . K um jj r il a and Sankara who fought the battle 
of ancient Brahmanism against heresy, though there was 
‘little persecution in our sense of the word ’. 1 The stories of 
persecution are late popular legends that were put into melo- 
dious verse by the pious credulity of the author of the Periya 
Puranam. Under the leadership of Sankara, Hinduism ab- 
sorbed many of the distinctive features of the speculative 
system and the practical organisation of latter day Buddhism. 
This is the chief reason why, on the one hand, Buddhism was 
so completely banished from Southern India in later times, 
and on the other, the opponents of Sankara’s system found it 
easy to stigmatise him as a Buddhist in disguise. 

The battle against heresy had been joined, however, long 
before Sankara’s day by the great Saiva Nayanars and the 
Vaisnava Alvars. The ‘emotional theism’ of these masters 
of popular song, ‘running in the parallel channels of Visnuism 
and Saivism’ is in many ways the most characteristic product 
of Tamil religious experience. The great work done by these 



636 


RELIGION 


holy men who traversed the whole of the Tamil land several 
times over, singing, preaching and organising, has ever since 
been treasured by a grateful posterity in 
legend eautiful beautiful legends which are significant even 
in their anachronisms. One such tale is 
that of a friendly meeting between Nanasambandar and Tiru- 
mangai Alvar. The earliest narrative of this incident acces- 
sible to us is that of the Divyasuricarita . 2 Sambandar, the 
opponent of Jainism, is said to have gone forth from Shiyali 
in his eagerness to meet the great Vaisnava antagonist of 
Buddhism and to invite him to Shiyali. Tirumangai would 
not set foot in a city which had no temple of Visnu, and 
Sambandar overcame the objection by disclosing the exis- 
tence of an ancient image of Visnu that had once stood in a 
temple, since ruined, and was being regularly worshipped at 
the time by an arcaka in his private dwelling. Sambandar 
and Tirumangai then entered Shiyali together; there Tiru- 
mangai composed some hymns which Sambandar admired 
greatly, and before leaving for his own city of Alinagar, he 
induced some rich persons engaged in embellishing the Siva 
temple to undertake the renovation of that of Visnu as well 
and to shed their hostility to the sister creed. Impossible as 
history , 3 this beautiful legend enshrines the belief in the com- 
mon mission of Saivism and Vaisnavism, entertained by the 
Tamil Vaisnavas of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. In 
stemming the strong current of anti-Vedic heresy, the alvars 
and the ndyanars had laboured together in the past, and what 
was more natural for their successors than to bring together 
the great Saiva antagonist of Jainism and the equally great 
Vaispava opponent of Buddhism. Let it also be noted that 
the currency of such a story in the eleventh and early twelfth 
centuries implies that Saivism and Vaisnavism had not yet 
developed the relentless sectarian hostility that usually 
characterised their relations in later times. The story of the 
Cola persecution of Ramanuja, however, may be said to mark 
the beginning of sectarian intolerance within the fold of 
Hinduism; and the legend of the meeting of Sambandar and 
Tirumangai was, perhaps, but the expression of the wistful 
memory of happier times. 

Under the Colas of the line of Vijayalaya may be said 
to commence the Silver Age of South Indian Saivism and 



NAMBl ANDAR NAMBI 


637 


Vaisnavism. Difficult as it is to propose precise dates in the 
present state of the evidence, we may still be certain that the 
sacred hymns of the ndyandrs and the dinars were arranged in 
canonical form some time in the eleventh century. 

Nambi .Andar Nambi, the author who arranged the Saiva 
Canon substantially in the form in which we 
Canon ^ 31Va now it, was most probably a contem- 

porary of Rajaraja I and Rajendra I. The 
account of his life and work given in a short Purana attri- 
buted to Umapati Siva Acarya of the early fourteenth cen- 
tury seems to conserve, in the midst of much legendary mat- 
ter, a fairly correct account of the growth of the canon in 
the hands of Nambi himself and his successors. It has been 
said that the inclusion, in the canon, of Nambi’s own poems 
and those of other writers like Karuvur Devar, manifestly 
later than Rajaraja’s reign, and the title Abhaya and Kula- 
sekhara given by Umapati to the Cola king who was Nambi’s 
contemporary, imply a later date for the redaction of the 
canon . 4 Even in Nambi’s time, difficulty was experienced in 
making the collection of hymns complete — as may be seen 
from the hymn on Tiruvidaivayil by Nanasambandar, un- 
known to the canon, and preserved in an inscription , 5 and 
from the legend of the destruction by white ants of the bulk 
of the palm leaves containing the hymns. 

The practice of reciting these hymns in temples had 
come into vogue long before the time of 
Tiruppadiyam. R a j ara j a . At Lalgucli and Allur in the 
Trichinopoly district are found inscriptions of the reign of 
Parantaka I, providing for Brahmins singing the Tiruppadi- 
yam during the daily service in the temples . 6 Earlier than 
Parantaka’s reign, in the reign of the Pallava Vijaya-Nandi- 
Vikrama Varman, reciters of the Tiruppadiyam are enu- 
merated in a list of persons employed in the service of a 
temple at Tiruvallam . 7 The inference is clear that the hymns 
had attained the status of divine literature long before Nambi 
Andar Nambi collected and edited them in the standard form 
in which they have reached us. From the reign of Parantaka 
I there is a regular series of endownments 8 recorded in epi- 
graphs of the Cola and Tondai countries for the recitation of 
these hymns in temples, to the accompaniment of musical 



638 


RELIGION 


instruments. The mention of a Devdranayakam, Superin- 
tendent of Devaram, in the reign of Rajendra I, implies that 
there was a regular state department controlling this work 
and securing its proper performance; it is not clear if the 
sphere of its activity was limited to Tan j ore or extended to 
other places. 83 In Nallur in South Arcot, provision was made 
in the reign of Kulottunga III for the singing of Tiruccdlal 
and Tiruvembavai of Manikka-vasagar and for s&kkai-kuttu 
on special occasions in the temple of Nalla-nayanar; Tiruvem- 
bdvai was divided into mudal-, iranddm-p&ttu, and kadaik- 
kappa, and the right to sing each sold to different devaradi- 
yar. 8b In another temple, Ulaganatha of Ulaganallur (S. 
Arcot) , the assignment of dance and song to separate dancing 
girls on separate days of the festival is recorded in another 
inscription. 80 

The history of Vaisnava hymnology in the period was 
quite similar. Tradition confers upon Natha- 
Csm.on^ aVa muni the honour of having done for Vaisnava 

lyrics what Nambi Andar Nambi achieved 
for the Saiva ones. If Srlnatha who seems to be mentioned 
in the Anbil plates 9 may be taken to be the same as the 
Vaisnava Saint Nathamuni, his age would be the end of the 
ninth and the beginning of the tenth centuries A.D., and this 
accords well with the other testimony we have, meagre as 
it is, on the subject. However that may be, the contents of 
the Anbil plates, the strong Vaisnavism of the family of Ani- 
ruddha, the minister of Parantaka II, the life of his father 
whose glory was his learning and the number of his disciples, 
the attachment of his mother and grand-father to God Ranga- 
natha, the liberal support extended by his great grand-father 
Ananta to the poor and the indigent — these furnish a clear 
idea of the part played by Vaisnavism in the social and reli- 
gious life of the time. And the age of Nathamuni’s ministry 
cannot lie far from it, as he was the first of the great succes- 
sion of Acaryas who carried forward and completed the work 
started by the Alvars of an earlier time. 10 The story is that 
Nathamuni once heard some visitors to his place from Kuru- 
gur recite a hymn of ten verses from the Tiruvdymoli, the 
1000 hymns composed by Sathakopa, also called Nammalvar. 
Captivated by the melody of the hymn and noticing from its 
last verse that it comprised only ten out of a thousand verses 



NATHAMUNI 


composed by Nammalvar, Nathamuni undertook a journey to 
Kurugur, the birth-place of Nammalvar, in the hope of dis- 
covering the whole collection there. At Kurugur, after wor- 
shipping Visnu, Nathamuni resorted to the foot of the sacred 
tamarind tree in his desire to meet the Alvar; great was his 
grief and disappointment when he found his yogic powers 
unequal to the task of invoking a vision of Sathakopa. He then 
adopted the plan of reciting 12,000 times the hymn of Mad- 
hurakavi on Sathakopa, his guru; pleased by this, both Satha- 
kopa and Madhurakavi appeared before Nathamuni and im- 
parted to him the knowledge of the four Prabandhas 11 with 
their full import. Thereafter Nathamuni stayed in Kurugur 
meditating upon the Prabandhas until he was summoned by 
Viranarayana Krsna, the god of his native place, to go back 
to Viranarayanapuram, where he collected a band of disciples 
round himself and made them sing these hymns to divine 
tunes. 1 * 

It were cruel and futile to dissect such fanciful tales with 
the weapons of historical criticism. In its integrity, this story 
is typical of the Indian way of keeping fresh the memory of 
great men and their deeds. It justifies the inference that the 
Vaisnava canon was arranged and its musical modes settled 
by the first great Acarya of the second great division in the 
history of Vaisnavism in South India, the one that falls bet- 
ween the age of the hymns and that of the great commentators 
that followed long after Ramanuja. 13 The mention of Tiru- 
Vaymolidevar in an inscription at Ukkal in Rajaraja’s reign, 
and of the recitation of Tiruppadiyam in Visnu temples is 
enough to show the parallelism in practice between Saivism 
and Vaisnavism in this respect. Two inscriptions of the reign 
of Rajendra I from Uttaramerur provide for the distribution 
of the food offered to the deity among Sri-Vaisnavas reciting 
Tiruppadiyam during worship, 14 and create an endowment of 
land for the maintenance of three persons who were to recite 
Tiruvaymdli regularly in the temple. 15 The recitation of Tiru- 
vaymoli during tiruppalli-yelucci in the Srirangam temple is 
provided for in a record of a.d. 1085. 16 The fact that the hymn 
of Kulasekhara-alvar beginning tettarundiral was recited 
before the deity during three nights in the course of a festival 
in Srirangam is mentioned in an inscription of a.d. 1088 17 . 
The recitation of Tiruvaymoli during the festivals in the 



640 


RELIGION 


months of Arpisi (October-November) and Vaigasi (May- 
June) at Tirukkoyilur is provided for in an inscription of the 
eighth year of Rajadhiraja II, a.d. 1171 18 A choir of fifty- 
eight Brahmins reciting Tirumoii in Kanci is mentioned in 
a.d. 1242. 19 An inscription from Tirukkoyilur, of uncertain 
date, records an endowment for the recitation of Tirunedun~ 
dandagam in the local Visnu temple. 20 Lastly, an inscription 
perhaps of Kulottunga III, mentions the creation at Kahcl- 
puram of a bh&sya-vrtti for the Ramanuja-bhasya being regu- 
larly expounded by a competent person. 21 And these ins- 
tances are by no means exhaustive. 

One curious instance of a contemporary composition of a 
tiruppadiyam beginning Kolanar-kidal in praise of Visnu at 
Tirumalpuram is recorded in an inscription of a.d. 99S; 22 such 
imitations of the canonical hymns seem however to have been 
quite rare, and unlike the later S>aiva compositions, have 
found no place in canonical literature. 

It may be noted that the recitation in the temples of the 

r> •. , , , T , sacred hymns in Tamil emphasises the rank 
assigned to them by the side of the Sanskritic 
Vedas, both by the Saivas and the Vaisnavas. That the Vedas 
were chanted day by day in the temples at the time of wor- 
ship by Brahmins specially appointed for the purpose becomes 
clear not only from the practice obtaining even now in the 
larger temples, but from a number of contemporary inscrip- 
tions of the Cola period. 23 Of such records one or two may 
be noted as being of special interest. In the fourteenth year 
of a Rajakesari, 24 an endowment was created in Pandaravadai 
for awarding a prize once a year in a recitation contest to be 
held on the night of the Ardra festival, the competitors being 
required to recite a prescribed portion of Jaimimya Sama 
Veda. On the occasion of festivals, more men were employed 
to recite Vedas before the deity than on ordinary days, and 
such occasional services were also often endowed. 25 Other 
instances of recitations, more popular in character and intend- 

, , , ed for the instruction and edification of 

and other works. , . . 

devotees are mentioned m the inscriptions; 

such are the Snjmrdna of Aludaiyanambi and the Siva- 
dharma, 26 and the Somu-siddhanta. The nature of these works 
is by no means clear at present, though the last appears, from 



THE TEMPLE MOVEMENT 641 

a reference to it in the Prabodhacandrddaya, to have pro- 
pounded the doctrine of the Kapalika school of Saivism. 27 

Besides the collection and conservation of sacred litera- 
ture, the new life in religion manifested it- 
Temples. self in the erection of stone temples, great 

and small, in all the holy places hallowed by association with 
the lives of the alydrs and ndyanars of the earlier age. As a 
religious institution, the South Indian Temple reaches back 
to a remote antiquity, and the existence of numerous temples 
( kottams ) of Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jain deities is fully 
attested by the Sangam literature. The early temples were 
structures of brick and mortar, or, under the Pallavas, carved 
out of solid blocks of granite, rock-cut ‘cave temples.’ 28 The 
art of erecting structural temples of stone was not unknown, 
and the Kailasanatha temple at Kancipuram and the shore 
temple at Mahabalipuram show the rapid advance in archi- 
tectural achievement in the two centuries after Mahendra- 
varman, the Vicitra-citta who marvelled at his own feat in 
having brought into existence a temple without metal, timber 
or brick. 29 That stone temples were, however, still rare in 
the Cola country in the ninth and tenth centuries, and that 
the kings of the Vijayalaya line led the way in multiplying 
their number is fully borne out by contemporary inscriptions. 
The Anbil plates state that the chief glory of the rule of 
Aditya I was that he covered the banks of the Kaveri, along 
its whole course from the mountain to the sea, with a number 
of lofty and impregnable temples built of stone and dedicated 
to Siva. The inscriptions of the reign of Parantaka I show 
that Aditya’s work was continued by his successor who is 
reputed to have covered with gold the roof of the Cidambaram 
temple. Besides the kings, some of their relatives and officials 
stand out prominent among the leaders in this widespread 
movement. Tirukkarrali-piccan (Piccan of the sacred stone 
temple) of whom there is still a sculpture in Tiruvaduturai 30 
was one of them and he was in the service of Parantaka I. 
Even the Rastrakuta invader, Krsna III, erected several 
temples in the land newly conquered by him, one of them 
being the Kalapriya at Kaveripakkam. 31 Sembiyan-mahadevi. 
the queen of Gandaraditya and mother of Uttama Cola, was 
widowed early in life and lived on for many years thereafter. 
Hers was a life of religious devotion, and possibly the crime 



642 


RELIGION 


by which her son cleared his way to the throne added poig- 
nancy to her piety. In any case, she used all her great infl- 
uence and resources throughout her son’s reign and far into 
that of his successor Rajaraja I for the construction and the 
very liberal endowment of an unusually large number of 
temples. 32 The village Sembiyan-mahadevi was altogether her 
foundation and the stone temple dedicated to Candramaulis- 
vara at Tiruvakkarai in South Arcot, built about a.d. 1001, 
was among the latest foundations of her life. Either as reno- 
vating old structures or founding new ones, or, more rarely, 
as commemorative monuments of a sepulchral character, the 
construction of stone temples continued throughout the Cola 
period and, in fact, has gone on till our own times. The most 
conspicuous monuments of the early eleventh century, and 
in some ways the finest of all South Indian temples, were 
those of Tanjore and of Gangaikonda-colpuram. 

The Tanjore inscriptions of the reign of Rajaraja fur- 
nish an unusually full view of the state of 
3afvism° f Saivism at the time. The hagiology that, 

more than a century later, found its classic 
poet in Sekkilar, was already quite popular; and some of it 
found representation in the iconography of the time, though 
with some differences in detail from the later version. 33 . And 
South Indian Saivism appears to have had a live contact with 
Saivism in the rest of India, as may be seen from Rajendra I 
providing for the annual supply of a large quantity of grain 
as acaryabhoga to Udaiyar Sarva Siva Papdita, who was per- 
forming the worship in the Tanjore temple, and his pupils, 
and their pupils, whether they lived in the Aryadesa, Madhya- 
desa or Gaudadesa. 34 Inscriptions of the reign of Kulottunga 
III give evidence of the existence of this connection between 
Northern India and the South in late Cola times as well. A 
certain Omkaradeva Iravalar gave some money in 1214 as 
provision for tiruppavitram to the deity at Tiruppasur (Chin- 
gleput district) ; the donor is described as a disciple of Jnana- 
siva Iravalar of the Santana of Laksadhyaya Iravalar of the 
Kolla-matha at Varanasi (Benares) 35 Another Iravalan of 
the Bhiksamatha of Varanasi is mentioned in an inscription 
at Pandanallur (Tanjore district) dated three years later. 36 
A tradition is preserved in some stray verses quoted by 
Anantasambhu (in his gloss on the Siddhantasdravali of Tri- 



URBANE HINDUISM 


643 


locanasiva) , 37 that Rajendra I imported Saivas from the banks 
of the Ganges and established them in various places in the 
Cola country; this tradition also points to the same fact that 
there was a live contact between Saiva institutions in the 
different parts of India. 

Speaking generally, the religious temper of the period, 
particularly in the first half of it, was by no 
^Toleration; ^ means n a rrow or sectarian. Not only did the 
kings as a rule tolerate religions and sects 
other than their own, but they often patronised all persua- 
sions in equal measure. ^ progressive king like Rajaraja even 
made it a point to give clear expression to his general attitude 
to religion by including in the decoration of the Great Siva 
Temple of Tanjore themes from Vaisnavism and even Budd- 
hism. His sister Kundavai built three temples, one to Visnu, 
another to Siva and a third to Jina, all in the same place, 
Rajarajapuram, now called Dadapuram, and her gifts to all j 
these shrines are found recorded in the same inscription^/ 
The list of jewels includes several namams, the Vaisnava 
caste-mark, made of gold. There were several temples which 
contained shrines both of Siva and of Visnu side by side, the 
most conspicuous instance being that of Cidambaramj The 
position of the icons of Nataraja and Govindaraja in this 
temple is brought out with great precision in the verse in the 
Tirukkovaiy&r which depicts Visnu as lying in front of 
Nataraja, absorbed in the contemplation of the foot lifted in 
his dance and supplicating him for a view of the other foot 
as well . 39 In the precincts of the temple of Candramaulisvara, 
at Tiruvakkarai, which was rebuilt of stone by Sembiyan- 
mahadevi, was a shrine of Varadaraja-perumal, originally built 
of bricks by Koccola and reconstructed in stone in the short 
reign of Adhirajendra . 40 If this is a reference to Senganan, 
the legendary Cola king whom Tirumangai calls by that 
name , 41 nothing can be more significant than this epigraphical 
reference to his construction of a Visnu temple by the side of 
Tirumangai celebrating him for the foundation of seventy 
beautiful palaces to the eight-armed Isa. Hinduism was still 
an attitude to life as a whole, which had not lost itself in an 
arid desert of sectarian rivalries. 



RELIGION 


It should hardly cause any surprise that there were occa- 
sions in which intolerance of a rival sect got 
Some exceptions. t ^ e U p per h an( j For even when the various 
creeds lived in mutual good-will and enjoyed equal patronage 
from the princes and nobles of the land, each sect lived its 
own separate and exclusive life, and nothing in the history 
of Indian society is more remarkable than its fatal capacity to 
combine intellectual tolerance with social exclusiveness. But 
social exclusiveness is bound, some time or other, to produce 
its natural result of indifference to the welfare of other groups 
than one’s own, and when doctrinal differences become acute, 
this indifference very soon develops into active hostility. The 
leading instance of religious intolerance in the period of Cola 
rule is that of the persecution of Ramanuja and his followers 
by a Cola monarch whose identity is not altogether free from 
doubt. We have seen reason to believe that this persecution 
led to a popular revolt in which Adhirajendra, the last ruler 
in the male line descending from Vijayalaya, lost his life. If 
this is a correct view of the course of events, two inferences 
may be drawn. First, that far from being part of a definite 
policy of the Cola monarchy to root out Vaisnavism, the per- 
secution of Ramanuja was only the freak of an individual 
ruler. Secondly, that the general atmosphere was so un- 
favourable to a narrow religious policy, that the monarch 
who attempted it lost his life in a popular revolt and has ever 
since been universally abhorred as the krmi kantha (the 
putrid neck). No persecution has ever failed to turn out 
ultimately to the profit of the persecuted faith, and there is 
no doubt that the creed of Ramanuja, already well established 
in the land by the ministrations of a long line of alvdrs and 
acaryas, drew fresh strength from the foolish and short-lived 
attempt to crush it out of existence. The fact remains, how- 
ever, that from this period, the Saivas and the Vaisnavas of 
South India became strangers to that friendly feeling which 
subsisted between them in an earlier age when they waged 
a common war against the Bauddhas and the Jainas. 

Another spasmodic outburst of anti-Vaisnava feeling is 
much better attested than the persecution of Ramanuja, 
which is so overgrown with legend that the real course of 
events seems to be lost beyond recovery. We refer to the 
deeds of Kulottunga II in Cidambaram which are, as we have 



AN ECLECTIC CITY 


645 


seen, clearly attested by contemporary inscriptions and litera- 
ture. That Kulottunga II was a fanatic Saiva who wanted 
to upset the time-honoured disposition of the images of Siva 
and Visnu in the great temple of the holiest centre of South 
Indian Saivism cannot be gainsaid. The balance of the two 
faiths, thus rudely upset by Kulottunga, was redressed in 
later days by the Vijayanagar rulers, but once again, the 
old harmony has gone, and the attitude of the two groups of 
devotees that have to jostle in the premises of the temple is 
hardly as friendly as the relative positions of the deities they 
worship would seem to require. 

A measure of the increasing social exclusiveness of the 
different sects is found in a casual decision, dated a.d. 1160, 
of the Mahasabha of Tirukkadaiyur. 42 The sabha resolved 
that any tmhesvaras who, contrary to their tenets as custo- 
dians of the Siva temple and its observances, mixed freely 
with Vaisnavas, would forfeit their property to the temple. 
This is almost the only recorded instance of this kind; even 
so, its significance is unmistakable. It is, no doubt, typical 
of the new religious atmosphere of steady deterioration that 
was setting in. 

The unique position of Kanclpuram, one of the capital 
cities of the Cola empire, is very instruc- 
iWI1C1 ' tive in regard to the mutual relations of the 

rival religious systems which were competing for royal 
patronage and popular favour. This city is seen to have com- 
prised three principal sections, each consecrated to a parti- 
cular faith and the institutions ministering to it. The biggest 
of them all is devoted to Siva, then comes what is often called 
Little Kanclpuram sacred to Visnu in the form of Hasti-giri- 
alvar or Arulala Perumal, and lastly we have Jina-kanci, 
popularly known as Tirupparuttikkunru, undoubtedly larger 
and more prosperous and in more direct and frequent com- 
munication with Kanclpuram proper in the days of the Cola 
empire than at the present day. Let us also recall that many 
vestiges of what must once have been a considerable Bud- 
dhist colony have been found at Kanclpuram. We see in the 
plan of the different parts of this great and ancient city and 
their mutual relations much that is suggestive of the history 
of religious beliefs and practices at their best in South India. 



RELIGION 


The impression of the tolerance and eclecticism that gene- 
rally characterised the religious outlook of 
The pantheon. ^ t j me strengthened by a study of the 
pantheon which included an assortment of all conceivable 
deities to whom worship was offered throughout the country. 
Besides images of 6iva in his various aspects 43 like Kiratar- 
junlya, Bhiksatana, Kalyanasundara, Pancadeha, Lingapura- 
nadeva, Umasahita, Nataraja, Daksinamurti, Sri Kantha and 
so on, the icons presented to the great temple of Tanjore by 
its royal patrons included images of Ganapati, Subrahmanya, 
Maha Visnu and Surya. 44 There were also images of Saiva 
saints receiving regular worship among them like Candes- 
vara, the three authors of the Demram , Meypporul-nayanar, 
Siruttondar, Siralar 45 and others. Among goddesses are men- 
tioned Kala-pidari, Durga-Paramesvari and Emalattu Dur- 
gaiyar Omkarasundari. 46 The Tanjore inscriptions mention 
incidentally other minor deities worshipped in several out- 
lying villages; these village deities comprised many forms of 
Pidari, 6ettaiyar (Jyestha) 47 and others, whose shrines are 
called tirumurrarrv as distinguished from the Sri Kdyil of 
the higher pantheon. The seven Mothers 48 are mentioned in 
other inscriptions, as also Krsna 49 Rama, Sita and Laksma- 
na, 50 and Hanuman. 51 Tiruvorriyur offered worship to all the 
sixty-three Saiva saints, 52 and Kalahasti kept the memory of 
a local legend fresh in the name of a garden called after Kan- 
nappar. 53 Ennayiram, a strong centre of Vaisnavism, allotted 
shares from the lands of the village to the shrines of 5§ri- 
Mulasthanam-udaiyar, Sarasvati, Srlbhataraki, Mahamodi, 
Suryadeva, Saptamatargal, Mahasasta, Durga, Jyestha and 
the gods of the Seris. 54 To complete the picture of practical 
popular religion it may be added that pilgrimages to specially 
sacred places were known and the charity of some took the 
form of providing amenities for the pilgrims en route to 
and from Tirumalai (Tirupati) 55 The regular sacrifice of 
a goat on every Tuesday to Mundesvari by the Kurava women 
of the nddu is recorded in a Mysore inscription of the time 
of Rajendra I. 56 

There is thus not a single element of popular Hinduism 
as we know it now that is not represented in 
Neo-Hinduism. t ^ e re Jigi ous practice of the tenth and 
eleventh centuries. Foreign students of the religious history 



SPIRITUAL VALUES 


647 


of India have often been puzzled and sometimes irritated by 
the utter recklessness with which Hinduism appears to sanc- 
tion and absorb within itself the basest superstitions and devil 
worship as well as the noblest and purest forms of worship 
and meditation . 57 But in religion, as in other matters, the 
aim was to attain, not equality, but harmony; to evolve a 
system in which each person and class would find a proper 
place, a foothold from which the next step might be taken. 
The doctrines of karma and rebirth were parts of the living 
faith of the whole people, and the inclusion, within the com- 
mon fold, of the more primitive manifestations of the religious 
impulse was but the result of a metaphysic which saw in 
the lowliest human being, in fact, in any living creature, a 
spark of divinity enveloped in the accidents of its own past 
and working out its way back to its pristine purity. The 
honoured place held by many ndyandrs and alvdrs who were 
not of the priestly class by birth, and the story of the pariah 
saint Nandan show that the standard of spiritual values was 
by no means lowered by the admission of primitive faiths 
into the ante-chamber of Hinduism. The aim was ever to 
purify and sublimate the religious impulse, though it is pro- 
bable that, in the attempt to raise the lower forms, the higher 
ones did not themselves altogether escape damage. 

The life of the ascetic strongly appealed to the imagina- 
tion of the people, and one of the common 
forms of religious charity was to provide 
for the feeding, regular or occasional, of ascetics in temples 
and mathas. Vaisnavism was on the whole moderate in its 
devotion to the ascetic ideal, and did not give rise to the 
bizarre manifestations of it associated with Saivism. The 
Vaisnava endowments generally provided for the feeding of 
Sri-Vaisnavas and tadar ( dasas ), 5S or of Brahmins who had a 
perfect mastery of the Veda . 59 And the degenerate Vaisna- 
vism of the Radha cult was as yet unknown and had appa- 
rently no great vogue in the South at any time. Examples of 
Vaisnava mathas like the Kundavai matha at Uttaramerur 60 
can be gathered from inscriptions. Saivism was at this period 
in marked contrast with the Advaitism of Sankara, Smarta 
Hinduism as it may be called, and embraced a whole gamut 
of sectional groups ranging from the comparatively mild 
Sivayogins to the extremely fanatical and repulsive groups 



648 


RELIGION 


like the Pasupatas, the Kapalikas, and the Kalamukhas. The 
Sivayogin, as his name implies, spent his life meditating upon 
Siva and seeking release from the bonds of mundane life by 
such meditation; at the approach of death, he is said to bathe 
his body in ashes, utter certain Saiva mantras and worship 
the linga on his chest. Many are the inscriptions recording 
endowments for Sivayogins being fed in temples and mathas. 61 
The Kalamukhas, also called Mahavratins, were perhaps the 
most extreme sect among these, and do not seem to have been 
very different from the Kapalikas. ‘The Kalamukhas hold 
that the following are the means for the attainment of desires 
concerning this world and the next: — (1) eating food in 
skull; (2) besmearing the body with the ashes of a dead body; 
(3) eating the ashes; (4) holding a club; (5) keeping a pot 
of wine; (6) worshipping the god as seated therein.’ 62 From 
these practices, they were known as Mahavratins, ‘men with 
the great vows’; they roused the disgust of a humane re- 
former like Ramanuja. They appear even to have practised 
human sacrifices. 63 The Kalamukhas were widespread in 
South India in the ninth, tenth and eleventh centuries. They 
did not lack support from the princes and the people. The 
Kodumbalur chieftain Vikramakesari, the contemporary of 
Parantaka II, constructed the three temples ( vimdna-trayam ) 
known as Muvarkovil, and then he presented a big matha 
( brhan-matham ) to the glorious Mallikarjuna of the Atreya 
gotra, a man from Madhura, versed in the Veda and the sisya 
of Vidyarasi and Taporasi; to that chief ascetic of the Kala- 
mukhadana, his guru, the Yadava (Vikramakesari) also gave 
eleven gramas attached to the matha for the regular feeding 
of fifty Asita-vaktra ascetics. 64 Earlier than the date of this 
record from Pudukkottah, is one from Vedal (North Arcot) 
which mentions the Kalamukha Dasapuriyan of the Harlta 
gotra and the Apastamba sutra 65 At Melpadi, in the same 
part of the country, there was a matha of the Kalamukhas 
of which the head was called Lakulisvara-Pandita. 66 There 
was another at Tiruvorriyur presided over by Caturanana 
Pandita. 67 In the reign of VIrarajendra, an inscription from 
Jambai (South Arcot) mentions a Mahavratin Lakulisvara 
Pandita among the authorities of the local temple. A Kala- 
mukha Gomadattu Arulala Bhattan sold some land to the 
temple at Koyil Tevarayanpettai (Tanjore district) in a.d. 



A KALAMUKHA ASCETIC 


649 


1123. 68 Other Kalamukhas of the same spiritual lineage, 
bearing the names Sailarasi and Jnanarasi, are mentioned as 
endowing lamps or taking charge of such endowments in the 
temple of Tiruvanaikkoyil (Chingleput) in the years 1127, 
1205 and 1231. 69 All these instances point to the extent and 
continuity of the influence of the Kalamukhas on South Indian 
Saivism under the Colas. It may be doubted, however, if 
the members of the sects who were connected with the 
temples and perhaps conducted worship in them, actively 
practised the tenets attributed to them. In the absence of 
contemporary literary evidence on such questions, we lack 
the means of determining this satisfactorily. 

The career of one of the Caturanana Panditas 70 of the 
Tiruvorriyur matha is rather fully described 
PaB<jS> tUranana 711 311 “ascription of the time of Kannara- 
deva, and deserves to be noticed in some de- 
tail as affording an interesting and authentic instance of the 
kind of motives that sent people into a life of ascetic renuncia- 
tion. Born of a family of local chieftains in Kerala, Valabha 
who resembled Guha and was possessed of many great quali- 
ties, mastered all the arts and sciences in his boyhood and, 
in the prime of life, bent on service to the world, he reached 
the Cola country and came to be closely associated with king 
Rajaditya as his samanta and affectionate friend. 71 As, owing 
to other pre-occupations he did not have the pleasure of 
fighting and dying along with his friend on the. battle-field, 
he smarted that his life was not in keeping with, his birth and 
connections, and became indifferent to the things of the world. 
Then he bathed in. the Ganges, and turned ascetic at Tiru- 
vorriyur, obtaining his vratas from Niranjana guru and be- 
coming a Mahavratin, Caturanana by name, and head of the 
local matha. The inscription which gives this account .is 
dated in the twentieth year of ‘Kannaradeva who took Kacci 
and Tanjai’ about a.d. 960, when he had made himself master 
of the northern districts of the Cola kingdom as a result of 
his invasion. 

The ascetics owned no property themselves; but their 
organisations, the monasteries ( mathas ) , often owned vast 
estates devoted to their maintenance and the encouragement 
of learning and the arts. What proportion of the population 
C. 82 



650 


RELIGION 


led such a life of pious, if not uneasy, poverty, and whether 
it was a larger one than at present, it is of course difficult to 
determine. The times were quite favourable to the ascetic 
ideal, and all religious systems in the country applauded it. 
Asceticism was twice blessed; he who turned ascetic and he 
who did not do so, but remained householder, alike gained 
by it. Both accumulated religious merit, for the householder 
was assured of a good berth in the other world as much for 
his gifts ( ddna ), as the ascetic for his renunciation and aus- 
terity. There was no doubt many a pious fraud masquerad- 
ing under the garb of asceticism that often afforded the oc- 
casion for a good joke among the populace whose common 
sense was seldom slow in detecting such cases. But the 
modern attitude which, in the name of economics, counts 
each man a hand, and looks upon a mendicant as an idle hand, 
was altogether unknown. And in spite of its excesses and 
aberrations, the ascetic ideal has done great good to the 
people by stressing the higher values of the spirit, and by 
giving them a ready-made philosophy with which to face the 
hard realities of life. It is still cherished by the masses of 
the people, in the villages, though not so much in the cities. 

The history of the matlias and guhais 72 of the period can- 
not be pursued in any detail here. Their 
and origin is anterior to the reign of Rajaraja I 73 
and their number and influence steadily in- 
creased during the period of Cola rule in South India. 
Stalling from important centres where one or more tnathas 
were established in the first instance, the movement spread 
all over the land until almost every temple came to possess 
one or more mathas functioning in close proximity to it. They 
grouped themselves from the beginning round a few pro- 
minent centres and in course of time, a limited number of 
santanas, spiritual groups attached to particular successions 
of gurus , came to be distinguished; examples of such santanas 
are the laksddhyaya santana of the matha of Patanjali-devar 
situated at Melaicceri of Perumbarrappuliyur (Cidambaram) 
which controlled an dcdryasthana at Kllaikattu (Kllaiyur, 
Negapatam tq., Tanjore dt.) , besides the Kollamatha at 
Varanasi and Naduvil-matha at Tir u vanaikka val ; 73a that of 
the mudaliydrs of Tiruccattimurram 74 and the mdligai-madat- 
tu mudaliyar santanam of Tiruviqlaimarudil . 75 Many of these 



MATHAS, SAIVA AND OTHER 65] 

groups were confined to the Tamil country in the range of 
their activity; these were the Tamil Saiva mathas proper. 
Others, however, kept up wider contacts and prided them- 
selves on their connection with Aryadesam, Benares, or even 
Kashmir; the Golaki matha had also a considerable following 
in the South. Epigraphy and tradition alike point to a fairly 
large immigration of Bhattas from Northern India to impor- 
tant religious centres in the South, particularly to Srirangam; 
immigrants from Kasmiradesam are specially mentioned 
in Srlrangam besides other places in Chingleput and Ramnad 
districts. 753 Generally, the mathas which maintained these 
external contacts belonged to the various schools of Pasupa- 
tas, Kapalikas and so on. There must have been monastic 
institutions of other types maintained by Saiva Brahmins 
and Vaisnavas, though of these we learn relatively little from 
the inscriptions. 

One instance of a matha in which provision was made for 
the convenience of pilgrims deserves special mention. A 
record from Gdvindaputtur dated a.d. 1248, 76 mentions that 
Subrahmanya Siva of Cidambaram (Vyaghrapuii) , a grand- 
son of a certain well known Kandhabharana, purchased land 
from several persons and created an endowment for certain 
specific services to be undertaken by the Tiruttondattogaiyan- 
tiru-madam situated in the temple of Tiruvisaiyamangai at 
Govindaputtur. Among the services to be undertaken with 
the proceeds of the land were the supply of salt and castor 
oil to pilgrims, and medical help for those among the disciples 
who fell ill and had no one to look after them. It is also of 
interest to note that Subrahmanya Siva, evidently also the 
head of the matha, laid it down that his successors duly ap- 
pointed by him for the administration of the matha at the 
end of his life were to carry on this arrangement, and in case 
he died without choosing his successor, he was to be chosen 
by the head of another matha at Cidambaram (also called 
Tiruttondattogaiyan-tirumadam) and that the new head so 
chosen was to carry on the arrangements under that parti- 
cular endowment. It is possible that similar provisions for 
general amenities, besides feeding and teaching, commonly 
undertaken by these institutions, obtained elsewhere; but we 
have no definite knowledge of them. It has been pointed out 
that sometimes even animals were attended to in similar in- 



652 RELIGION 

stitutions, and an instance from the Travancore country has 
been cited. 77 

Before leaving the mathas, attention must be drawn to a 
popular riot described in a record of the 
A kalaham. second year of Rajaraja IIF 8 as guhai-idi- 
kalaham, a revolt in which monasteries were demolished. 
This occurred in the twenty-second regnal year of Kulot- 
tunga III, a.d. 1200, and in it, the property belonging to a 
guhai in Tirutturaipundi suffered badly. The causes of this 
demonstration are not stated and we cannot even say whether 
it was directed against this particular guhai or guhais in 
general; on the latter assumption, it is indeed very strange 
that we hear nothing more of it than this casual reference to 
it. 79 

In the long period of Cola rule the Hindu temple attain- 
ed the zenith of its influence on the social 
temple^ ° f the fh e country. It ceased to be a small 

structure of brick and mortar providing a 
centre of simple worship attended by the villagers. The new 
idea of the stone temple found room for the employment of 
much skill and taste in its planning and decoration. With 
its rise, there came up also a varied and complex routine in 
each temple sustained by the rich accumulations in land and 
gold, the result of pious gifts, offered with a generosity and 
administered with a care to which we have long become 
strangers. Each generation husbanded with caution what 
was handed down to it, and by means of fresh additions, 
managed to leave a richer heritage to its successor. The 
vast and growing wealth of the temples brought them into 
more and more intimate business relations with the neigh- 
bourhood. And in Tanjore, there rose under Rajaraja’s eye, 
as under a magician’s wand, the marvellous Great Temple 
which surpassed everything effected elsewhere by genera- 
tions of effort. Not only did its stately plan ensure for it an 
abiding place as the masterpiece of South Indian Temple 
architecture, but the elaborate arrangements made for the 
management of the affairs of the temple and carefully record- 
ed in the inscriptions on its walls, summed up the best prac- 
tices of the time in this regard and set a model for the future. 
A deliberate desire to bring the temple into intimate touch 
with several aspects of the life of the people marks almost 



THE RICHES OF THE TANJORE TEMPLE 653 


every one of these arrangements. As the Great Temple 
adorned the capital city of the whole empire, and as it was 
the foundation of the greatest monarch of Southern India, 
the range of its contacts was naturally much wider than that 
of an average temple; but almost every temple, however 
small in size and restricted in influence, was a miniature of 
the Great Temple and had its counterpart of every feature of 
the larger institution. 

The Great Temple of Tanjore was easily the richest 
temple of the time. The king alone had by 
Temple 31-63 * the twenty-ninth year of his reign presented 

to it a vast amount of gold and treasure 
in the form of ornaments, jewels and vessels. Much of it was 
booty that fell to him as a result of his wars. The quantity 
of gold of which account has been preserved amounted to over 
41,500 kalanjus, or, taking a kalanju to be about 70 grains, 
well over 500 lbs. troy. The value of jewels presented was 
about 10,200 kdsus, equal to half as many kalanjus, in gold. 80 
Of silver he gave 50,650 kalanjus, over 600 lbs. troy. He set 
apart lands in several villages throughout his dominions, 
including Ceylon, yielding an annual income of 116,000 kalams 
of paddy, equal at the then prevailing prices 81 to 58,000 kdsus. 
besides a cash income of 1,100 kdsus. For the service of the 
temple, four hundred hetaerae were impressed from among 
those of the other temples in the country, and they were 
assigned each a pangu (share) comprising a house and one 
veli of land yielding a net revenue of 100 kalams of paddy 
a year. About 180 such shares were set apart further for the 
maintenance of as many as 212 men servants comprising danc- 
ing masters, musicians, drummers, tailors, goldsmiths, accoun- 
tants and so on. Among these were three persons to sing the 
Ariyam and four others the Tamil , apparently the two systems 
of music called ahamdrgam and desi elsewhere. 82 There was 
constituted also a choir of fifty persons for reciting the Tiru p- 
padiyam to the accompaniment of musical instruments; the 
choir had the power to fill vacancies by co-optation in case 
any of them died or migrated elsewhere leaving behind no 
relative suitable to take his place; the daily remuneration 
for each of them was fixed at three kurunis of paddy-corn. 83 
Rajaraja’s elder sister Kundavai presented to the temple gold 
of the weight of nearly 10,000 kalanjus and utensils of the 



654 


RELIGION 


value of 18,000 kasus. Others, queens and high officials and 
regiments of soldiers, made other gifts recorded with equal 
care and precision on the temple walls and pillars. All the 
cash endowments amounting to several thousands of kasus 
were loaned out to numerous village assemblies at rates of 
interest fixed in kind or money, and generally ranging about 
12 f V per annum. Camphor, cardamom-seeds, campak-buds 
and cuscus-roots, for instance, were provided for in this 
manner by means of cash endowments. 833 

In fact, the place of the Great Temple in the economy of 
the capital city and of the empire can hardly be exaggerated. 
Its construction must have extended over many years and 
furnished employment for the best architects and sculptors 
of the land during these years, besides a vast number of 
common labourers. The accurate and detailed descriptions of 
the numerous icons, some of them cast in the form of complex 
groups of figures in attitudes illustrating the favourite themes 
of legend, give the impression of a high state of efficiency 
attained in the art of casting metals and of a more or less 
constant and profitable employment for the skilled artisans ./ 
Whe account, equally minute and complete, of the ornaments 
and jewels with which the images were decked testifies to 
fhe superior excellence reached in the art of the goldsmith, 
and the extent to which it was promoted by a rich temple. 
And as a matter of course, every temple, great or small, held 
in relation to its neighbourhood exactly the same position 
that the Great Temple had in the capital. The difference was 
only one of degree. As landholder, employer, and consumer 
of goods and services, as bank, school and museum, as hospital 
and theatre, in short, as a nucleus which gathered round itself 
all that was best in the arts of civilised existence and regu- 
lated them with the humaneness born of the spirit of Dharma, 
the mediaeval Indian temple has few parallels in the annals of 
mankind. The examples of searching periodical inquests by 
the highest officers of the central government, sometimes by 
the king himself, into the management and affairs of the 
temples, that are recorded in the inscriptions, show that the 
Cola government realised the increasing social importance of 
the role of the temple and the need for the exercise of a 
steady and vigilant control on the business side of its 
affairs. 84 



JAIN FOUNDATIONS 


655 


By the side of Saivism and Vaisnavism and the other 
j . . forms taken by Hinduism to which attention 

■ has been drawn, Jainism had a fair follow- 

ing and enjoyed the patronage of the princes and people, 
though not to the same extent as the orthodox creeds. The 
pallic~candam», the land of the palli (Jaina temple) , was a 
recognised category of tax-free land known to the revenue 
accounts of the time. Tamil literature was greatly enriched 
by the writings of Jain authors, and legend avers that as late 
as the middle of the twelfth century Sekkilar was goaded into 
the composition of his magnificent ‘Lives of the Saints’ 
( Periya-purdnam ) by king Kulottunga II seeking literary 
enjoyment in the verses of the Sivaka-Sindamani, a secular 
kavyci in Tamil by a Jain author. Vestiges of Jainism have 
been discovered in the Travancore country which, though un- 
dated, may with some confidence be assigned to the period 
extending from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries. 85 And 
the Cola inscriptions contain noteworthy references to Jain 
centres in the Tamil districts. The Udayendiram plates of 
Hastimalla record that the Digambara Jains had an ancient 
pallic-candam comprising two pattis of land which were spe- 
cially excluded from the gift of the village of Kadaikkottur 
made in the reign of Parantaka I. 86 There was at Vedal (N. 
Arcot) a large Jain monastery in which some dispute arose 
between one nun and her five hundred pupils on the one 
part and four hundred nuns on the other, and was put an 
end to only by the lay Jains of the place taking under their 
protection one of the parties to the dispute. 87 This was about 
A.D. 885. At isuTamur in South Arcot an inscription of the 
seventeenth year of a Rajakesari records the provision of a 
lamp in the mandapa of the temple of Parsvanatha in which 
the scripture was expounded. 88 A certain Gangasurapperum- 
balli of Rajendrapuram finds mention in a record from Tirak- 
kol (N. Arcot) ; 80 and a Kanakasenabha^ara who had the palli 
is found at Sendalai in the twelfth year of a Parakesari. 90 At 
Anandamangalam in the Chingleput district, on a boulder 
which bears in a line the sculptures of three groups of Jaina 
figures, is found engraved a record which provides for the 
daily feeding of one adigal in the Jinagirip-palli. 91 This record 
is dated A.D. 945 in the reign of Parantaka I. In the same year, 
a pupil of Aidsfanernibhatara, of the big Jain settlement of 



656 


RELIGION 


Tiruppanmalai, Pattinik-kuratti-adigal by name, caused a well 
to be dug at Vilappakkam, and the well and a house were 
constituted into a nunnery, under the supervision of ‘the 
twenty-four' of the place. 92 In the seventeenth year of Raja- 
raja, two lamps were endowed by a land grant to the big 
monastery ( periya-palli ) in Tirunarungondai, a pallic-candam 
in South Arcot. 93 Tirumalai near Polur in North Arcot, and 
Tirumalavadi in the Trichinopoly district where Kundavai 
built a Jain temple were other great Jain centres of the time. 94 
At Tirupparuttikkunram, a suburb of Kanclpuram, there is a 
celebrated Jain shrine to this day. This place is often called 
Jina KancI, and its Rs i samudaya, congregation of monks, is 
said to have purchased some land about a.d. 1116, 95 and the 
same samudaya is just mentioned in another inscription of a 
slightly later date in the reign of Vikramacola. 96 An undated 
inscription of the reign of Kulottunga I records a gift of land 
to a perumballi (big Jain temple), called after the king’s 
name, at Kuhur, in the Tanjore district. 97 Two other pallis are 
mentioned in an inscription of a.d. 1194 from Maruttuvakku$i, 
Tanjore district. 98 The settlement at Jina-KancI is once more 
mentioned in a.d. 1199, when Kurukkal Candraklrtti and 
some others are said to have exerted themselves to secure the 
grant of a pallic-canda iraiyili for this important shrine. 983 

Facts like these raise a warning against a wholesale 
acceptance of the stories of the persecution and extirpation 
of Jainism and Buddhism, so freely retailed in the hagiology 
of the Hindu sects. 

Buddhism does not seem to figure as much in the epi- 
B ddh' graphy of the period as Jainism. The cele- 

brated Leyden grant indeed records the gift 
of a whole village to the Bauddha Vihara of Cudamani-Varma- 
deva in Negapatam, and this grant was supplemented by a 
fresh gift in the reign of Kulottunga I, on a representation 
made by the king of Kadaram through his ambassadors. And 
the Vaisnava legends have preserved a curious story of Tiru- 
mangai Alvar having despoiled the Bauddha Vihara of Nega- 
patam of a solid golden image of the Buddha in order to find 
the funds required for building the great Ranganatha temple 
at Srirangam; possibly this legend only means that at the 
time the lives of the Alvars were put together, in the twelfth 



VESTIGES OF BUDDHISM 


657 


century a.d., Negapatam was still a strong centre of Buddhism 
which attracted popular attention by its wealth and influence. 
Some relics of Buddhism have been traced in Kanclpuram 99 
and it is quite possible that Kanclpuram which was one of the 
great centres of Hinduism and Jainism also accommodated a 
Buddhist colony in these days. Sri Mulavasam in Malabar, 
on almost the same latitude as Negapatam on the opposite 
coast, was another well known centre of Buddhism whose 
influence was felt from very early times in places as far from 
it as Gandhara . 100 A more systematic search for Buddhist 
antiquities in Southern India than has yet been undertaken 
may reveal other centres of that religion not now known to 
us. Buddhist writers also contributed to the growth of Tamil 
Literature, though not to the same extent as Jains. All the 
same, epigraphy and literature alike produce the impression 
that in the tenth and eleventh centuries of the Christian era, 
Buddhism was less popular in the Tamil country than Jain- 
ism, and it seems probable that in the religious controversies 
of the preceding age, Buddhism suffered more damage and 
lost its hold on the people of the country more completely 
than Jainism. 

The picture of religious life in the country is thus a com- 
plex one. There was a perpetual stirring and 
harmony* mixing together of various creeds each infl- 

uencing the others and being influenced in 
turn. As a result of this long process of assimilation, the 
Buddhist vihara, the Jain palU, and the Hindu temple pre- 
sented many similarities in their worship, organisation and 
festivities in the midst of equally striking differences; and the 
ideals of asceticism and renunciation made a common appeal 
to all these religions alike. On the whole the religious dif- 
ferences of the time, such as they were, did not tend to pro- 
duce social discord, and a general attitude of mutual tole- 
rance, if not respect, seems to have been well sustained. 


1. Hinduism and Buddhism, p. ad. 

2. Canto xiv, 89-99. 

3. For an unconvincing attempt to treat this as history, see S. K. 
Aiyangar, Ancient India, pp. 413-4. M. Raghava Aiyangar, on the other 
hand, suggests that the- story is the result of a confusion between 

C. 83 



RELIGION 


Aludaiya Nambi, i.e., Sundaramurti, the real contemporary of Tiru- 
mangai, and Aludaiya Pillai (Sambandar). Alvargal Kdlanilai, p. 137 — 
a shrewd guess, but not more. More recently the same scholar has 
restated some of Dr. S. K. Aiyangar’s arguments and sought to establish 
the contemporaneity of the two hymnists; but his new argument rests 
on the unproven and improbable assumption that Nandivarman Palla- 
vamalla had the title Vairamegha. Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar 
Commemoration Volume , p. 210. 

4. See K. S. Srinivasa Pillai — Tamil Varala.ru, Part II, pp. 179 ff. 
Contra ARE. 1918, II, 34 which, strangely enough, makes Sekkilar, the 
author of Puranam on the Discovery of the Tirumurai. 

5. 8 of 1918. 

6. 373 of 1903 and 99 of 1929. 

7. SII. iii, p. 93, 11. 32-3. 

8. 129 of 1914; 349 of 1918; 358 of 1903; 199 of 1915, etc. The men- 
tion of Tiruvembavai in 12 of 1905, of Tiruccalal in 165 of 1906, and of 
Tiruvembavai and Tiruvadavurali-nayandr in 421 of 1912 is noteworthy. 

8a. 97 of 1932. See, however, Tamil Lexicon, s. v. Devaram. 

8b. 143-4, 149, and 160-1 of 1940-1, ARE, 1939/40-42/3, II, 41. 

8c. 176 of 1940-1. 

9. v. 46; also El. xv, p. 54. 

10. Nathamuni’s birth place is called Viranarayanapuram ; this 
recalls a surname of Parantaka I. 

11. i.e., the works of Sathakopa. 

12. Divyasuricaritra, xvi, 13-21. The same story is repeated with 
some natural embellishments, in the Guruparamparas. The main differ- 
ences introduced by the later account are: (a) the visitors to Vira- 
narayanapuram, from whose recitation of a hymn Nathamuni learned 
of the existence of the hymns, are stated to have come from the Western 
country, and not Kurugur. (b) At Kurugur, Nathamuni is told definitely 
by Parankusadasa, a pupil of Madhurakavi, that the Tiruvdymoli and 
other sacred literature had been lost for a long time, (c) All the 4,000 
hymns, not only the one thousand and odd of Sathakopa, are revealed 
to Nathamuni. 

13. R. G. Bhandarkar’s date, twelfth century A.D., for Kulasekhara 
Alvar (Vaisnavism, etc., pp. 49-50) is clearly wrong. A hymn of Kula- 
sekhara is specifically mentioned by its first words — tettarundiral—in an 
inscription of the year a.d. 1088. (SII. iii, p. 148). 

14. 181 of 1923. 

15. 176 of 1923. 

16. 61 of 1892. 

17. 62 of 1892. 

18. 343 of 1921. 

19. 557 of 1919. 

20. 126 of 1900, a record of Sola-Keraladeva. 

21. 493 of 1919. 

22. 333 of 1906. 



NOTES 


659 


23. 103 of 1926; 52 of 1928. 

24. 266 of 1923. 

25. SII. ii, 25 seems to me to record one such endowment. The 

phrase employed is tirup-parai-araiyavum; Hultzsch has taken this to 
mean: ‘to beat the sacred drum’. The fact that the act had to be per- 
formed by apurvis of the ghatika (See SII. iii, p. 233 n. 2) suggests 

the need for a better interpretation; parai means also ‘word’ and ‘arai’, 
‘speak’ or ‘recite’. I think it is the recitation of the Vedas, the Sacred 
Word, that is in question here. 

26. 403 of 1896, 214 of 1911 and 321 of 1917. 

27. ARE. 1912, II, 29. See also Tucci’s citations in JPASB. xxvi 
(1930), pp. 130-2. 

28. The Anaimalai (Madura) ‘Cave Temple’ to Narasimha is one 
of the few early Pan$ya temples known. El. viii pp. 317 ff. 

29. EL xvii, p. 14. 

30. 132 of 1925. 

31. El. iv, p. 281, and 382 of 1905. 

32. ARE. 1926, II, 22. 

33. SII. ii, Introduction, pp. 39-40. 

34. SII. ii, 20. See Gopinath Rao, Hindu Iconography, ii, Intr. 

35. Ill of 1930. 

36. 72 of 1931. 

37. JOR. vii, p. 200. 

38. 8 of 1919. G. Jouveau-Dubreuil has stated that the namam is 
not seen earlier than fifteenth century. (Archaeologxe du sud de V Inde., 
ii, p. 62). This inscription gives clear evidence of its use at least four 
centuries earlier. 

39. Verse 86. 

40. 205 of 1904. 

41. Periya-tiru-moli. VI, 6, 4. 

42. 257 of 1925. 

43. SII. ii, Intr., pp. 29-41. 

44. Ibid.; 606 of 1902; 177 of 1907; and 118 of 1914. 

45. Also 56 and 57 of 1913. 

46. 207 of 1919. 

47. Also 10 of 1898. 

48. 705 of 1909; 131 of 1892 (SII. iii, 66). 

49. 93 of 1925; 289 of 1897. 

50. 244 of 1910. 

51. 335 of 1906. 

52. 187 of 1912. 

53. 125 of 1922. 

54. 335 of 1917. Surya, seven mothers and Sasta are mentioned 
together in 131 of 1892. 

55. 430 of 1905; 255 of 1915. 

56. 484 of 1911. 

57. For an ingenious but perverse explanation of this feature, see 
Trevaskis — The Land of the Five Rivers, p. 57. 



RELIGION 


58. 333 of 1917. 

59. Vedam alagidaga valla Brahmanar. 343 of 1917. 

60. 184 of 1923. 

61. 467 of 1908; 577 of 1920; 227 of 1911; 101 of 1914; 241 of 1894, etc. 

62. Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 127. 

63. Gopinatha Rao, op. cit. 

64. Pd. no. 14. See also PK. pp. 116-7. 

65. 85 of 1908. 

66. 85 of 1889. 

67. 177, 181 of 1912, etc. 

68. 247 of 1923. 

69. 360, 357, 352 of 1911. 

70. Names like Lakullsvara and Caturanana are titles rather than 
personal names. Failure to grasp this fact firmly has led to some con- 
fused writing. Fleet made the mistake of supposing that the founder 
of Pasupata was the same as Lakulisa of the Melpadi inscriptions, 
(EL v. p. 288; contra Gopinatha Rao, op. cit., pp. 17 ff) , who is again 
identified with his namesake of Jambai (ARE. 1907, II, 39). The latter 
identification is not, like the former, a chronological impossibility; but 
it is improbable that the same man was in charge of important religious 
duties at Melpatfi and. Jambai about the same time. The Tiruvorriyur 
inscriptions leave no manner of doubt that Caturanana was the title of 
the head of the local matha borne by a succession of persons who held 
the office. 

71. 181 of 1912. ARE. 1913, H, 17. El. xxvii, p. 293. One wonders 
if this man was the same as Vellangumaran, the Kerala general of Raja- 
ditya, who built the Siva temple at Gramam (735 of 1905), and was the 
most prominent among the numberless Kerala servants of Rajaditya. 

72. ‘Guhai’ means, according to the old Tamil lexicon, the Pingalam, 
a place where ascetics reside ( munivar iruppidam), a monastery. Vide 
Tamil Lexicon s. v. Guhai. 

73. Contra ARE. 1909 II, 53. Tiruvaduturai (111 of 1925) and 
Tiruvorriyur (181 of 1912) are among the earliest places where mathas 
came up. See also ARE. 1911, II, 31 for a brief notice of some mathas. 

73a. 88 of 1946-7, ARE. p. 3. 

74. 392 of 1908. 

75. 49 of 1911. 

75a. 14 of 1936-7, ARE. II, 28. 

76. 192 of 1929. 

77. ARE. 1929, II, 39; TAR. 1920-21, p. 64. 

78. 471 of 1912. 

79. Contra ARE. 1913, II, 42. 

80. StI. ii, 38, paragraph 48. 

81. SII. ii, p. 68. 

82. 360 of 1907; 211 of 1912. 

83. SII. ii, 65. 

83a. A lamp of ghee and camphor to be maintained in the temple 
of Sauripperumal at Tirukkannapuram required, in a.d. 1129. an endow- 
ment of 20 kalanjus in gold. (509 of 1922). 



NOTES 


84. Details of such instances are cited in my paper on The Economy 
of a South Indian Temple in the Cola Period’ in the Malaviya Comme- 
moration Volume. 

85. TAS. ii, pp. 125 ff. 

86. SII. ii, 76, w. 27-8. 

87. SII. iii, 92. 

88. 201 of 1902. 

89. 277 of 1916. 

90. 7 of 1899. 

91. 430 of 1922. 

92. 53 of 1900. Possibly the 24 formed a local Jain assembly, the 
number being that of the Tirthankaras. 

93. 385 of 1902. 

94. SII. i, 67 and 68. Kundavai built another Jain temple at Dada- 
puram. (ante p. 643). 

95. 382 of 1929. 

96. 381 of 1929. 

97. 288 of 1917. 

98. 392 of 1907. 

98a. 43 of 1890. 

99. IA., 44, p. 127. 

100. TAS. ii, p. 117. 



Chapter XXVI 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


In literature, as in most other spheres, the age of the 
imperial Colas constitutes the most creative 
Intioductory. epoch Q f South Indian History. After the 
brilliant achievement of the Sang am age, in which the princes 
of the Cola lineage took a good part as patrons of poets and 
sometimes as authors, literature and arts pass under the pro- 
tection of the Pallavas and the Pandyas for a period of four 
or five centuries. During this period, Tamil and Sanskrit 
literatures were extensively cultivated; there was also some 
writing in Pali undertaken principally by the Buddhist divines 
of the period. The Devaram and the Tiruv&sagam, and the 
bulk of the ‘Four Thousand Sacred Hymns’ of the Tamil 
Vaisnava Canon belong undoubtedly to this period, as also 
the Pandikkovai, Sulamani, the Nandikkalambakam and the 
Bharatavenba of Perundevanar. In the domain of Sanskrit, 
the illustrious names of Kumarila and Sankara belong to the 
same age. 


With the rise of the Cola power, there ensues a broaden- 
ing of the channels of literature and a 
expansion!** ^ more co P ious flow of literary effort, the 
expression of a fresh energy released by the 
realisation, for the first time, of an imperial state in South 
India. The direct connection between the growth of the Cola 
empire, a new political fact, and the birth of the new litera- 


ture, becomes clear if we compare the highly ornate and poetic 
prasastis of the Cola inscriptions with the meagre and arid 
prose of the inscriptions of an earlier time. The difference is 
more noticeable in Tamil, the language of the people, than in 
Sanskrit, the language of learning. All the 
Inscriptions 6 m prasastis of the Cola kings from the time of 
Rajaraja I, with few exceptions, may be 
classed among the best specimens of the literature of the age; 
the stately diction, the easy flow of the verse, and the ani- 
mated narration of historical incidents mark them out as a 
class by themselves in the literature of Tamil. Besides the 



EPIGRAPHY AND LITERATURE 


663 


imperial prasastis, there are other instances of literature in 
inscriptions. The examples that suggest themselves most 
readily are the Cidambaram and Tiruvadi inscriptions which 
recount the career and achievements of Naralokavira, an 
official who served Kulottunga I and Vikramacola with great 
distinction; and the prasastis of the Kadjavas in the inscrip- 
tions found at Atti, Vayalur (Vailur) and Vrddhachalam. 
In these compositions the various metres are handled with 
great skill; the somewhat complex laws of Tamil prosody are 
observed with an easy grace which saves the author from the 
use of obscure words or the adoption of forced constructions; 
and as narrative poetry, these inscriptions share some of the 
best qualities of the imperial prasastis. There is not the 
slightest doubt therefore that these poems were the composi- 
tions of court-poets of a high order, and that the steady 
demand for their services furnished a great impetus to the 
cultivation of secular literature in this period. 

The names of some works have been preserved casually 
in the inscriptions; these works are al- 
Lost poems. together unknown otherwise; they were 
once considered worthy of public recognition, but having no 
access to the works themselves, we are not in a position to 
decide if the recognition was a homage to their literary excel- 
lence or was the result of other causes, local or personal. 
However that may be, the names of these works and the 
occasions for their being mentioned in inscriptions give us 
some idea of the extent of popular interest in literary produc- 
tions and of the types of literature that commanded popu- 
larity. Rajaraja I, perhaps the greatest emperor of the line, 
was the subject of two works, a drama and a Kavya. They 
are the Rajarajesvara-natakam and the Rdjaraja-viiayam ; 1 the 
former was to be enacted in the great Tanjore temple during 
festivals and the latter was to be read in the temple at Tirup- 
pundurutti, and endowments were created to provide for 
both. It is not certain if these works were in Tamil or San- 
skrit; it seems probable that the ndtakam was not a drama 
based on Rajaraja’s life, but rather a dramatic representation 
of the construction of the great temple itself, if it was not 
merely an attempt to popularise some Saiva legends. The 
Rdjaraja-vijayam might have been a quasi-historical poem 
treating of Rajaraja’s reign. In any case, both the works must 



664 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


have contained several allusions, if not accurate descriptions, 
of some of the most striking episodes in Rajaraja’s life, and 
the loss of these works is indeed much to be regretted. 
Kulottunga I was the subject of another work, Kulottunga- 
Cola-caritai, by Tirunarayana-bhatta, also called Kavi- 
kumuda-candra, a pandit from Manakulasanicceri in Tribhu- 
vani, and the poet was given as reward ( sarkdram ) land of 
the extent of half a nilam and two mas by the sabha of the 
village, the land being always assessable only at the rate pre- 
vailing for the twelfth grade. The award was made by the 
sabhd in accordance with an order from the king requiring 
them to adjudge the h&vya and reward the author suitably. 2 
Two inscriptions from Cuddalore, South Arcot, dated 1111 
and 1119, record gifts of tax-free land in recognition of a 
sthalapurana and a nataka (based on local legends) com- 
posed by a certain Kamalalaya Bhatta; the works were called 
Kannivana-puraiiam and PurrM-puliyur-nadagam , names which 
seem to imply that they were Tamil works of a popular cha- 
racter. 3 In endowing a lamp at Tiruvalangadu, North Arcot, 
in 1210 the donor, Aranilaivisakhan Trailokyamallan Vatsa- 
rajan of Arumbakkam, describes himself as a person who 
rendered the Bharata in elegant Tamil and discovered the 
path of Siva. 4 In 1146 a certain Marudattur-udaiyan states 
that he gave to the temple at Nangupatti some land which he 
had received from V edavanamudaiyan of Paiyyur whom he 
had celebrated in verse. 5 Two other instances occur in ins- 
criptions which, though doubtless of the Cola period, cannot 
be more precisely dated as the names of the kings in whose 
reigns the records were engraved are not given. When the 
king was witnessing a dance by Pungoyil-nayakat-talaikkSli 
in one of the pavilions in the temple at Tiruvarur, he was 
pleased to order the gift of some iraiyili land in the brahma- 
deya village Vayarrur to Pungoyil Nambi who had celebrated 
a feudatory of the king (nammakkal) , Vlrasola Anukkar, in 
a poem called Viranukkavijayam;* evidently the Nambi and 
the talaikkoli were ministering in the same shrine. Lastly, 
the officers of the treasury of the temple of Tiruvallam gave 
away 100 kulis from the temple lands to Varadayap-pulavar 
of Kuratti who had composed the Vallai-andadi, a poem in 
praise of the local deity. 68 These examples of forgotten poems 



KONGU-VELIR 


665 


mentioned in the inscriptions, and nowhere else, attest the 
existence of a fairly widespread literary activity of a popular 
character. When we add to this, the list of poems and other 
works fragments of which are preserved in the older com- 
mentaries and glosses, we may safely conclude that much 
excellent work has been lost beyond recovery. This is true 
to some extent of the ancient literature of any country; but 
with regard to South India, the impression is hard to resist 
that this loss has been very considerable and that, with some 
remarkable exceptions, the survivals have been the result 
more of caprice and accident than of deliberate choice or of 
an active literary criticism. 

About the close of Pandya-Pallava period must be placed 
the important Tamil version of the Brhat- 
Perungadai. kaiha, Perungadai or Udayanan Kadai by 
the poet who is known by the name Kongu-velir, the vel 
(chieftain) of Kongu. Very little is known of his life; a verse 
in a recent work Kongu-mandalasatakam states that he was 
a native of Mangai, which has been identified with Vijaya- 
mangalam in the Erode taluq of the Coimbatore district. 
Adiyarkku-nallar, the celebrated annotator of the Silappadi- 
karam, has said that Udayanan Kadai was based on a study 
of several works of the age of the second Sangam; from this 
the conclusion has been drawn that this work may date from 
the third century a.d. or earlier . 7 This is, however, by no 
means certain; all that we can say is that in the days of 
Adiyarkku-nallar in the twelfth century A.D., this belief was 
current about Udayanan Kadai . 8 On the other hand, it is the 
opinion of Svaminatha Aiyar, the great scholar to whom we 
owe a masterly edition of all that has survived of this work , 9 
that it was indebted to the Sanskrit version known to have 
been made by the Ganga ruler Durvinlta in the sixth century 
a.d. The story of Udayana is very well known and need not 
be detailed here; of the adventures of his son, Naravahana, 
the most original part of Gunadhya’s work, the Perungadai 
in its extant parts knows little. These comprise a hundred 
sections of varying length, the shortest being about fifty lines 
and the longest a little over two hundred. The metre is 
ahaval, a very flexible type, analogous to blank verse in 
English, and most suited for narrative poetry. The style of 
the author is very chaste and direct, and the poem rightly 
C. 84 



666 LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 

takes a high rank among the literary classics of the Tamil 
world. 

The Sivaka-Sinddmani of the Jain poet Tiruttakkadeva 
is counted as the greatest among the mahd- 
gvndamani. kavyas of Tamil literature. As it is seen to 
follow the Ksattracuddmani of Vadibhasimha, itself based on 
the Uttarapurana of Gunabhadra composed in a.d. 898, 10 there 
can be little doubt that the Sindamani was composed some- 
time in the tenth century. 11 Naccinarkkiniyar states that the 
author was born of the race of the Colas. 12 A later tradition 
cherished by Tamil Jains adds that after a full course of 
study in Tamil and Sanskrit, he turned an ascetic at a rela- 
tively early age and went to Madura to live there for some 
time in the company of the great poets of the Tamil Sangam. 
While admitting the distinction earned by Jain writers in 
the line of religious and holy literature, these poets challenged 
their capacity in general, and that of Tiruttakkadevar in par- 
ticular, to contribute to the literature of Love. The ascetic 
poet took up the challenge, and having satisfied his guru that 
he would not lose his spiritual balance if he was permitted to 
produce an erotic poem, he composed the big poem on the 
life of Jivakan, the subject prescribed by his master. The 
result pleased the guru; but it did not give the quietus to the 
critics of the Sangam, who, unable to deny the merits of the 
poem, now raised a suspicion against the character of its 
author, saying that one who had no experience of sex-life 
could not have produced it; Tiruttakkadevar then demon- 
strated the purity of his devotion to the ascetic ideal by 
means of an ordeal. We may not accept these tales as history, 
especially because there is nothing in the poem of Tiruttak- 
kadevar that cannot be explained on the simple supposition 
that the Jain poet wanted to set forth in Tamil one of the 
most romantic and edifying cycles of tales preserved in the 
Puranas of the Jainas. 

The life story of Jivaka is that of an ideal hero, equally 
distinguished in the arts of war and peace, the perfect saint 
no less than the charming lover. After a stormy youth mark- 
ed by many adventures, Jivaka finds himself in the prime of 
life the monarch of a splendid kingdom; for some years there- 
after he lives a life of pleasure hi the company of the eight 
splendid queens whom he had espoused at different times 



KALLADANAR 667 

earlier in life; in fact, the Sindamani is also called Mana-nul, 
the Book of Marriages, on account of each of Jivaka’s adven- 
tures culminating in a happy marriage. Jivaka is shaken 
from his complacency by an incident, trivial in itself, but 
full of deep significance to him. He sees in a moment’s flash 
the hollowness of human life and the wisdom of seeking 
release from its bonds. He installs his son on the throne and 
seeks the peace of the forest, and attains salvation in the end. 

In its present form the poem contains 3,145 stanzas, of 
four lines each. It is said that the author actually composed 
only 2,700 stanzas, the remaining 445 being later additions 
by his guru, with whose permission he wrote the poem, and 
by another hand. 13 The annotator has marked out two verses 
as those of the guru, but there is no means of identifying the 
additions of the other writer mentioned above, if there were 
such additions. The art of Tiruttakkadevar is marked by all 
the qualities of great poetry and has, as is well-known, fur- 
nished the model for even the genius of Kamban. We shall 
see that it also inspired, though indirectly, the composition 
of the Periya-Puranam. 

It seems probable that two other mahakavyas, the Valai- 
yapati and the Kundalakesi, known so far only by fragments 
cited in other works, were both composed more or less about 
the same time as the Sindamani. The Kundalakesi, it may be 
noted, is one of the few known Buddhist Tamil works besides 
the Manimekalai. 

The Kallad,am is a poem of Kalladanar, the work and the 
author alike taking the name of a place, 14 
Kalladam. possibly the birth-place of the poet. He 

must have been different from the Sangam poet of the same 
name, five of whose songs figure in the Purananuru, 15 and 
others in the Ahan&niiru and Kurundogai. There is a tradi- 
tion that the author of the Kalladam chose one hundred 
verses from the Tiruccirrambalak-kdvai as the basis for his 
work, and this may well have been so. The work is written 
in a peculiar style, the result of the author’s forced attempt 
to revive the poetic forms and diction of the Sangam age. 
The whole poem is thus a curious instance of extreme pedan- 
try. It comprises a hundred pieces, each purporting to depict 
a particular mood of love ( Ahatturai ). The formalised sche- 



668 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


matic and rather soulless treatment of love in the Kovai type 
appears, to a modem mind, enough in itself to spoil the 
chances of real literature; our author has imposed further 
shackles on himself by tying himself up to a selection of 
verses from the Tirukkovai and by his deliberate effort to 
write in an idiom unnatural in his age; and there is no evi- 
dence to suggest that the author meant it to be a mere burles- 
que or parody; in fact it is too serious for that, and the story 
is that the excellence of the Tirukkovai was demonstrated to 
the satisfaction of the Sangam only by this effort of Kalla- 
danar. The decay of taste and the failure to reach a proper 
standard of literary criticism and maintain it, is best seen 
in the admiration in which this stilted composition has been 
held by generations of scholars and poets in recent times . 16 

Kalladanar was fully acquainted with the cycle of Saiva 
legends centring round Madura , 163 and refers to the miracles 
wrought by Siva on account of Manikkavasagar, Darumi, 
Idaikkadar and others. It is probable that the Tirukkannap- 
padevar Tirumaram included in the eleventh section of the 
Saiva canon was also his work. There is no definite evidence 
on the age of the Kallddam; it may be as early as the tenth 
century, or it may be much later. It is a safe assumption that 
in any case it belongs to the age of the Imperial Colas. 

The Kalingattupparani composed by the poet laureate 
Jayangondar towards the close of the reign 
porcini 190 ^ 11 '' Kulottunga I is the earliest and best of 

! the paranis accessible to us. It is a splendid 

little masterpiece. The line between history and fictitious 
convention is very clearly seen throughout the poem; and the 
poet’s mastery of a choice diction, and the sustained harmony 
between the metres employed and the incidents portrayed, 
are unique in the whole range of Tamil literature. The parani 
is the war poem par excellence and depicts not only the pomp 
and circumstance of war, but all the gruesome details of the 
field. It may be noted in passing that the Kalinga war of 
Kulottunga seems to have been the theme of several literary 
efforts; to judge from the stray verses on the subject pre- 
served by the commentaries on the Virasoliyam and the 
Dandiyalangdram, a good part of the results of these efforts 
has been lost irretrievably. The survival of the Kalingattup- 



KOTTAN’S PATRONS AND WORKS 


parani in its entirety is perhaps due to its supreme merit; for 
there are several instances in the history of Indian literatures 
of one good book killing many inferior ones. Jayangondar 
had many imitators but no rival among the poets of later 
times. 

Kuttan or Ottakkuttan came of the class of Sengundar 
who seem to have pursued the occupations 
11 of fighting in the army as privates and cap- 

tains, and of weaving. 17 Born in a poor family in Malari, an 
obscure village in the Cola country, 18 he sought service under 
Sankaran, the chieftain of Puduvai and father of Sadaiyan, 
the patron of the more celebrated Kamban. A certain Gan- 
geyan soon discovered that Kuttan was destined for a higher 
purpose than household service under Sankaran, and Kuttan 
expressed his gratitude by composing the Nalayirakkovai on 
his patron Gangeya. Another patron of Kuttan was a certain 
Soman of Puvanai, i.e. Tribhuvani near Pondicherry. When 
his fame rose, Kuttan was entertained in their court by three 
successive Cola monarchs beginning with Vikramacola; on 
each of them he composed an ula, besides a parani celebrat- 
ing Vikramacola’s Kalinga war, and a pillaittam.il on Kulot- 
tunga II. The last poem is easily the best among the known 
compositions of the poet on account of its copious diction, its 
melodious verse, and fine imagery. The stories of the circum- 
stances leading to Kuttan’s composition of the Itti-yelupadu, 
Eluppelupadu and the Takkayagapparani belong more to 
anthropology than history. When the poet’s fame stood at its 
highest, the sengundar wanted Kuttan to celebrate the glories 
of their community, and when the poet sought to excuse him- 
self saying that he could not be expected to employ his talents 
in praising his own community, the irate sengundar made up 
their minds to do away with the man who was so utterly 
devoid of caste-consciousness. The poet escaped with his life 
by a trick played by his friends on the foolish sengundar, but 
then he agreed to praise the Itti (spear), the chief weapon 
of the sengundar in war, if they would make an offering of 
1008 heads severed from the shoulders of as many first-born 
sengundar youths for the goddess to inspire Kuttan to his 
enterprise. After some argument this was agreed to, and 
Kuttan sang the ittiyelupadu, seventy verses in praise of the 
spear, and the Eluppelupadu. seventy verses calculated to 



670 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


bring back to life the 1008 youths whose lives had been 
sacrificed. Of the second poem only some fragments are left 
and these are by no means entitled to a high place as Tamil 
poetry. The ittiyelupadu, also poor poetry, contains a number 
of local allusions to apparently historical incidents in which 
sengundar soldiers and chieftains played a part; but there is 
no means yet of explaining these allusions, and the annotators, 
unwilling to confess ignorance, fabricate legends. Kuttan is 
said to have become Ottakkuttan after he got the severed 
heads of the sengundar youths to attach themselves ( otta ) 
again to their respective bodies. A more plausible, if less 
romantic, story accounts for the name by saying that, at the 
request of the Cola king, the poet attached (otta) a kanni of 
the ula to another verse composed by him on the spot. The 
Takkaydgapparani, obviously an imitation of the Kalingattup- 
parani , in its metres and diction, handles a Puranic theme 
with considerable force and power, and must rank high as 
literature, though well below its model. Other poems attri- 
buted to Kuttan are the Sarasvatiyandddi (said to be the very 
first of his compositions) in praise of Sarasvati, the goddess 
of learning, by whose grace he became a poet; and the Arum- 
hait-tolldyiram. The village of Kuttanur on the banks of 
the Arisil river in the Tanjore district keeps alive the memory 
of the poet and the patronage of his talents by the Cola rulers 
who gave him the village as a fief. A Sarasvati temple in it, 
and a pedestal inscribed in Tamil characters of the 12th cen- 
tury and recording that Kavipperumal alias Ovada-kuttar, 
the grandson of the Kavic-cakravarti of Malari, set up an 
image of Sarasvati, 19 now' lost, show that the stories which 
connect Kuttan with Sarasvati in a special manner are not 
altogether unfounded. 20 

A greater poet than Ottakuttan was Kamban, the cele- 
^ k brated author of the Rdmayanam. This poem 

is the greatest epic in Tamil literature, and 
though the author states that he follows in the wake of Val- 
miki, still his work is no mere translation nor even an adap- 
tation of the Sanskrit original. In the treatment of the inci- 
dents in the story, and in the portrayal of the chief charac- 
ters in it, Kamban makes many wide departures and handles 
the subject matter with a mastery and originality and a depth 
of poetic experience seldom equalled in Tamil literature. 



KAMBAN’S RAMAVATARAM 671 

Like the other great poets who have enriched the literatures 
of the different languages of India and the East by their works 
on the Rama story, Kamban imports into his narration the 
colour of his own time and place. Thus his description of 
Kosala is an idealised account of the features of the Cola 
country, and when he wants to emphasise the glory of moon- 
light, he brings it home to his readers by saying that it spread 
everywhere like the fame of his patron Sadaiyan of Vennai. 21 
Rama himself was as much master of the Tamil idiom as of 
the Sanskrit. 22 Sometimes Kamban is influenced by the some- 
what rigid canon of Tamil poetics, as when he enters on an 
elaborate analysis of the emotions of Rama and Sita after a 
chance meeting which takes place immediately on Rama’s 
entry into Mithila. Elsewhere, as in the description of Slta’s 
behaviour when Hanuman handed over Rama’s ring to 
her, Kamban eleborates a brief hint of Slta’s emotions thrown 
out by Valmiki who says that she rejoiced as if she had 
rejoined her husband. He compresses Valmiki’s account at 
other points, as in Dasaratha’s asvamedha. 

From amidst a mass of legend centring round the name 
of the great poet, some facts seem to stand out prominently. 
His father was Aditya a resident of Muvalur (Tanjore dt., 
Mayavaram tq.) in Tiruvalundur-nadu, and he seems to have 
been an uvaccan by caste. 23 Early in life, he attracted the 
attention of Sadaiyappavallal alias Sararaman, the Trigarta 
chieftain of Puduvai; the Trigarta is mentioned in the Vik- 
ramasdlan-ula 24 and in some undated inscriptions from Muva- 
lur and Tirukkodikaval in which he is also described as 
Cediraya of the Ganga race. 25 Kamban was also patronised 
by the contemporary Cola king and was granted by him a 
fief called Kambanadu and the title Kamc-cakravarti. He 
undertook the composition of the Ramayana, or rather Rdrnd- 
vatdra as he seems to have called it, out of an unbounded 
love for the theme, and he carried the story only up to the 
return of Rama to Ayodhya and his coronation as king, the 
uttara kandam being reputed to be the work either of Ottak- 
kuttan or a lesser celebrity by name Vanidasan or Vaniyan 
Tadan. 

Perhaps less worthy of credence are some other details 
of a personal nature. He fell in love with a dancing girl Valli 
whom he met in the Saiva matha presided over by Catura- 



672 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


nana Pandita at Tiruvorriyur, and verses are preserved in 
the Tamil-navdlar-caritai which purport to record Kamban’s 
great love and admiration of Valli and his dissatisfaction with 
another claimant to his affections. The story goes that 
Kamban commanded the regard of all the ruling sovereigns 
of his time, including the Pandya and the Kakatlya Rudra, 
and that the Cola ruler, jealous of his fame and anxious to 
get rid of his over-mighty subject, plotted his murder and 
executed it in person; there is no means yet of deciding if 
this puerile account of the poet’s end has any foundation. 28 

The date of Kamban has been much disputed, but there 
seems to be now little room left to doubt 
His date. that he was a junior contemporary of 

Ottakkuttan and of Sekkilar or followed close upon them. 
The palaeography of the inscriptions of 5§adaiyan mentioned 
above, and Kamban’s description of the Cola country as 
belonging to Tydgamavinddan, a title which recalls the sur- 
name of Kulottunga III, 27 are fairly conclusive on the point. 
The distinct echoes of the Sivaka-Sinddmaw in Kamban’s 
great work constitute, in the light of the date assigned to the 
former poem, another circumstance confirming the date thus 
suggested for Kamban. 273 

Besides the Rdmayanam, Kamban is said to have been 
the author of the Erelupadu, and Sadagoparandadi, as also of 
a Mummanik-kovai (not now extant) which gave rise to an 
attack on Kamban’s verse by Vaniyan Tadan. The Erelupadu 
together with the Tirukkai valakkam is a eulogium on agri- 
culture and the cultivator class, the Vellalas. When the poem 
was being published in an assembly, Cedirayan, the son of 
Sadaiyan, was bitten by a poisonous snake and died; he was 
restored to life by a couple of venbas composed by the poet 
for the purpose. The andadi had to be composed by Kamban 
to please the god of Srlrangam before whom approval was 
sought by the poet for his Rdmayanam and who made it a con- 
dition that Kamban should praise his beloved devotee Satha- 
kopa in a centum of verses. In view of the tendency, com- 
mon in Indian literature, of fathering minor works of un- 
known origin upon celebrated authors, and in view of the 
mediocre and commonplace character of these two works, 
we have to receive with great suspicion the popular legends 
on their authorship and the occasions for their composition. 



THREE MINOR POEMS 


673 


Pugalendi is held by a persistent tradition to have been 
a contemporary of Ottakkuttan; a native of 
Pugalendi. Kalandai in the Tondainad, he sought a 

career in the Pandyan court; later, he went over to the Cola 
court when the Cola ruler espoused a Pandyan princess. 
There he roused the jealousy of Kuttan, and their intrigues 
against each other brought discord into the royal household. 
Finally, the differences between the poets were made up by 
the king’s intercession and they began to live in peace and 
friendship. This pretty story has no apparent claim to our 
credence. Again the Tondaimandala-satakam states that 
Pugalendi composed a Kalambakam, a eulogium in various 
metres, on Korrandai, the chief of Jinji (Senjiyar kdn ); if 
we accept the tradition that Ottakuttan and Pugalendi were 
contemporaries, this chief of Jinji may have been no other 
than the one mentioned in the Vikramcis6lanuUi? s but this 
is doubtful, and modem critics place him a century later than 
Kuttan. 283 Pugalendi is, however, best known by his Ncila- 
venbd, a poem narrating the story of Nala in about four hund- 
red stanzas in the veiiba metre. The venbd is to Tamil what 
the anusthup is to the Sanskrit language, a simple and flexible 
medium capable of producing great results in the hands of a 
great poet. And Pugalendi’s venbds are indeed of high 
quality; and the popularity of the theme he handled gained 
great currency for them. Other works with little or no claim 
to literary merit have often been fathered on Pugalendi; the 
tendency is partly explained by the easy style of the Nala- 
venba which made Pugalendi popular; but there is nothing 
in common between the fine poetry of the Nalavetiba and the 
miserable doggerels attributed to him by an ignorant popular 
tradition. The age of Pugalendi cannot be established by 
any tangible evidence, as his references to Candiran Suvarkki 
of Muranai-nagar in Malluvanadu cannot yet be related to 
the inscriptions; the echoes of the ideas and even phrases of 
Kamban in his poem are sufficiently striking to give plausi- 
bility to the view that Pugalendi could not have preceded 
that great poet. 


The Kulottungan-kovai and the Tanjaivdnan- kovai de- 
serve to be mentioned as among the best 
Two kovais. known works of secular literature belong- 
ing to the late Cola period. The first, as we have seen, is a 
0 85 



674 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


Kdvai on Kumara Kulottunga who may be tentatively iden- 
tified with Kulottunga III. Little is known of the author, 
and the poem has no conspicuous merit except that it centres 
round a great Cola ruler and contains passing allusions to 
some of his achievements in war. The kdvai, like the ula, is 
a peace poem; it purports to deal with the stages in the de- 
velopment of love between a lover and his love from the 
moment they are thrown together by accident; in portraying 
each situation, details relating to the birth and achievements 
of the hero are worked in by the poet. The Tanjaivdimn-kovai 
falls almost outside the period of Cola supremacy. After the 
Tiruk-kovaiydr of Manikkavasagar, this is the most popular 
among the poems of this type. The author, Poyya-moli Pula- 
var, may have been a native of Vanji, as the name Vanji-Poy- 
yamoli indicates. He seems to have lived for some time in 
Tiruccengattangudi, Turaiyur and Madura; he is said to have 
finally betaken himself to Tondai-mandalam, but another tra- 
dition affirms that the poet burnt himself to death on the fune- 
ral pyre of his patron Slnakkan of Araisur. 29 The Vanan of 
Tanjai, the hero of the Kdvai, is reputed to have been the 
minister of the Pandya king and chieftain of Tanjakkur in 
Maranadu near Madura. He is described in the Kdvai 30 as 
‘the eye of the Pandya who conquered the malai-nadu.’ This 
must be a reference to Maravarman Kulasekhara I a.d. 1260- 
1308. This inference gains strength from another fact. The 
Kdvai illustrates systematically the rules of the Nambi-Ahap- 
porul, which mentions Kulasekhara as the king in whose reign 
it was composed and published. 31 

The Periya-Puranam of Sekkilar and the Tiruvilaiyadal 
Sekk'lar Purdnam of Perumbarrap-puliyur Nambi are 

*" ‘ two works of high literary quality dealing 

with Saiva hagiology and legends, and these may be briefly 
considered before taking up the purely devotional literature of 
the age. Of the composition of the Tiruttondar Purdnam or the 
Periya-Puranam we have a graphic account attributed to Uma- 
pati Sivacarya, c. a.d. 1313 — the Sekkilar Nayanar Purdnam 
narrates the life of Sekkilar, and this work in spite of its being 
a Purana, is unique for its historical and biographical interest. 
Umapati came in the main line of Saiva tradition and lived 
in an age when the memory of the great Cola rulers and their 
achievements was still fresh; he must have had access to 



THE PERIY A-PURANAM 675 

much authentic information, and it is to his uncommon his- 
torical sense that we owe this life of Sekkilar. Another 
work also said to be of Umapati, though necessarily less 
authentic in its details relating to a much earlier time, is 
the Tiy^murai-kanda-purdnam, on the work of Nambi Andar 
Nambi, of which some account has already been given. 

Sekkilar was born at Kunrattur in Kunraivalanadu, a 
subdivision of Puliyurk-kottam in Tondaimandalam. He is 
also called Sevai-kavalar and Gangai-kula-tilaka. He was a 
Vellala by caste; he sought an official career under the Cola 
government, rose to a high rank and earned the title Uttama~ 
sdla-Pallavan. He was devoted to the deity of Tirunages- 
varam and evinced his devotion by building in his native town 
of Kunrattur a Siva temple closely modelled on that of Tiru- 
nagesvaram. His deeply religious nature was roused to pro- 
test against the way in which the Sivaka-Sindamani, the im- 
pious work of a heretical Jaina, was being read, admired and 
enjoyed in the Court of the Cola monarch; he held that to 
spend time on such a book was to waste the opportunities of 
this life and to imperil the life hereafter, and exhorted the 
king to turn instead to the lives of the Saiva saints sketched 
by Sundaramurti in his Tiruttomdattogai and elaborated by 
Nambi Andar Nambi. The king then commanded Sekkilar 
to expound the life-stories of the Saints, and being greatly 
attracted by the theme, he desired Sekkilar to write down 
the lives in extenso in a great poem, and gave him much 
wealth to enable him to undertake the task. Sekkilar then 
retired to Cidambaram, and with his mind filled with divine 
grace — there was a voice commanding him to begin the work 
with the words UlageUm . — he began to compose the Tirut- 
tondar-Puiwnam in the beautiful 1000 pillared mandapa within 
the precincts of the temple. Messengers went to the Cola 
monarch and reported the progress of the work from time to 
time until it reached completion with a total of 4253 stanzas. 
Then the king himself came to Cidambaram; again a voice, 
accompanied by the tinklings of an anklet, commanded the 
king to listen with attention to the great work of Sekkilar, 
and there followed the formal publication of the work when 
Sekkilar expounded it from day to day for a whole year; 
the work was universally hailed as a veritable fifth Veda in 
Tamil and immediately took its place as the twelfth book in 
the Saiva canon. The author was honoured with the title 



676 LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 

Tondar-sirparavuvdr, ‘the singer of the glories of saints’, adorn- 
ed with the crown of knowledge (ndnamudi) and saluted by 
everyone present including the Cola monarch. Umapati’s 
poems must be read in the original for one to realise the gusto 
with which that author celebrates this epoch-making event 
in the history of South Indian Saivism. 

The Periya-Puranam has influenced the lives and thoughts 
of the Tamil Saiva population almost incessantly from the 
date of its composition. It has certainly thrown into the 
shade, at least in popular estimation, many an other work of 
pure literature, not suffused with the didactic and religious 
purpose that pervades this Puranam. And to this day 
there are thousands of Tamils who accept the legends em- 
balmed in Sekkilar’s melodious verse as literally and histori- 
cally true. To us the significance of this work lies in the 
rank it takes among the masterpieces of Tamil literature and 
in the picture it gives of the heroic age of Tamil Saivism as 
it was visualised by one of the most talented and deeply reli- 
gious seers of the Tamil land. In every way, it is a composi- 
tion that worthily commemorates the great age of the Impe- 
rial Colas and their sustained devotion to Saivism. 

Sekkilar himself tells us that his work was composed to 
please the sabha of the Cola monarch Anapaya who covered 
the Perambalam with fine gold, 32 and we know that this de- 
scription fits only Kulottunga II. It may be noted, however, 
that the name Sekkilar occurs as that of an official of the re- 
venue department as early as a.d. 1093 in the reign of Kulot- 
lunga I. 33 If this official was of the same family as the great 
poet, the latter must be taken to have come of a family which 
had distinguished itself for some generations in the service 
of the state. Umapati Sivacarya states that Sekkilar had a 
younger brother Palaravayar, and it seems most probable 
that it is he that is mentioned in an early inscription of the 
reign of Kulottunga II 34 under the name Sekkilar Palara- 
vayar Kalappalarayan of Kunrattur. It may be noted in pass- 
ing that Sekkilar was a family name, a fact which strengthens 
the identifications proposed here: Kunratturir-Cekkilar tiru- 
marapu sirandadanre (Umapati). Another member of the 
family, Sekkildn Ammaiyappan Parantakadevan alias Kari- 
kalasola Pallavarayan. made a gift at Tirukkadaiyur in the 
Tanjore district in 1182. 35 



TWO TIRUVILAIYADAL PURANAMS 


677 


The Tiruvilaiyddal Puranam of Perumbarrap-puliyur 
Nambi is the earliest Tamil version we 

Nambi’s _ possess of the legends centring round 

T iruvilaiyadal 

Madura and describing the sixty-tour mira- 
culous sports of Siva. The author was a Brahmin born at 
Selli-nagar, now Panaiyur, near Kari-valamvanda-nallur in 
the Tinnevelly district. He composed his work at the request 
of the contemporary Pandya king and was richly rewarded 
by him for his effort. His spiritual guru was a certain Vina- 
yaka who belonged to Maligaimadam in Cidambaram, and 
the name of Cidambaram (Perumbarrapuliyur) seems to be 
prefixed to his own name either to indicate the fact that he 
had his initiation there, or more generally to mark his devo- 
tion to Nataraja, the presiding deity of the place. It has been 
pointed out that in a.d. 1227 a member of our author’s family, 
Anandatandavanambi or his wife, erected a gopura in Madura. 
This may be taken to furnish a rough indication of the age 
of our author also; but the exact chronological relation be- 
tween him and Anandatandavanambi cannot yet be settled. 3(1 


A much later version of the ‘sacred sports’ by Paranjoti 
held the field, and the earlier work of Nambi had almost been 
lost sight of till it was recovered, like many another classic, 
by the prince of modem Tamil scholars, Svaminatha Aiyar. 
Nambi’s work differs in many important respects from Paran- 
joti’s. particularly in the names of the Pandyan kings in whose 
time particular miracles are believed to have occurred. Tire 
fictitious list of successive rulers inheriting the throne for 
sixty-four generations from father to son, found in the Haiti - 
syamahdtmya and in Paranjoti, is unknown to Nambi, who 
names in all only less than ten kings. The order in which the 
sports are narrated also differs; there are besides many other 
minor differences all of which have been carefully noted by 
the learned editor of Nambi’s Puranam. Authors who rush 
to deduce history from legend will do well to note the warn- 
ing furnished by a study of these two versions. 

To turn now to the purely religious literature of the age. 

The Tamil Saiva canon owes its present ar- 
Literafure 3 rangement to Nambi Andar Nambi who 

may certainly be assigned to the early 
eleventh century, if not to the close of the tenth. As has 
been stated already, Umapati Sivacarya describes in a short 



678 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


work, Tirumurai-kanda-puranam, the redaction of the Saiva 
canon by Nambi Andar Nambi. He states that Nambi, in 
the first instance arranged the canon in the form of ten books: 
the first three comprising 384 padigams of 
Tirumurai. Tiru-Nana-Sambandar, books four to six 
made up of 307 padigams of Tirunavukkarasu, 100 padigams 
of Sundara forming the seventh book, the Tiruvdsagam of 
Manikkavasagar being the eighth, and a number of tiruvi- 
saippds 31 by nine different authors and the Tirumandiram of 
Tirumular forming the last two books. We learn that subse- 
quently the king requested Nambi to put together one more 
book from the padigams left over, including the pdsuram 
uttered by Siva himself and calculated to procure siddhi: 
Nambi accordingly arranged the eleventh book of the Canon. 
This section, including the compositions of Nambi himself, 
comprises the works of twelve different authors, two of whom 
are among the sixty-three saints of Saivism. The Periya-Pu- 
ranam counts as the twelfth book. Clearly the arrangement 
of the books is not chronological; for to give the most striking 
instance, Tirumular was earlier than Sundaramurti and is 
mentioned in the Tiruttondattogai; but the Tirumandiram is 
only the tenth book, whereas Sundaramurtti’s hymns form 
the seventh. 

Among the authors of the ninth Book of the Canon, 
Gandaraditya may be definitely identified with the son of 
Parantaka I. 38 The attempt to identify Sendanar with Tiru- 
maligaittevar on the strength of an inscription of the reign 
of Rajaraja I from Tiruvilimilalai 39 can hardly be considered 
satisfactory; the inscription cited does not seem to furnish 
conclusive proof of the identity, and it seems unlikely that 
tradition could in this instance have erred so far as to make 
two authors out of one; for we should not forget that the ar- 
rangement of the Canon seems to have reached its present 
form before the age of Umapati. Karuvur-devar who has 
hymns on three Cola temples, the Adityesvara at Kalandai, 
the Rajarajesvara at Tanjore, and the Gangaikondacolesvara 
at Gangaikonda-colapuram, was as his name indicates a na- 
tive of Karuvur, and the legends centring round his name 
have found a place in the Karuvur Puranam , 40 He may be 
assigned to the first half of the eleventh century a.d. It is 
possible that Nambi Kada Nambi who has sung two hymns, 



SlVA-ti ANA-B6D AM 


679 


one each on Tiruvarur and Koyil (Cidambaram) was identi- 
cal with the Atreya Nambi Kada Nambi, an arcaka mention- 
ed in an inscription dated a.d. 1050 from Tiruvaiyaru. 41 

Among doctrinal works, the Siva-Nana-Bodam of Mey- 
kandar, written in the first half of the thir- 
° ogy teenth century A.D., 42 is the first attempt at 

a systematic statement of the tenets of Tamil £aivism. This 
is a short treatise of a dozen aphorisms (sutras) which seem 
to have been translated from a Sanskrit original; 43 the author 
has added vdrttikas of his own which explain and illustrate 
the argument of each of the sutras and fix their me aning s. 
The name Siva-Nana-Bodam is explained thus. ‘Sivam is 
one; Nanam is the knowledge of its true nature; Bodam is the 
realisation of such knowledge.’ 44 The scheme of the twelve 
sutras is simple. The first three sutras assert the existence of 
the three entities God (pati) , bondage ( pasa ) and soul (pasu) ; 
the three next define and explain their nature and interrela- 
tion; the next triad deals with the means (sadhana) of re- 
lease, and the last part is devoted to the nature of release. 
The key position held by the work of Meykandar in the litera- 
ture of Tamil Saivism is brought out by a verse which says: 
‘The Veda is the cow; its milk is the true Agama; the Tamil 
sung by the Four is the ghee extracted from it; and the virtue 
of the Tamil work of Meykandan of the celebrated (city of) 
Vennai is the fine taste of the ghee.’ 45 

The Bodam was preceded by two short works which may 
be said to stand almost in the relation of text and commen- 
tary. 46 These are the Tiruvundiyar and Tinikkalirruppadi- 
yar by two authors, teacher and disciple according to tradi- 
tion, and both known by the name or rather title Uyya-vanda- 
devar. They are both works meant to present in an easy 
style the main aspects of Saiva doctrine and practice. 

After the Siva-Nana-Bodam, the next work of importance 
on doctrine is the §iva-Ndna-§ittiyar of Arunandi, reputed 
in tradition to have been first the guru of Meykandar’s father 
and then the disciple of Meykandar himself. Though written 
in verse, it is a comprehensive statement of the true doctrine 
( supakkam , svapaksa) introduced by a critical discussion of 
rival systems (para-pakkam) of which no fewer than four- 
teen, including four schools of Buddhism and two of Jainism, 



680 LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 

are passed under review. This great work, which is, in fact, 
the classic treatise on Tamil Saivism, for the work of Mey- 
kandar is too cryptic and fails to explain the position of Sai- 
vism vis-i't-vis other systems, has been the subject of many 
commentaries and is to this day the most widely read manual 
of Saivism among the Tamils. The Irupa-vinipcihdu by the 
same writer owes its name to the alternate use of two metres 
in its twenty verses which expound the doctrine in the form 
of a dialogue between teacher and pupil. This work is said 
to have been composed by Arunandi to enshrine the memory 
of his beloved teacher in each of its verses ; and so it does. 

Another catechism, much the simplest of all manuals on 
Saivism, is the Unmai-vilakkam by Manavasagan-gadandar of 
Tiruvadi (South Arcot) who claims that his work makes not 
the slightest departure from the essence of the Agamas. Urna- 
pati Sivacarya, who lived at the close of the thirteenth and 
the early years of the fourteenth century, 47 was the author 
of eight works on the doctrine which complete the tale of the 
Saiva Siddhanta Sastras in Tamil. 

They are the following : 

1. Sivappirakasam. an ambitious treatise, only less 

important than the Siva-N&na-Sittiydr. Ore 
hundred verses. 

2. Tiru-varut-payan composed on the model of the 

celebrated Tirakkural and comprising ten divi- 
sions of ten kurals each. 

3. Vina-veiiba, a short catechism of thirteen oenbds. 

4. Porrippahrodai. a short work of 100 lines. 

5. Kodikkavi , a very short exposition in four verses. 

6. Nenjuvidu tutu adopting the sandesa form which 

had already found imitators in Tamil. 

7. Unmai iieri-vilakkam devoted to the path of realisa- 

tion and dealing with ‘the ten kctryas.’ 48 

8. Sankarpa-nirakaranam devoted, like the ‘para- 

paksa’ of the Sittiyar. to a critique of other 
creeds. Unlike the earlier work, this is much 
exercised with the minute differences within the 
very fold of Saivism. 



VAISNAVA WORKS 


681 


It is curious that few works of religious literature seem 
to have been composed by the Vaistiavas of 
Paucity of Tamil the Tamil country in this period. It has been 
v ^ma vtm pointed out already that the arrangement 

of the Vaisnava canon proceeded side by side 
with that of the Saiva canon in the tenth and early eleventh 
centuries. There is also ample evidence to show that a succes- 
sion of great Vaisnava deary as composed numerous devotional 
poems and philosophical works in the Sanskrit language in 
this period; Yamunaearya, Yadavaprakasa and Ramanuja 
himself are only the leading examples of a large group of 
authors justly celebrated for their learning and devotion and 
for their literary achievements. Strangely enough, however, 
Vaisnavism which started as a popular movement of religious 
reform and revival, appears to have developed in the Cola 
period a sort of a high-brow attitude and scorned the use of 
the popular idiom; in fact, the writers of this school develop- 
ed in course of time a quaint style more Sanskritic than 
Tamil in its make-up which is seen at its best in the great 
commentaries of Periya-vaccan Pillai and Nambillai. Among 
the works composed in this style of writing, one of the earliest 
is the short commentary, the Arayirappadi, on Nammalvar’s 
Tiruvaymoli, by Kurugaippiran Pillan, a relative and disciple 
of Ramanuja. 

There is, however, one poem which deserves mention if 
only because it is one of the few exceptions 
Ramanuja- to the general rule followed by the Vaisnava 
u rra i. authors of the age. It is the Ramdnuja- 

nurrandadi, a century of verses in the kalitturai metre in 
praise of Ramanuja by his disciple Tiruvarangattu Amudanar. 
This poem in a simple devotional style is held in great esteem 
and is even called prapannagdyatn as it is often repeated as 
a daily prayer. The central idea of the poem is that without 
the grace of the guru there is no way to salvation. The 
author avows that he has no faith in tapas * 9 and pronounces 
a sweeping condemnation on every creed other than Rama- 
nuja’s . 50 Ramanuja’s deep and abiding bhakti, sordda kadal 
perunjuli , 51 and his profound attachment to the Rdmdyana 52 
are specially stressed in the poem. It is not improbable that 
C. 86 



682 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


our author is identical with the Tiruvarangattamudanar of 
Mungirkudi mentioned in an inscription from Tirukkdyilur 
of the third year of Kulottunga II . 53 


Grammar, etc. 


Grammar, rhetoric and lexicography have always claim- 
ed the attention of authors since the begin- 
ning of written literature, and striking 
contributions were made in these departments in the Cola 
period. The Y apparungalam and Yapparungalakkarigai of 
Amitasagara, a Jaina ascetic, were composed some time to- 
wards the close of the tenth century. The 
Amita-Sagara correc ^ f orrn of the author’s name is Amita- 
sagara (the boundless ocean — alapparungadal) and not Amrta- 
sagara as it is sometimes written by mistake. The author calls 
himself a disciple of Gunasagara, quotes the Sulamani and is 
quoted by Perundevanar, the annotator of the Virasoliyam. 
The text and commentary of the Virasoliyam both date from 
the reign of Vxrarajendra. The age of the Sulamani is not 
beyond dispute; it has been ascribed to the latter half of the 
ninth century , 54 but it might well have been some centuries 
earlier. The Karigai of Amitasagara soon attained great 
celebrity and the place where the work was composed came 
to be known as Karigai-Kulattur, as may be seen from two 
inscriptions of the reign of Kulottunga I, from Nldur . 55 These 
inscriptions state that an ancestor of Kandan Madhavan of 
Kulattur induced Amitasagara to come and live in the Siru- 
Kunranadu of the Jayangondasola-manclalam; if this name 
was current in Amitasagara’s time, the composition of these 
two works on Yappu must have been later than the last years 
of Rajaraja I who assumed the title Jayangonda-sola towards 
the close of his reign. 


The Y apparungalam is a treatise on prosody of which the 
Karigai is an abridgement. It is unique in its range and it 
offers an exhaustive treatment of the variety of metres in 
Tamil; it is even more valuable for the fine commentary to 
which it has given rise. A large number of literary specimens 
otherwise unknown have been preserved in this commentary. 
The same observation holds good of the commentary on the 
Karigai by Gunasagara, who is believed to have been a 
disciple of Amitasagara, the pupil taking the name of his 
guru’s guru. 



TWO GRAMMARIANS 


683 


The Virasoliyam of Buddhamitra, and its commentary by 
Perundevanar, a pupil of the author, next 
Buddhamitra. daim Q ur attention. The Cola monarch 
Virarajendra is mentioned by name as a great Tamil scholar ; 56 
this fact and the name of the work leave no doubt that it was 
composed in Virarajendra’s reign. The commentary cites the 
tiru manni valara introduction of Rajendra I 57 and mentions 
the battles of Koppam 58 and Kudalsangamam . 59 Buddhamitra 
is called ‘the ruler of Ponparri’, in the pdyiram or preface 
to his work; Ponparri may be the same as Ponpetti in the 
Tanjore district , 60 and the title of Buddhamitra may imply that 
he got an assignment on the revenues of Ponpetti from the 
Cola ruler. The Virasoliyam is written in kalitturai metre and 
planned on the basis of a synthesis between the Tamil and 
Sanskrit systems of grammar and rhetoric and comprises the 
usual five sections : Sandhi ( eluttu ) , Sol, Porul, Yappu and 

Alankara ( ani ) . The author’s preference for Sanskrit titles is 
seen in the names of the first and last sections, while the names 
and order of the sections show even more clearly his partiality 
for the Sanskrit system. The work is full of interest for a 
student of the history of grammatical theory in Tamil. 

The Dandiyalangdram is the only work devoted entirely 
to a discussion of alankara, or ani as it is 
ga?arr? mlm ~ called in Tamil. The name of the work is 
justified by its closely following the model 
of Dandi’s Kavyadarsa, being in fact a more or less close 
rendering of it in Tamil. The name of the author and the 
details of his life and age have disappeared altogether. There 
is a verse of unknown age which states that the author was 
the son of Ambikapati, and was himself called Dandi, that he 
attained eminence in Sanskrit and Tamil learning, expound- 
ing alankara on the lines laid down by Sanskrit rhetoricians. 
The great poet Kamban is reputed to have had a son Ambika- 
pati by name, and it is sometimes held that our author was 
the grandson of Kamban. One of the earliest references to 
the Dandiyalangdram is that by Adiyarkkunallar, in his 
celebrated commentary on the Silappadikdram. The work was 
also apparently called Aniyiyal , 61 Aniyilakkanam and Aniyadi- 
gdram. It is composed in siitra style and, like the Kavya- 
darsa, it treats of the nature of poetry and kavya, and of 
figures of speech under two generic heads — arthalankdra 



684 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


( porulani ) and sabddlankara (sollani) . The author of the 
Prayogavivekam, writing some time in the eighteenth century, 
says that the author of the Daudiyalangaram annotated the 
sutras and illustrated them himself. This seems probable, and 
it is interesting to note that some of the illustrative stanzas 
are in praise of Anapaya Cola. 62 

The Neminadam of Gunavirapandita is a short treatise 
comprising less than 100 verses in the Venba 
Nemina am. metre and treating of the orthographs and 

parts of speech ( eluttu and sol ) of the Tamil language. The 
work takes its name from the tirthankara Neminatha of South 
Mylapore, Tenmayilapuri. 63 The author was a Jain, and 
pupil of Vaccanandi (Vajranandi) of Kalandai, possibly the 
the same place as that of Pugalendi. Another work of Guna- 
vira on prosody is called Venbappdttiyal, also Vaccanandi - 
rnalai, the garland of Vaccanandi, after the author’s guru. From 
the preface to the Vaccanandi-malai we learn that the author’s 
literary activity fell in the reign of Tribhuvana-deva, no doubt 
identical with Tribhuvana-vlradeva of the inscriptions, i.e. 
Kulottunga III. If this view is correct, Neminatha, who ac- 
cording to tradition recorded in a recent compilation, the 
Tamil-ndvalar-caritai, was a contemporary of Ottakkuttan, 
might not be identical with our author. 


The Nannul (Good Book) by Pavanandi, again a Jain 
author, is another work composed in the 
reign of Kulottunga III. By its simplicity 
and terseness, the book has practically displaced all other 
works as the beginner’s handbook of Tamil grammar. The 
author was patronised by Amarabharanan Slyagangan, a 
feudatory of Kulottunga III. The Nannul treats only of 
eluttu and sol, and it is not clear if the author stopped there, 
or if the rest of his work has been lost. The Nambiyahap - 
•porul of Narkavirajanambi is the last work 
that falls to be noticed here. Tamil literature 
divides its subject matter into two great divi- 
sions Puram and Aham, literally ‘external’ and ‘internal’, al- 
most corresponding to the philosophical distinction between 
‘objective’ and ‘subjective.’ The ahapporul generally resolves 
itself into a minute analysis of subjective reactions to erotic 
situations, though this by no means exhausts the content of 


Nannul. 


Ahapporul of 
Nambi. 



PROSE COMMENTARIES 


685 


this division. It has been pointed out already that this work 
was composed in the reign of Maravarman Kulasekhara I and 
that it has been systematically illustrated in the Tanjai-Vanan- 
Kovai, 

The Pingalandai and the Cuddmani are two lexicons that 
may be assigned to the Cola period with 
Lexicography. g rea t probability. The Cuddmani or the 
Nigantu-Cudamani as the author, Mandala-Purusa, seems to 
have designated his work, distinctly mentions the Kdrigai of 
Amitasagara in giving the different senses in which that word 
is applied; the Cuddmani must therefore have been composed 
after the Yapparungalakkdrigai; how long after it is not easy 
to decide . 64 The two lexicons mark progressive stages in the 
advancement of lexicography in Tamil. It should be noted 
that if the Pingalandai was, as its p&yiram states, composed by 
the son of the author of the earliest Tamil nigandu known, 
the Sendan-Divdkaram, and if those are right that assign a 
very high antiquity to the Divdkaram, the Pingalandai must 
be taken also to belong to the age anterior to the rise of the 
Vijayalaya line of kings . 65 

Some of the great commentators must have no doubt 
flourished in the centuries of Cola rule, 
Commentaries, j s difficult to point to definite data 

bearing on the age of these writers. On the other 
hand no systematic effort has yet been made to settle 
the chronological relations among these authors. Ilam- 
puranar, often mentioned as adigal because he was an ascetic, 
was no doubt among the earliest of them; he cites the Divd- 
karam, and his commentary on the Tolkappiyam is a model 
of terse and critical elucidation of a difficult text. Senavarai- 
yar, Perasiriyar and Naccinarkkiniyar followed him, and they 
often cite his views if not always by his name. Except his 
name and the fact that he composed a commentary on the 
Solladigaram of Tolkappiyam, we know nothing of Senavarai- 
yar at present; even the name is doubtful, for Senavaraiyar is 
said to have been the name of a caste, by Mayilai-nathar, in 
his commentary on the N annul. The commentary of Perasiri- 
yar is again accessible only for parts of the Poruladigaram, 
the work once believed to be his having turned out to be by 
another hand, Deyvaecilaiyar. Perasiriyar also wrote a gloss 



686 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


on the Tiruccirrambalakkovaiyar. e5a He is referred to in terms 
of very high regard by the commentator of the Yapparunga- 
lam; the attempt 66 to identify him, on that account, with 
Iraiyanar, the mysterious author of the Kalaviyal, is rather 
misplaced. Adiyarkkunallar who cites the poets of this period, 
like Jayangondar and Kuttan, rather freely in his commentary 
on the Silappadikaram, and Parimelalagar who is criticised by 
Naceinarkkiniyar 67 may also have belonged to our period. 
Parimelalagar wrote excellent commentaries on the Tiruk- 
kural and Paripadal. 

If the literary chronology of Tamil is replete with many 
unsolved problems, the situation is even 
Literature worse with regard to Sanskrit literature. 

We have ample evidence from all sides that 
Sanskrit learning and literary activity in its various branches 
found steady encouragement and flourished at a high level 
throughout the period of our study; attention has been drawn 
elsewhere to the endowments for colleges where different 
branches of Vedic and philosophic study were pursued, and 
to the popularity of the Prabhakara-mlmamsa and of the 
Rupavatara attested by the inscriptions. A detailed account 
of Sanskrit literature in this period cannot yet be undertaken, 
for those preliminary researches are yet to be made without 
which a general survey of literary activity over two or three 
centuries can hardly be attempted. But attention may be 
drawn here to one or two significant facts. First, we have 
some evidence to show that the Cola monarchs took a per- 
sonal interest in the growth and spread of Sanskrit studies; 
from the introductory verses in the Sanskrit lexicon Ndn&r- 
tharnava-samksepa, we learn that a village of Saiva Brah- 
mins learned in Sanskrit lore was established in the Cola 
country by Kulottunga I, that from that village a certain 
Kesavasvamin of the Vatsa gotra, a member of a family of 
hereditary grammarians, was in the service of Rajaraja II, 
and that he was commissioned by the king to prepare, for the 
use of young scholars, this Sanskrit lexicon in which the 
words are arranged in alphabetical order and their various 
meanings set forth, as directed by the king himself . 673 A more 
important instance of royal patronage of Sanskrit learning 
belongs to a much earlier period. It is this. Madhava, the 



SANSKRIT LEARNING 


son of Venkatarya and Sundari, lived in a village on the 
south bank of the Kaveri, and composed an 
extensive bhasya on the Rg-veda. He says 

VeS a Shava° fthat while Writin S ^ § reaf WOrk - he Uved 
in comfort in the country of the most 
renowned warrior of the world : Jaga- 

tam ekavirasya visaye nivasan sukham. 68 This statement 
implies that he flourished under royal patronage; and though 
he does not mention the name of his patron monarch, we 
may surmise that the reference is to Parantaka I who is said 
in the Kanyakumari inscription of Virarajendra to have earn- 
ed for himself the name Vlra-Cocla by conquering the invin- 
cible Krsnaraja. 69 The great Vedabhasyas of a later age com- 
posed under the patronage of the early Vijayanagar rulers 
would thus seem to have followed the model set by the first 
great ruler among the Imperial Colas of the Vijayalaya line. 

Haradatta, a well-known commentator on Sutra litera- 
ture, lived in the ninth or tenth century a.d. Bharatasvamin 
is known to have commented on the Samaveda in Hoysala 
Ramanatha’s reign, and there must have flourished about 
the same time Sadgurusisya (pupil of six gurus) whose 
personal name is lost and who commented on the Aitareya 
Brahmana and Aranyaka, on Katyayana’s Sarvanukramani. 
and on the Asvaldyana Srauta siitra. 

Among the Puranas, the Bhagavata which synthesises 
bhakti and advaita Vedanta is believed to have been com- 
posed in South India some time in the beginning of the tenth 
century a.d. Visnu Citta commented on the Visnu Purana in 
the early thirteenth century. Udali’s Vivekatilaka on the 
Rdmdyana may be assigned to the twelfth century as he is 
cited in the idu (thirteenth century). 

The Alvar Kulasekhara (ninth century) produced 
Mukundamdla, a devotional lyric which has retained its popu- 
larity to this day. Only a little later came Saktibhadra, repu- 
ted pupil of Sankara; his Ascarya-Cudamani deals with an 
episode in the Rama saga and is believed to have been the 
first full-blown drama ( nataka ) to be produced in the South. 
The same author’s UnmAdavdsavadatta is no longer extant. 

A second Kulasekhara from Kerala (a.d. 935-55) dramatised 
incidents from the Mahabhdrata in a stageworthy manner in 



688 LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 

the Tapatisamvarana and Subhadra-Dhancmjaya. This royal 
author also patronised Vasudeva, the author of Nalodaya 
wrongly attributed to Kalidasa, and Bilvamangalasvami alias 
Lila-suka whose Krsuu-Karndmrta is a devotional poem of 
unsurpassed beauty in three asv&sas. 

In the thirteenth century Saradatanaya, scion of a scho- 
larly family in the Chingleput district, wrote a great work 
on rhetoric Bkavaprakasa, and also a treatise on music called 
Saradiya. Though Venkatanatha or Vedanta Desika was bom 
in 1268 his work falls mostly outside our period just as those 
of Kumarila and Sankara do at the beginning of it. 

In philosophy we may note Varadaraja (twelfth century) , 
author of Tdrkika-raksa and of a commentary (Bodhinl) on 
the Ku suinanjali of Udayana. He was perhaps the same as 
the homonymous author of Vyavaharanirnaya, a treatise on 
law, and Nayavivekadipika, an expose of Mimamsd of the Pra- 
bhakara school. Sankara’s and Kumarila’s pupils, and their 
pupils continued the traditional lore of Advaita Vedanta and 
Mlmamsa, but no detailed notice of their work can find a 
place in this general history. The same observation must be 
taken to apply also to Visistadvaita literature. 

!§aiva philosophy is represented in Sanskrit by Hara- 
dattacarya (d. a.d. 1119) author of Sruti-sukti-mala also call- 
ed Caturvedatatparya Sangraha; and Harihara-taratamya, a 
sectarian polemic. He was followed by Srlkantha whose 
Brahma-rrumanisd-bhasya expounds the sutras of Badarayana 
from the Saiva standpoint, not quite the same as the Saiva- 
siddhanta, but distinguished as Sivadvaita. Aghorasivacarya 
(c. 1158) and Umapatisivacarya, already noticed as a Tamil 
writer, also wrote considerable works on the Saiva system in 
Sanskrit, besides Jnanasivacarya of Suryanarkoyil who com- 
mented on the ‘ Siva-jndna-bodha’ section of the Raurava 
Agama; his commentary is notable for citations from lost 
works. He also wrote a Saivaparibhasa and other works. 

In lexicography the Vaijayanfy of Yadavaprakasa, the early 
guru of Ramanuja, deserves particular mention, and in gram- 
mar Haradatta (ninth century) whose commentary Padaman- 
jari on the Kasika of Vamana and Jayaditya is an authorita- 



NOTES 


689 


tive work of outstanding merit. In the thirteenth century a 
certain Krsnalllasuka wrote a commentary called Purusakara 
on the Daiva of Deva, a terse metrical treatise in 200 verses 
on roots of similar form; the commentary describes itself as 
a vdrttika and takes a high place among grammatical works. 


1. SII. ii, p. 306; 120 of 1931. ARE. 1931, II, 12. 

2. 198 of 1919. 

3. 129, 128 of 1902. 

4. Paradandannai arundamilppaduttuc-civaneri-kanda, 482 of 1905. 

5. 335 of 1914; Pd. 129; — nan kavi padi pad inn kavikku enakku 
parisil tanda tan ka niydna kudikkadu. 

6. 548 of 1904. Cf. nammakkal with Kuhju-kuttam (troops, pattd- 
? am) of the Travancore records (Desikavinayakam). 

6a. 233 of 1921. 

7. JRAS., 1906, pp. 689-92. 

8. V. Svaminatha Aiyar, Perungadai, p. xxviii, cf. Lacote Gunadhya 
and the Brhat Katha (Tr. by Tabard, 1923), p. 148. 

9. Op cit., p. viii, n. 

10. Ksattracuddmani ed. T. S. Kuppuswami Sastri, (1903), p. 3 
of the introduction. 

11. Swaka-Sindamani, p. 11, n; Sen Tamil, v. pp. 98 ff. 

12. v. 3143. 

13. Naccinarkkiniyar on v. 3143 and n. on p. 914 by Svaminatha 
Aiyar. 

14. Kallddattuk-kalandinidaruli, Tiruv&sag am (Kirtti, 1. 11). 

15. One of these (385) is in celebration of Aruvandai, the chief of 
Ambar in the Tanjore district. This chief may have been the patron 
of the author of Sendan Divakaram; R. Raghava Aiyangar (Sen Tamil, 
v. pp. 114 ff.) has argued that the Divakaram was composed more than 
1800 years ago. On the other hand, S. Vaiyapuri Pillai (Ndma-Deepa- 
Nighantu, p. iv) suggests that the Aruvandai of the Divakaram might 
have been a descendant of the Aruvandai of the Puraivanuru, and pro- 
poses the first half of the eighth century as the date of the Divakaram. 

16. The saying is : Kalladam karravanidattu sollddade; this may 
be true in a sense different from the one intended. The work, it should 
be noted, is not cited by any of the great commentators. 

16a. Kudaryadivaru madarpariyon 

ettettiyarriya kattamar sadaiyd n — 95. 

17. The Divakaram has : Sengundap-padaiyar senait-talaivar tan- 
Uivdyar karugar kaikkolar, though there seems to be no good Ms. autho- 
rity for this. 

C. 87 



690 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


18. Kuttan’s birth-place is given differently in different accounts. 
Manavai takes the place of Malari in some, while others give to Shiyali 
the honour of having been the place of Kuttan’s birth But Malari :s 
borne out epigraphically — 109 of 1928. 

19. 109 of 1928. ARE. 1928, I, 3; 1932 II, 47. 

20. For notices of Kuttan see : Pandit V. Svaminatha Aiyar — intro- 
duction to Takkayagapparani; R. Raghava Aiyangar — Jen Tamil, iii, 
pp. 164 ff.; and Sengundar Pirabandattirattu by Nagalinga Munivar 
(1926). 

21. Mitilaikkatci v. 74. 

22. Nagarningu-padalam v. 140. 

23. An arcaka in the temples of Kali and similar deities. 

24. Ante p. 347. 

25. 29-34 of 1925; 57-58 of 1931. ARE. 1925 II 43. All vellalas are 
conventionally described as being of the Gangai-kula. 

26. R. Raghava Aiyangar has discussed the life and work of 
Kamban with remarkable ability in Jen Tamil, Vol. 3. 

27 Maruttumalaip-padalam, 58. There are two traditional verses 
on Kamban’s date, one apparently giving J. 807 and the other J. 1100. 
The former seems to accord with a vague legend that the Ramayanam 
was published in the Jrirangam temple under the presidency of 
Nathamuni, (Jen Tamil, xxv, pp. 308-9). But this fact is not men- 
tioned in the Divyasuricarita or the Guruparampara. R. Raghava 
Aiyangar suggests that the date usually taken as 807 is really 107 with 
an omitted thousand i.e., 1107 (Jen Tamil, iii, p. 179), and this reconciles 
the two verses. This is accepted by S. Vaiyapuri (Tamilc-cudar- 
manigal, p. 130) who says that the poem was published in 1185 in 
Kulottunga Ill’s reign. He also says that Tydya-samudra, Tydga, and 
Ty&ga-vinoda were respectively the titles of Vikramacola, Kulot- 
tunga II and Kulottunga in (ibid., pp. 126 ff.). 

27a. EC. v. Hassan 77, a.d. 1377 refers to a hereditary family of 
expounders of Kamban. 

28. Ante p. 347, Jen Tamil, ii, 393 ff. 

28a. Vaiyapuri, op., cit., p. 157. 

29. The story is told that the poet once fell asleep on the bed of 
his patron and that Sinakkan’s queen, not knowing this, also slept on 
the same bed for some time; when Jlnakkan himself turned up and saw 
what had happened, the poet felt miserable though his patron did not 
mistake him in the least. 

30. Verse 18. 

31. The commentary which gives this fact is coeval with its text 
and by the same author. Jen Tamil, v. p. 544. 

32. Meya-vivvurai ko ndu vi rumbuman- 

jeyavannrup-perambalan-jeyya 
tuya ponnani solantdulipa- 
raya sir-anapayan-arasavai — Payiram, 8. 



33. 180 of 1894. 

34. 445 of 1912. 

35. 39 of 1906. 

36. For more details see introduction to V. Svaminatha Aiyar’s 
edition of the work. Note, however, that 133 of 1908, (a.d. 1304), 
mentions either our author or a namesake of his. 

37. These contain hymns on the Tan j ore temple and on its copy, 
the temple of Gangaikonda-colapuram; this may be taken to give an 
indication of the date of Nambi Andar Nambi, if we may be certain 
that we have this ninth book as Nambi left it. 

38. Ante p. 152. 

39. 449 of 1908, Sen Tamil, iii, pp. 358-62. 

40. Ch. 39, w. 62-80. Sen Tamil, iv, pp. 141-5. 

41. 221 of 1894. 

42. Sen Tamil, iii, pp. 189-90. 

43. Ramana Sastri says that the original forms part of the Rauraua 
Agama (Ti rumandiram Intr. p. 7). The view has often been expressed 
that the Tamil work is the original and the Sanskrit is the translation. 
See T. I. Tambyah: Psalms of a Saiva Saint, p. xix. The arguments 
adduced in support of this position are inconclusive. The Sanskrit work 
is in anusthup verse like all agamas, corresponds to the Tamil sutras, 
and does not contain anything corresponding to the Tamil varttikas. 
Both Umapatisiva, author of the Pauskarabhasya and Sivagrayogi held 
the view that the Sanskrit work is the original, cf. V. P. Kantimatinatha 
Pillai, Tamil-civa-nana-bodac-cirappu (1926) pp. 54, 59. Vidyaranya 
is said to have written a monistic exposition of the Sanskrit work, ibid., 
pp. 30, 47. 3iva as guru told Manikkavasagar that he held the Siva-nana- 
badam in his hand; this may be not so much a daring anachronism 
antedating the work of Meykandar as Pope thought (Tiruvasagam, xxii) , 
as the expression of a belief in the antiquity of the Sanskrit work of 
that name. 

44. ‘Swam onru; adanait-terudal nanam; terndadanait-telidal 
bidam’. Kadavul-ma-munivar, v. 36 Tirupperunduraic-carukkam, 
Tiruvadavur-adigal Puranam. 

45. Vedam pasu, adan pal mey agamam nalvar 
Odum Tamil adanin ullurum ney-poda migu 
Neyyin itnisuvaiyam nil Vennai Meykandan. 

Seyda Tamil niilin tiram. 

46. The Saiva-Sittanta Varalaru by Anavaratavinayakam Pillai 
(Madras, 1908). 

47. We have the Saka data 1235 in his Sankarpanirakaranam, 
pdyiram, 26. 

48. These are: tattva rupam, tattva darsanam and tattva suddhi, 
atma rupam, atma darsanam and atma suddhi, siva rupam, siva darsa- 
nam, siva-yogam and siva-bhogam. The authorship of this work has 
been recently ascribed to Tattuvanathar of Shiyali, and the Tugalarubodam 
of Sirrambala-nadigal included among the fourteen sastras on the 



692 


LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 

strength of a fresh study of the mss. of the work. Saivasiddhanta 
Sattiram (1934), pp. 980-2, and 1124. 

49. v. 14. 

50. v. 99. 

51. v. 15. 

52. v. 37. 

53. 315 of 1921. Contra, ARE. 1922, II, 23, where the inscription is 
assigned to Kulottunga III. 

54. Sen Tamil, v. pp. 99-102. 

55. 534 and 535 of 1921; K. V. S. Aiyar who edits these inscriptions, 
El. xviii No. 8, falls into a number of errors which have been corrected 
by M. Raghava Aiyangar in JIH. I may add that I am unable to accept 
the identity of Gunasagara, the guru of Amitasagara, with the Guna- 
sagara of the Kalugumalai inscriptions with no more evidence than the 
identity of a name so common among Jain ascetics. 

56. meviya venkudaic-cembiyan Virarajendiran-ran 
ntiviyal sendamit-collin moli — Saudi verse 7. " 

57. Yappu 19. 

58. Yappu 34. 

59. Alahgaram 39. 

60. ARE. 1899, paragraph 50. 

61. Not all the citations of Adiyarkkunallar from this work could 
be traced in the current editions of the Dandiyalangaram. 

62. See Preface to Dandiyalangaram ed. Arumugam Servai (1920). 

63. Nannul-Maylainadarurai, p. xvii. 

64. If Krsna Raya mentioned in St. 10 of the ninth section refers 
to the Vijayanagar ruler, the work must be taken to fall outside the 
period covered in this chapter. 

65. For further details see S. Vaiyapuri Pillai, Introd. to Tamil 
Lexicon , p. xxvi. 

65a. Some hold that there were two authors of the same name 

66. Yapparungalam ed. Bhavanandam Pillai, pp. iv-v. 

67. Paripddal Introdn. p. xxi. 

67a. Nanarthdrnava-samksepa, Triv. Sans. Series No. 23. 29 and 31— 
vv. 1-20 at the beginning. 

68. Proceedings of the Fifth (All India) Oriental Conference. 
pp. 263 ff. 

69. Ante p. 126. 



Chapter XXVII 


COLA ART 

The history of Art in the Tamil country begins for all 
practical purposes with the rise of the Pal- 
Pre-Cdla penod. 2 avas G f the Simhavisnu line in the seventh 
century a.d. Having scooped out perhaps the first rock-cut 
shrine of his time at Mandagappattu (Viluppuram taluq, 
S. Arcot), Mahendravarman records his achievement with 
boyish glee in an inscription which says that he caused a 
temple for Brahma, Isvara, and Visnu to be made without the 
use of brick, timber, metal or mortar . 1 This is clear evidence 
that before his time temples were built of wood with the aid 
of metal nails or bands and raised over plinths of brick and 
mortar, or they may have been altogether brick and mortar 
structures in which timber and metal also found use. None 
of these early monuments have survived, but doubtless their 
forms and motifs must have been the basis for the Pallava 
structures, their pillars, capitals, and decorative designs. We 
have only literary references to palaces and temples, man- 
sions and bazaars in cities, besides some detailed, but obviously 
overdrawn, descriptions which we have now no means of veri- 
fying. Under the Pallavas who ruled to the end of the ninth 
century, architecture and sculpture in stone made great 
advances; the Shore Temple of Mamallapuram, and the Kaila- 
sanatha and Vaikunthaperumal at Kanclpuram mark the 
zenith of Pallava art; they were followed by smaller structures 
bearing evidence of the dwindling i-esources of the Pallavas 
towards the end. No South Indian bronze can be said to have 
been identified as demonstrably Pallava in origin; but con- 
sidering the heights attained in the art of metal-casting early 
in the period of Cola rule, we may legitimately infer that the 
beginnings of the art must be placed also in the age of the 
Pallavas. 

The Colas continued and developed the art-tradition of 
the Pallavas and Pandyas whom they suc- 
Cola art. ceeded. Under both the dynasties all the 

arts — architecture, sculpture and painting, were concentrated 



694 COLA ART 

mostly in public structures, particularly temples; the palaces 
and houses and all other types of civil architecture have more 
or less totally disappeared, though careful study may reveal, 
as in the instance of Uttaramerur, 2 the unbroken continuity of 
the town plan, and even of the names of streets in important 
centres from those days to ours. The practice of scooping out 
live rock into temples and pavilions had ceased under the 
later Pallavas, and structural temples of stone had become 
more or less the rule. It was the particular glory of the Colas 
to have extended this practice all over the Tamil country, 
their early temples being unpretentious structures hardly to 
be distinguished from those of the later Pallavas in the decline; 
the size of the temple grew with the extent of the kingdom 
until the giant temples of Tanjore a. 1 Gangaikonda-cola- 
puram proclaimed to the world the might and majesty of the 
greatest empire of the Tamils; two other temples at Darasuram 
and Tribhuvanam near Kumbakonam completed the tale of 
the most impressive Cola monuments. Sculpture, painting and 
bronze-casting made corresponding advances. 

G. Jouveau-Dubreuil, the founder of the scientific study 
of South Indian architecture, observed: 3 ‘The Pallavas excelled 
in sculpture. The Colas were above all architects. Their 
style is distinguished by simplicity and grandeur’. Cola sculp- 
tors, we shall see, however, were no less noteworthy than 
Cola architects and in no way inferior to Pallava sculptors in 
stone; their achievements in big bronzes were unsurpassed 
for their beauty and for the technical skill in the sheer mani- 
pulation of large masses of metal. 

The South Indian temple came up in one of several ways. 

Some shrines were erected in places where 
Origin of temples. f rees had been regarded perhaps from 
pre-Aryan days as the abode of the deity and had 
been worshipped as such; these trees came to be 
regarded as sthala-vrksas even after the rich hues of 
Indo-Aryan myths had gathered round these places; exam- 
ples are found in the mango ( ekamra ) tree of Kanclpuram, 
the Jambu tree of Jambukesvaram on the island of Srirangam, 
and the tillai - forest of Cidambaram. Other shrines arose on 
the spots where puranic stories and incidents were localised 
by popular belief. These two classes find a prominent place 



TYPES OF TEMPLES 


695 


in the hymns of the Devaram and the Divyaprabandam; after 
being celebrated in song by the nayanars and alyars they 
gained in importance and naturally attracted the attention of 
generous temple-builders. Then there were sepulchral shrines, 
paUipadais as they were known, built on the relics of saints, 
heroes and kings. Temples of this class appear to have been 
more numerous than we are apt to imagine, though only some 
attained any great size or celebrity. Some examples of such 
shrines have been noticed here in the chapters on political 
history. Lastly, there were temples which rose at the bidding 
of powerful monarchs on sites of their choice — the most con- 
spicuous instances of this class being the two Brhadisvara 
temples of Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram erected by 
Rajaraja I and his son Rajendra I. Perhaps the Kailasanatha 
of Kahcl, and the Kailasanatha of Ellora, must be included 
in the same category. 

The rule of the Colas covered roughly a period of four 
centuries (a.d. 850-1250). During this long period not only 
was the entire Tamil country studded with 
Stone temples. s t one temples of varying sizes, the erection of 
karralis, all-stone temples from base to finial ( upanadi-stupi 
pariyantam), being often mentioned as a mark of distinction, 
but the canon of Cola architecture was adopted and followed 
in areas outside the Tamil country — Ceylon, Mysore, Draksa- 
rama and other places in Andhra for instance. It is not pos- 
sible to survey here all these monuments; we must confine 
our attention to the Tamil country proper and to a few typical 
structures that possess the leading characteristics of each stage 
in the development of architectural motifs and designs. The 
number of temples of which the precise date of construction 
is known is not many, but the architectural motifs when care- 
fully studied reveal features typical of each phase of the art; 
the Siva temple at Korkai in Tinnevelly district, (PI. Ill, fig. 5) 
for instance, looks like a very early Cola temple, but its walls 
bear no inscriptions earlier than the time of Kuldttunga I; 

if, however, it is noted that the late inscrip- 
Their dates. tions occur only in the maMmandapa, and 
that the garbhagrha and ardhamandapa have nearly the same 
external and internal dimensions as the early Cdla temples 
of Pudukkottah, that the cornice here carries a hamsa frieze 
underneath, and that there are no niches on the exterior of 



696 COLA ART 

the walls of the sanctum, there can be little doubt left that the 
main shrine was certainly pre-Raj araj a in date, and the maha- 
mandapa a later addition. On the other hand, some features 
of the early Cola and in places even pre-Cola style, like the 
plain bevelled corbel without the triangular tenon-like projec- 
tion^, appear in temples known to have been built late in the 
Cola period like the Mayuranatha of Mayavaram (Tanjore) 
and Brahmesvara in Brahmadesam (S. Arcot) . Another diffi- 
culty arises from the additions made to early temples in later 
times; they are mainly in the form of pillared mandapas and 
corridors which often obscure the leading traits of early art: 
subsidiary structures, surrounding walls and gopuras 
on them create a somewhat confusing temple complex, 
the growth of which through its several stages is not always 
easy to trace. The temple of Uyyakkandan-Tirumalai near 
Trichinopoly, for instance, was at first a free-standing early 
Cola temple on a hill; under Rajendra I it was surrounded 
by mandapas erected at some distance from the main shrine 
so as not to obscure its features; but subsequent additions 
have not been marked by such taste, and have made it diffi- 
cult to visualise the original beauty of the shrine and its situa- 
tion. 

The replacement of brick by stone structures went on 
steadily under the Colas, and is often mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions. Perhaps the earliest instance is that of Tirukkaluk- 
kunram in the Chingleput district; all the early inscriptions 
of the temple occur in an apsidal stone building with a flat 
top which now serves as a strong-room; its architectural fea- 

„ , . tures are either late Pallava or early Cola in 

Early temples. . . . . ,. , ‘ 

character; an inscription of the twenty- 

seventh year of Rajakesari 4 suggests that the temple must 
have been in existence as a brick structure from the days of 
Skandasisya (if not earlier) to those of Aditya I, when it 
was built of stone and its original grants dating from Skan- 
dasisya’s time renewed and confirmed. At a later date even 
this stone temple was abandoned in favour of another large 
stone temple. Aditya I is praised for his having built stone 
temples of Siva from Sahyadri to the sea. In his reign, how- 
ever, brick temples were also built; a Paluvettaraiya chieftain 
Kandan Maravan built a brick temple of Tiruttorram-udaiya- 
mahadeva which was rebuilt of stone many years later in the 



EARLY PHASES OF ARCHITECTURE 


reign of Kulottunga I; 5 at the same time another fine stone 
temple of Agastyesvara (PI. IV, fig. 8) was built in the same 
place in Aditya’s reign, and this temple well preserved to this 
day conserves the most notable features of the transition from 
Pallava to Cola architecture — such as pillars with squatting 
lions forming their lower half and marked by large thick 
palagais over their capitals (PI. V, fig. 9). At Tirukodikaval 
(Tanjore district) Queen Sembiyan-mahadevi rebuilt of stone 
an old brick temple in the eleventh year of her son Uttama- 
Cola’s reign, and Rajaraja I ordered in his twenty-eighth year 
the reconstruction in stone of the temple at Tiruinalavadi, a 
task completed by his son as recorded in one of the inscrip- 
tions. 6 Other examples need not be recounted; obviously 
brick and stone architecture flourished side by side, and to 
this day we have the all-brick Cola temple at Nangur 
(Tanjore district) which reproduces all the mouldings in the 
basement and other architectural features typical of the Cola 
style. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil observed : ‘The pagoda of Bahur 

represents the style of the Pallava epoch, at the beginning of 
the ninth century; and the temple of Tanjore dates from the 
commencement of the eleventh century. During this interval 
of two centuries were constructed monuments of an interme- 
diate style’, and proceeded to illustrate that style by a study 
in some detail of the temple of Srinivasanallur (Musiri taluq, 
Trichinopoly district) . But the period of the intermediate style 
may be further divided into two — an earlier phase of transi- 
tion from the Pallava to the Cola style, a period marked by a 
number of small and medium temples which share the Pallava 
and Cola architectural features in varying 
Two periods. proportions and which still retain generally 
the appearance of Pallava structural temples; and a later more 
pronounced Cola phase; the former includes the reigns of/ 
Vijayalaya and Aditya I. and the latter the reign of Parantaka 
I and the interval between him and Rajaraja I. I 


The smaller early Cola temples hardly differed in their 
appearance from those of Muktesvara and 
Transition. Matangesvara in KancI, and the temples of 

Tiruttani and Bahur — all stone temples of the late Pallava 
period. The mouldings in the basement ( upapltha 7 ) 

the disposition of the niches and pilasters on the body 
C 88 



698 COLA ART 

of the temple, and the vimana rising on a square sanctum 
( garbhagrha ) in diminishing tiers were more or less the same. 
The topmost members of the vimana, viz., the griva, sikhara 
and stupi conformed to the plan of the garbhagrha, generally 
square, but sometimes circular in section as in the case of the 
Vijayalaya-colesvara of Narttamalai which resembles the Tri- 
purantakesvara, Muktesvara and Matangesvara of Kahci. 
Some of these early Cola temples have a number of 
subsidiary shrines round about and to understand the 
disposition of these shrines, we must again turn to 
Pallava shrines. The garbhagrha of the Kailasanatha 
(Rajasimhesvara) of Kancx is a composite structure, with 
a central cella facing east to which are attached smaller 
shrines built on to its walls on the three free sides and 
the four corners; all the subshrines contain images of Siva. 
At Panamalai subshrines are attached to the middle of the 
three free sides, while in the Aivarkoyil at Kodumbalur they 
are found in the four corners of the main shrine; the integra- 
tion of Kailasanatha is reached by a combination of both the 
conceptions. In the early Cola temples the subshrines are 
detached from the main sanctum, and arranged as separate 
shrines round it in the courtyard, facing the main shrine and 
its axis, dedicated each to a subsidiary deity ( parivara-devata ■) . 
These peristylar subshrines, each a miniature of the central 
sanctum, generally abut on the enclosing wall ( tirumadil ) 
which usually has a gopura in front. The gopura, how- 
ever, is a relatively small structure calculated in no way to 
detract from the domination of the vimana. The number of 
subshrines increased in later times with the size of the temple. 

Of these early Cola temples Percy Brown observes : ‘All 
these small structures are very complete in their formation 
and display a freshness and spirit in marked contrast to the 
last productions of the declining style of the Pallavas. So 
much so that they appear to herald either a new movement, 
or to denote some stimulation received from another and more 
virile source. The latter assumption is the more likely as all 
the temples of the group show by their 
New start. treatment a close affinity to those of the 

more distant Calukyans than to any revival of their predeces- 
sors the Pallavas’. 8 It is well known that the Calukyas of 
Badami drew upon Pallava experience for their chief temples 



NARTTAMALAI 


in Pattadakal. and that about the middle of the eighth century 
they gave place to the Rastrakutas who continued the Pallava- 
Calukya tradition in structural temples and in the rock-cut 
style; the Calukya power did not revive till towards the close 
of the tenth century. Most obviously, Brown’s first alter- 
native, the heralding of a new movement, is the correct 
explanation of the freshness of the early C5la monuments. 


n n 

Uu 




The Vijayalaya-colesvaram of Narttamalai (PI. I figs. 1 
and 2) is the first of these monuments to claim attention. Its 
name occurs in a later Pandya inscription, and the date of its 
construction is not as clearly attested as might be wished. 9 
But there seems to be little reason to doubt the identity of 
the structure or its age as suggested by its name. The tem- 
ple stands on a hill and faces west, and is surrounded by seven 
small attendant shrines now in ruins (see plan) besides the 
Viiavalaya- nandi in front which has left no trace; the 
Colesvara. enclosing wall of the group has totally dis- 

appeared. The main temple is built entirely of well-dressed 



700 


COLA ART 


gneiss blocks accurately fitted, and covers an area of 1240 
square feet. The garbhagrha is circular and enclosed by a 
solid wall five feet thick; it has a diameter of 8 feet 6 inches 
inside, and a height of 8 feet. The circular wall is enclosed by 
a square structure of 29 feet side which leaves a narrow 
circumambulatory between the two walls. The closed anta- 
rala (porch) in front on the same basement as the main 
shrine is carried on six pillars and an equal number of pilasters, 
and has a flat roof drawn out into a massive cornice, arched 
and decorated with kudus at intervals; inside the kudus are 
seen human heads or animal figures under trifoliated finials. 
There is a parapet over the edge of the entire roof relieved by 
a series of panjaras, cubical at the corners with curvilinear 
roofs, and rectangular in the middle with wagon-shaped roofs, 
all the panjaras being adorned with figure niches bearing 
dancing figures of women in graceful poses. The vimdna 
above the circular shrine, unique in style, rises in three 
diminishing tiers, each with its own cornice and kudus, the 
two lower ones being square, and the upper-most circular 
and forming a sort of plinth for the grlva, sikhara and stupi 
on top. On the four sides above the circular tier, at the points 
corresponding to the four comers of the lower square tier 
there are placed four fine nandis (bulls) facing out; there are 
also niches for sculptures at the four cardinal points of the 
circular tier. The sikhara is a smooth dome circular in section 
unlike the ribbed octagonal Pallava type; it too has projecting 
kiidus crowned by lion faces ( simhalalata ) and surmounting 
the niches in the grlva (neck) below. The stupi, now missing, 
must have been circular also. The vimdna is hollow and 
diminishing in size as it rises owing to the corbelling of the 
stones on their inner face. The pillars within the antarala 
(unlike the pilasters on the external walls which have develop- 
ed Cola features) are still of the Pallava order, square in sec- 
tion and chamfered into an octagon in the middle; the corbels 
exhibit the taranga (roll) ornament with a medial band and 
no lotus medallion. An elegant floral design crowns the main 
gateway bearing in lateral niches graceful two-armed dvdra- 
palakas, five feet in height facing front, but body flexed to- 
wards the entrance; one leg crossed over the other (fig. 84) . 
Of the seven subshrines six are intact and the seventh in 
ruins. They are all cut-stone replicas of the main shrine. 



TRANSITION FROM SMALL TEMPLES 


701 


Other temples, though smaller, belonging to the same 
class are also found in the Pudukkottah area. In Viralur the 
small Siva temple has a circular vimana 
other examples. <Ji S p enses w ith the square stages 

and is set right on the roof, and there are remains 
of subshrines. The Balasubrahmanya temple of Kan- 
nanur, which is marked by entire yalis in the frieze of 
the entablature and not merely their busts as in other instan- 
ces, belongs to the reign of Aditya I, while the small Siva 
temples of Visalur, Tiruppur and Kaliyapatti are all apparent- 
ly of the time of Vijayalaya. They are all compact little edifices 
of the typical square type with a sanctum about eight feet 
square on the outside and five feet inside, and a small ardha- 
mandapa in front closed on the sides with a low entrance 
facing the east. The vimana of these temples, square in sec- 
tion, rests right on the roof, the sikhara being curvilinear and 
bearing large kudus with scroll work and simha-mukha super- 
posed on niches in the gnva below. In the niches are found 
generally Indra on the east, Daksinamurti on the south, 
Visnu on the west and Brahma, on the north — a disposition 
which is repeated on the walls round the garbhagrha in 
larger shrines with the omission, of course, of the Indra figure 
on the east and the substitution, at times, of a Lingodbhava 
for Visnu on the west. These small shrines may with advan- 
tage be compared with that represented in the famous rock 
relief of Mamallapuram showing Bhagiratha’s (or Arjuna’s?) 
penance. The Agastyesvara of Panangudi (II fig. 3) is also 
of the same class but rather more elaborate as it has niches 
on the walls of the garbhagrha and excavation has revealed 
the presence of seven subshrines round it, as round all the 
others so far mentioned. 

Most typical of the transition period is the larger and very 
well preserved temple at Tirukkattalai (see 
Tirukkattalai. p l an ) now known as Sundaresvara. It 
was built in the third year of Aditya I. 10 The modern 
name of the place is derived obviously from the old name 
of the temple called Karkuricci-Tirukkarrali in the 
earliest inscriptions. The central shrine comprises a square 
garbhagrha (12' outside and 6' 6" inside) and an ardha- 
mandapa besides a mukhamandapa, an obviously later addi- 
tion of the time of Kulottunga I. The vimana is almost square 



702 COLA ART 

and has a stone finial of corresponding shape. There are 
simhcilalatas facing each cardinal direction below the stupi . and 
the bulls in the next tier below. Further down, in two rows 
one above the other on the tiers of the vimdna are found in 
niches a seated Daksinamurti and Bhiksatanamurti in the 
south, Varahamurti and Visnu on the west, two Brahmas on 
the north. And on the main wall of the garbhagrha there are 
a standing Vinadhara Daksinamurti on the south (fig. 37), a 
Lingodbhava on the west and Brahma on the north. The 



Plan II. Ground plan of Sundaresvara Temple at Tirukkattalai. 


pilasters on the walls are typically Cola, but the corbels 
though with an angular profile bear the Pallava roll-ornament 
with a hollow moulding (in place of the roll at its lower angle 
or bend) , and further up above the cornice there runs a frieze 
of rampant yalis with projecting makara heads at the corners. 
There is a frieze of ganas below the cornice. The seven sub- 
shrines, miniatures of the main shrine, abut the surrounding 
wall ( tirumadil ), and enshrine SQrya; the Saptamatrkas 
(seven mothers) in a row with Ganesa and Virabhadra at 
either end (this shrine has necessarily a wagon-top roof with 
a row of finials) ; and then in pradaksina order, Ganesa, Sub- 
rahmanya, Jyestha, Candra and Candikesvara. There is a 
small gopura over the front gateway of this very complete 
early Cola temple extant. 




COLA ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES 703 

The Nagesvara at Kumbakonam (PI. Ill fig. 6), though 
N _ , its appreciation has become difficult by the 

too close proximity of a number of later 
structures, shares all the main features of Tirukkattalai; 
specially notable here are the ardhanari figure at the back of 
the garbhagrha and the number of fine portrait figures in the 
recesses and niches of the ardhamandapa and the tableux of 
Ramayana scenes beneath the pilasters of the same mandapa, 
which will call for further discussion under sculpture; the 
top members of the vimdna above the third tier are now 
finished in stucco though originally they must have been of 
stone. The presence of four lion-pillars built into later sub- 
shrines shows that the sanctity of the site goes back to the 
Pallava period. A shrine of Ganesa in the s.-w. corner, one 
of Vaidyanatha to the north of the mahamandapa, a Surya 
shrine in the n.-e. comer and a loose bas-relief of Jyestha 
seem to be the only survivals of the original parivdra shrines. 
This temple may with reason be identified with the Tiruk- 
kudandai-kilkottam of Appar. The Mahadeva temple at 
Tiruccendurai (Trichinopoly district) built by Bhuti Aditya 
Bhattarika, queen of the Cola prince Arikulakesari, in the 
reign of Aditya I, 11 the Agastyesvaram of Melappaluvur (PI. 
IV fig. 8) with a circular vimdna on a square garbhagrha of 
the time of Vijayalaya or Aditya, are other notable temples 
of this early phase of the transition to the Cola style. 

Before taking up the temples of the next period, Paran- 
taka I to Rajaraja I, when Cola temples proper came into 
existence, we may stop to consider the defi- 
style atUreS ° f C °' a n ^ e c ^ aracter ^ st ^ cs fh e transition and the 
typical features of the developed Cola style. 
The most notable general features are the emphasis on the 
central shrine which dominates the whole group of sub- 
shrines by its position and its architecture; then the exterior 
of the main shrine displays a remarkable simplification in all 
its parts; much unnecessary and fretful detail is eliminated 
and the value of plain spaces receives greater appreciation 
than in the Pallava structures, and much more than in the 
later Calukya and Hoysala temples. The antardla or porch 
in front of the garbhagrha forms an integral part of the cen- 
tral shrine, so that the lowermost tier of the vimdna covers 
both in Pallava temples; this feature which persists in the early 



704 


COLA ART 


Cola temples, e.g. Vijayalaya-colesvaram, soon disappears; 
the cmtarcila true to its name becomes a communicating passage 
between the garbhagrha and the mahdmandapa in front, and 
the vimana rises in the newer temples only over the sanctum; 
the antardla is also known as ardhamandapa (vestibule) . In the 
basement ( upapitha ) , the kumudam starts by having an 
octagonal section but later becomes a rounded moulding; 
likewise the kapotam starts by being straight, a projecting tier 
of rectangular blocks, but later develops into a curved cornice. 
The dominating lion-motif in pillars and elsewhere of the 
Pallava style gradually disappears altogether, and the pillars 
and pilasters evolve into ‘purely abstract conventions of mould- 
ings and other similar forms’ (Brown). The Cola order of 
the capital differs from the Pallava in two respects: a neck- 
moulding (padmabandha) is introduced between the shaft and 
the capital adding another member to the latter at the lower 
end in the form of a pot ( kalasa ); the abacus or palagai be- 
comes much expanded, a thick square slab of stone which to- 
gether with the petal moulding (idol) on its lower side be- 
comes the most striking element in the order. The palagai 
becomes thinner later, and the idal undergoes interesting 
modifications. 

Again the bracket or corbel develops an angular profile 
instead of the curved one of the late Pallava style, and is 
often bevelled so as to leave a triangular tenon-like projection, 
which, in turn, starts on a long line of varied and interesting 
evolution culminating in the pumunai of modern times (see 
drawing 5 at the end of the chapter) . The roll ornament with 
its median band is either shed, or at times varied with an 
involution or ‘throating’ at its bend. Both forms of the corbel, 
the plain bevel as well as the bevel with the taranga (roll), 
often appear together as inside the Agnlsvara at Cittur 
(Pudukkottah) . Vestiges of the old order survive sometimes 
like the massive capital surmounted by a kudu in the Siva 
temple at Udaiyargudi, the Muvarkovil of Kodumbalur and 
the Siva temple at Pufijai — all of which will be referred to 
again in some detail. Besides the strictly architectural treat- 
ment of the exterior, a considerable amount of bold sculpture 
appears in prepared niches containing icons and pur&nic or 
human figures. String courses or friezes of ydlis above the 
plinth, and of bhutaganas in various humourous postures 



SRiNIVASANALLUR 705 

below, and yalis again above the upper cornices, which also 
carry kudus at intervals and scroll ornamentation ( kodik - 
karukku ) are other notable features of the new style. The 
kudus have changed form, their shovel-tops giving place to a 
trefoil or to a lion-face (siviha-mukha ) , arches giving place 
to circles in the centre containing no figure sculpture unlike 
the Pallava kudxis. 

The peristylar subshrines, already mentioned, are another 
essential feature of the Cola temple-complex. An inscription 
in the Siva temple of Erumbur (S. Arcot) 12 counts eight sub- 
shrines including that of Nandi in front of the main shrine. 
The deities occupying the subshrines and the positions they 
take in relation to the main shrine vary in different instances, 
and the inscriptions often give full details regarding each tem- 
ple. We need not stop to reproduce them here as some idea 
has been given in the account of individual temples. 

The earliest specimen of the time of Parantaka I is the 
temple popularly known as Koranganatha in 
Koianganatha. srlnivasanallur (Musiri taluq, Trichinopoly 
district), of which the deity is described as Tirukkurak- 
kutturai Ferumanandigal in the earliest inscriptions. 13 A 
medium-sized temple (fig. 10) with an overall length of 50 
feet, it has a square garbhagrha of 25 feet side, and a mandapa 
in front 25 feet by 20. The top of the sikhara is 50 feet from 
the ground and the cornice of the mandapa and garbhagrha 
16 ft. The cella, which has the appearance of being double- 
storied on account of a cornice at its middle height, is 12 feet 
square inside and entered by an antarala borne on four pillars. 
A projecting niche in the middle of each of the three free 
sides of the garbhagrha, and the recesses on either side of it 
accommodate icons or portrait sculptures of about half life- 
size and of such high relief as to appear almost as in the round. 
The north and south walls of the antarala have similar niches 
which must once have enshrined Durga and Ganapati. The 
niches for the dvdrapalas are also empty. The decora- 
tive designs of the arches above the niches are inter- 
mediate between those of the Kailasanatha of Kanci 
and of Tanjore. There is no kapota on the base- 
ment and its place is taken by the frieze of simhas 
nearlv as prominent as at Tanjore in the next period. There 
C. 89 



706 COLA ART 

is no gana - frieze below the cornice of the garbhagrha, where 
we see instead over the beam the projecting ends of the rafters 
inside, imitated from the wooden rafters of a brick and mortar 
temple. 

The Agastisvara of Kiliyanur (South Arcot) dates from 
the time of Parantaka I also; 14 here the lowest 
Other temples. course 0 f the square basement comprising a 
series of plinth stones ( upana or jagatip-padai ) scalloped on 
top in the form of lotus petals, the idea being that the entire 
vim&na from the kumuda upwards stands within a blossoming 
lotus forming a padmakosa (pistil inside the lotus). The 
kuviuda moulding has semi-circular cross section as at Srini- 
vasanallur. The Tiruttindlsvara of Tindivanam 15 (S. Arcot) 
dating from before a.d. 961; the Pipllikesvara of Tiruverumbi- 
yur (Trichinopoly) built by about the same time by S§embiyan 
Vedivelan, a feudatory of Sundara Cola, 16 and notable for the 
sculptures of purinic scenes in panels below the pilasters in 
the exterior as in the Nagesvara of Kumbakonam, are other 
temples in the same class. The Tiruvalisvaram near Brahma- 
desam (Tinnevelly district) is almost unique for its fine work- 
manship and its wealth of monographic sculpture on the upper 
tiers of the vimiina, and dates from some time before the _acces- 
sion of Rajaraja I whose inscriptions, however, are the earliest 
traced on the walls of the extant structure, later additions 
being the mahamandapa of the period of Cola-Pandya viceroys 
and the amman shrine of the thirteenth century. The Brahma- 
purisvara of Pullamangai (Tanjore district) built in the early 
years of Parantaka I 17 resembles the Nagesvara of Kumba- 
konam in many ways, and is notable for its corbels bearing 
the taranga ornament — one of the earliest instances in this 
period, and for the excellence of its niches and their sculptures 
to be considered later in some detail. 

The Mahalingasvami temple of Tiruvidaimarudur (Tan- 
jore district) must have been built of stone about 910. An 
inscription in the temple of the fourth year of Parantaka I 18 
states that at a meeting held in the ndtakasala of the temple 
it was resolved to have the old inscriptions copied and re- 
engraved in the garbhagrha and vimiina, and one of the old 
recorded gifts related to the reign of Kadupattigal Nandi- 
pottaraiyar, i.e. Nandivarman II or III. The basement of the 



KODUMBALUR 


707 


temple has an octagonally moulded kumada and a short kantha 
studded with pilasters supporting a straight kapota, over which 
is a dado much like the kantha below adorned by sculptured 
panels and surmounted by a thick projecting cornice scalloped 
underneath in the form of lotus petals. Such variations of 
architectural motifs which attest the artistic freedom and 
initiative of the school cannot be traced in any detail in this 
general account of Cola art. The early inscriptions of the 
temple mention a shrine of Purana Ganapati, implying the 
presence at one time of subshrines round the main one, and 
of a mandapa called after the famous merchant-guild Tisai- 
ayirattu-ainnurruvar. 

Among other clearly dated temples of this period which 
cannot be studied in any detail may be named the Mucu- 
kundesvara of Kodumbalur (c. 912), the twin shrines of the 
Colesvara group at Melappalavur (Trichinopoly) , 19 the 
Bhaktajanesvara of Tirunamanallur (S. Arcot), 20 the Vata- 
tlrthanatha of Andanallur (Trichinopoly), 21 and the Kadam- 
bavanesvara of Erumbur (S. Arcot) . 22 In the last named tem- 
ple built in 935 we find the Arunacalesvara form of Siva in 
the western niche of the sanctum in the place of the usual 
Visnu, Ardhanari, or Lingodbhava. The Naltunai Isvaram of 
Punjai of the time of Aditya II should also be mentioned. 23 

There are several temples in the same class; passing 
these by, we may make particular mention of the Puduk- 
kottah temples — Agnisvaram at Cittur and the Muvarkovil 
of Kodumbalur. The first bears a record of the fourth year 
of Rajakesari (Gandaraditya) 24 and must have been built 
about 950; here the corbel has the angular profile, the taranga 
ornament with the ‘throating’ at the bend, and also the 
median band; the other type of corbel is also used, and the 
same latitude is observed in the shape of the pilasters in the 
different sections of the temple. Of the ‘Temple of Three’ at 
Kodumbalur, a very fine temple-complex of the time of 
Sundara Cola built by Bhuti Vikrama- 
Muvar-kovil kesari, 25 only two members survive (IV, 
fig. 7). Excavation has revealed that the virmna-trayam 
together with the surrounding subshrines was placed 
within a large enclosure with a gateway on the west 
(see plan) . Of the three central shrines each 21 feet square 



708 


COLA ART 


and standing on a north-south line at intervals of about 10 
feet, all facing west, the middle and south vimanas are intact, 
but only the basement of the northern one. Each had an 
ardhamandapa of 18 feet square of which all but the plinth 
has gone. At a distance of 8 feet from this, and common to 
all the three, was a mahamaiidapa 91 feet by 41 feet, in front 
of which at a distance of 1 foot 9 inches in the centre was a 
small nandi shrine (11' 3" square) ; midway between the ncindi 



Plan in. Muvarkovil : Kodumbalur. 


shrine and the gateway ( gopura ) on the central axis was the 
balipitha or d hvajastambha about 5' 9" square. Of all these 
only the plinths have survived. Around this principal group 
and abutting the enclosing wall ran a covered cloister with 
fifteen subshrines. The basements of 14 of these are intact 
while the one at the south-east comer is altogether missing. 
The enclosing wall is massive, 3' 4" of stone; the main gate 
on the west is 4' 6" wide, and there is besides a passage (4' 




JAVANESE ANALOGY 


709 


wide) on the north-east corner leading down a flight of steps 
to a circular stone well of ten feet diameter just outside. The 
principal shrines are padmakosas. and the mouldings of the 
basement, as indeed all that has survived of this temple- 
complex, are very fine work. The bhuta or gana friezes below 
the massive arched cornices of the vim&na contain particularly 
fascinating studies in the funny and bizarre. Many of the 
fine sculptures of Siva in his various forms on the vimana 
and of the parivara devatas, lying loose or excavated, deserve 
notice; these include Ardhanari, Vinadhara Daksinamurti. 
Gajari, Antakasurasamhara, Kirata, Gangadhara, Harihara, 
Umaprasada, Saptamatrkas, MohinS and others. 

By its three central shrines of equal beauty and impor- 
tance, and the multiplicity of its subshrines the Muvarkovil 
reminds one of the celebrated Brahmanical temple-complex 
of Prambanam in Java. Built within less 
on nCe than half a century of each other, and at a 

time when there were many opportunities of 
active intercourse between South India and Indonesia, the 
two temple-complexes exhibit very interesting differences in 
the application of the same idea. The Javanese temple takes 
up the pre-Cola Indian idea of representing the manifesta- 
tions of the same deity in the principal and subordinate 
shrines, and multiplies the latter indefinitely, the Prambanan 
complex having for instance 156 minor shrines; the Cola 
architects resist the temptation to display by sheer number of 
subshrines, confining them to a more or less schematic and 
traditional group of attendant divinities waiting upon the 
main deity as it were. On the other hand, while the central 
temples in Prambanam enshrined Siva, Visnu and Brahma, 
the Trinity of Hinduism, at Kodumbalur Siva alone occupied 
the sanctum of all the three central shrines. 

We now come to the Middle Cola period as we may call 
it (985-1070) when Cola Art reached and passed its meridian. 

The number of temples built during this 
Middle Cola period continued to be large, and the con- 
period. 

structions were as widespread as the Cola 
empire itself. But in this general account we must neces- 
sarily pass over many instances of intrinsically interesting and 
well-dated examples, 26 and fasten attention on the two great 



710 


COLA ART 


temples of Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram which con- 
stitute a landmark in the history of Indian Architecture. 

Compared with the smaller temples of the same age, 
these two, as Percy Brown observes, ‘are as cathedrals to a 
village church.’ 27 Begun according to the records in the 
temple some time about 1003, _the Rajarajesvara (now called 
Brhadlsvara) of Tanjore was sufficiently advanced in con- 
struction by 1006 to allow of Rajaraja worshipping in the 
central shrine with the offer of golden flow- 

j 1 ers on his return from the war against the 

Calukya Satyasraya,- and we have seen that on the 275th day 
of the twenty-fifth year (1009-10) of his reign he solemnly 
dedicated the copper-pot ( kalasa ) meant to serve as the 
finial ( stupi ) at the top of the vimana. 29 This was apparently 
the most ambitious undertaking of Tamil architecture quite 
in keeping with the vast power and the growing extent and 
resources of the Cola empire (VI fig. 11) . The main struc- 
ture is 180 feet long, and the massive pyramidal vimana rises 
to a height of 190 feet over the sanctum excelling thus even 
the Lingaraj (160 feet) of Bhuvanesvar, then a recent con- 
struction. Barring the portico, the nandimandapa, the Karu- 
vur Devar shrine, the amman shrine and that of Subrah- 
manya which are the most substantial later accretions, most 
of the structures of this grand temple are of one period, and 
it is not difficult to appreciate the majesty and simplicity of 
its unitary plan. The axial structures, the vimana, the ard- 
hamandapa, mahamandapa and the big nandi are set in a 
walled enclosure of suitable proportions with a gopura in 
front on the east. Abutting the madil inside runs a pillared 
cloister connecting together a number of subshrines, thirty- 
five in all, placed at the cardinal points and at intervals along 
the four sides. There is a second gopura in front which 
formed the gateway of a second outer enclosure. 

The main vimana is of the uttama (high-class) type, also 
called a mddakkdvil in Tamil and Daksina-meru— the Koran- 
ganatha, as already noticed, being perhaps the earliest exam- 
ple of this type. It rests on a solid square base of 99 feet side, 
of which the horizontal outline is broken by five projecting 
bays, the central bay larger than the rest, alternating with 
recesses— all continued right up from the basement to the 



THE GREAT TEMPLE OF TANJORE 711 

topmost storey of the pyramid above, where the sikhara 
springs. The base (p ttha) is ornamented by pilasters alter- 
nating with recesses and carries a kapota (cornice) pressed 
down as it were by a yali frieze. On this pitha rises the 
upapitha of a lesser area of 63 feet square of which the updna 
covered with inscriptions forms a padmadala receptacle for 
the massive semi-circular kumuda with padmadala courses 
above and below; the kumuda is chamfered octagonally where 
it turns into the transept at the eastern end. The kantha 
and kapota have been virtually suppressed, and immediately 
above the kumuda is found the varimanam, a series of lion 
figures in profile with riders on their backs, the lions giving 
place at the corners to makara heads with warriors, horses or 
equestrian figures in their gapes. The vertical walls of the 
cella follow the contours of the pediment as already stated, 
and rise to a height of 50 feet; they are divided into two storeys 
by a massive curved comice with a number of kudus bearing 
sculptures in low relief; the second storey also ends with an 
overhanging cornice on top with a frieze of yalis above. 
The niches and recesses throughout bear graceful figural 
sculptures and have the typical Cola forms of architectural 
members and ornamental motifs. Some of these are so pro- 
minent and characteristic of the style as to deserve particu- 
lar mention. As already indicated the niches ( devagosthas ) 
are no longer shallow recesses adorned with bas-reliefs as in 
Pallava times, but deep hollows serving as receptacles for 
statues almost in the round generally of the various mani- 
festations of Siva. On either side of the niche are pilasters 
with bulbous capitals which differ from other pilasters by 
their section being polygonal and not square. Again, beneath 
the architrave over the niche we find a tiruvacci whose form 
begins to resemble the kudu, a transformation which is fully 
effected in the next period. The centre of this tiruvacci is 
circular as in the kudu, but the makaras on the sides have 
pendant tails as in the Pallava period — a feature which dis- 
appears later. There is another motif peculiar to the Cola 
epoch and unknown in Pallava monuments. It appears in 
the recesses between the niches carrying sculptures and takes 
the form of a tree or pillar growing out of a vase ( kumbha ) 
and crowned by a sort of capital with brackets of rearing 
horses supporting an ornament which in general resembles 



712 


COLA ART 


the tiruvacci described above and takes the shape of a flower 
bearing flames or arabesques. This ‘decorative pilaster’ motif 
develops in the fourteenth century into the kumbhapanjara 
in which the top member grows into something like a pahjara. 

As in the upper storeys of the vimana the vertically of 
perpendicular walls and niches of the garbhagrha is relieved 
by powerful horizontal members — the heavy kumuda mould- 
ing of the pediment, and the massive overhanging cornices 
of the two storeys. These vertical walls enclose a shrine 
chamber 45 feet square with a narrow circumambulatory 
passage 9 feet wide round it. The inner wall of the cella 
repeats the features of the outside with large central bay- 
niches enshrining sculptures and lighted by rectangular open- 
ings (doorways) on the outer wall, the openings being walled 
up later perhaps in the Nayak period. These rubble walls 
have now been removed. It is in this circumambulatory, 
tucked away beneath the vimana round the garbhagrha, that 
the now well-known Cola frescoes were discovered about 1930. 
The cella enshrines an enormous Unga which with its pedestal 
nearly covers the height of both the storeys (as seen from 
outside) of the garbhagrha. 

The pyramidal vimana above the sanctum rises in thir- 
teen diminishing tiers until the width of its apex equals one- 
third of its base. ‘On the square platform thus formed stands 
the cupola, the inward curve of its neck producing a pleasing 
break in the otherwise rigid outlines of the composition, while 
the bulbous dome poised like a light but substantial globe is 
a fitting finish to its soaring character’ (Brown) . The effect 
of the pyramid is enhanced by the studied manner of its 
treatment in which the vertical lines of the panjaras are so 
intersected by the horizontal lines of the diminishing tiers 
as to produce ‘an architectural texture of great beauty.’ 
‘Finally’, says Percy Brown, ‘there is the contrast of the 
rounded cupola at the summit, its winged niches on all four 
sides relieving the severity of the outline just where this is 
required. In erecting the vimana on the principle of a pyra- 
mid its builders were on safe ground, for such a form not only 
conveys the impression of solid strength and stability, but is 
in reality the most permanent structural shape yet devised 
. . . Unquestionably the finest single creation of the Dravidian 



TEMPLE OF GAN GAIKONDA-C6LAPU RAM 713 


craftsmen, the Tanjore vimdna is also a touchstone of Indian 
architecture as a whole.’ 

The shrine of Candikesvara is situated very near the main 
shrine to its north and looks like a miniature of it even in 
the double storey of the cella. The peristylar cloister con- 
nects as already noted a string of thirty-five subshrines — four 
at the four corners, six between them and on either side of 
the gdpura on the east, seven on the west, and nine each on 
the two sides. Most of them have now been walled up and 
converted to other uses; the comer ones which are intact 
recall the small early Cola shrines already discussed. The 
full details of the parivdra deities enshrined in these sub- 
shrines and at Muvarkovil will perhaps never be known. The 
enclosing walls ( madil ) seen from outside also present the 
appearance of two storeys of equal height each topped by a 
massive curved cornice of its own. Their pilasters with 
quadrangular section and bulbous capital, superimposed one 
on the other, are quite impressive to look at and a series of 
nandis at regular intervals crown the walls. 

Built within twenty years of the completion of the great 
Tanjore temple, that of Gangaikonda-colapuram (VI, fig. 12) 
reproduces almost all the main features of Tanjore, but in 
quite a different spirit; Percy Brown has called it ‘the femi- 
nine counterpart of Tanjore,’ 29 lacking the virile qualities and 
masculine vigour of its predecessor, but possessing a rich and 
voluptuous beauty of its own. The difference in effect is 
almost entirely the result of the introduction of more orna- 
mentation as in the pediment and of curves in the place of 
straight lines in the composition of the vimdna. This great 
temple has suffered much from modem predatory engineer- 
ing, 30 and seems once to have been as much fortress as temple; 

there is a large bastion on its south-west 
colapuram°^ a ~ an § le > and a smaller one on the western side. 

The temple itself forms a rectangle 340 feet 
long and 100 feet wide, composed of a mandapa measuring 
175 feet by 95, and a garbhagrha with a square plan of 100 
feet side, with a vestibule in between, the ends of which form, 
as in Tanjore, north and south entrances, both picturesque 
doorways with impressive dvdrapdlakas and approached by 
flights of steps, (VII, fig. 13). 

C. 90 



716 


COLA ART 


temple as in the north-west comer of the north court in the 
Valuvur (Tanjore) temple. 

Other developments to be put in the same class were the 
gopuras and mandapas which also grew in importance in the 
late Cola period and continued to retain it in subsequent 
Gopuras and ^ mes - ^ single modest gopura was part of 
mandapas. the temple plan even from Pallava times. 

and we have seen examples of it in such 
transition and early Cola temples as those of Tirukkattalai, 
Muvarkovil and Erumur. Again an inscription 39 from 
Vrddhacalam (S. Arcot) of the twelfth year of Uttama Cola 
records the construction by his mother, Sembiyan-mahadevi, 
of a complete temple unit comprising srikoyil, snapana-manda- 
pam, gopura and minor shrines. The large inner gopura 
Rajarajan-tiruvasal, and the outer gopura Keralantakan-tiru- 
vasal of Tanjore, both of stone, were coeval with the main 
shrine. Another all-stone gopura is the small and beautiful 
one of Nilakanthesvara at Laddigam (N. Arcot) of the time 
of Rajendra I (VII, fig. 14). Kulottunga III was the last 
great builder among Cola monarchs and the gopura of his 
great temple at Tnbhuvanam (to be described presently) 
marks the last phase of the Cola style of gopura. It is a 
squat oblong structure of five diminishing storeys with 
a rectangular griva surmounted by a wagon-top sikhara with 
large kudu-ends on either side and a series of kalasas on top. 
None of these gopuras, however, is designed so as to interfere 
with the domination of the entire temple-complex by its 
central vimana. The position was more or less exactly revers- 
ed under the later Pandyas and their successors, the rulers of 
Vijayanagara. To some extent the Pandya practice began 
when the Cola style had not cleared the stage, and the Pand- 
yan gopuras of Cidambaram. Tiruvannamalai and Jambukes- 
varam (1100-1350) chosen by Jouveau-Dubreuil to illustrate 
that style considerably overlap the later Cola period. Like- 
wise the ma-ndapa is also an essential part of the temple plan 
as it was developed by the Colas and only received a greater 
emphasis, often carried to meaningless excess of display, 
under their successors, particularly the Vijayanagar monarchs 
and their feudatories. Even if we take no account of the 
pillared cloisters of the peristyle— the tiriiccurrdlais as they 



AIRAVATESVARA 


717 


were called — sometimes built in two or three storeys, the 
mahdmandapas of Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram, and 
earlier still that of Muvarkovil must be held to be the precur- 
sors of the later more extensive mandapas. A mandapa called 
Arumolidevan was built on the north of the Melpadi temple 
in the fourth year of Rajendra I. 40 Though the snapana-manda- 
pas may not have been large structures, nrtta-mandapas in 
temples of which we hear in inscriptions must have attained 
a fair size. Some of these mandtapas were big enough to serve 
as royal camps or courts of enquiry in important causes where 
investigations had to be conducted by royal officials. Sekki- 
lar is said to have first expounded his Periya-Purchiam in the 
reign of Kulottunga II in the 1000-pillared mandapa of the 
Cidambaram temple; this may mean only that that mandapa 
had been built when the Sekkil&r Puranam which narrates 
the event was written; but enough has been said to show that, 
very probably, a mandapa of good extent was available for 
Sekkilar’s use. 

In the late Cola period (1070-1250) temple construction 
was as active as ever. We must pass by all the smaller 
temples, because not only are they numerous and very much 
like one another, but in several cases owing 
Late Cola. ^o the changes wrought by time they have 
become composite structures made up of parts belonging to 
different epochs not always easy to distinguish. We shall con- 
sider briefly only the two large temples which stand in the 
main line of the evolution of Cola architecture and constitute 
landmarks in it. 41 

First comes Airavatesvara of Darasuram (Tanjore dis- 
trict VIII, fig. 15) . The temple is called Rajarajesvara in its 
inscriptions, after Rajaraja II in whose reign it was built, 
though additions were made to it by Kulottunga III also. 
Originally the temple seems to have had a number of enclo- 
sures ( prakaras ) with gopura entrances to each, of which 
only one is now intact. Axially, the main temple has the same 
plan and parts as the Tanjore temple, with the addition in 
front of the mahamavdapa of a pillared agramandapa having 
a porch on the south. This ‘Rajagambiran 
Darasuram. tirumandapam ’ as it is called is so built as 

to simulate a chariot on wheels drawn by elephants. The 



718 


C6LA ART 


temple belongs to the Meru class like the Tan j ore temple, 
and is conceived as a padmakosa. While the general similarity 
between this temple and its predecessors of Tanjore and Gan- 
gaikonda-colapuram is unmistakable, there is a striking 
increase in the quantity of figural and decorative sculpture on 
every part of the temple. One of the most interesting sets is 
the series depicting scenes from the Periya-Purdnam on the 
short pilaster strips and the recesses between them in the 
dado on the base of the garbhagrha wall over the yali frieze. 
The similarity of the scenes of Sundara’s life in this series 
and in the mural paintings of Tanjore is very striking. These 
labelled scenes 42 attest the powerful moral influence of Sek- 
kilar’s epic narration of the ‘lives of the saints.’ Another deve- 
lopment of an architectural motif that calls for particular 
notice is the transformation of the ogee or doucine below the 
palagai into a well-developed inverted lotus with a whorl of 
expanding petals, the idal properly so called: in later styles 
it becomes multi-seriate and consists of two or more alter- 
nating whorls of petals. The corbels also evolve some way 
towards the later puspabodigai, particularly by the cham- 
fered parts on either side of the central tenon beginning to 
assume the floral shape that came to be known as madalai. 
The kumbhapanjara, of which the beginnings are traced on 
the recesses of the Tanjore walls, also evolves further in both 
the lower kumbha and the panjara on top. 

The superstructure of the vim&na has five diminishing 
storeys, the two lowermost extending over and including the 
ardhamandapa. The first storey (tala) is a string of complete 
miniature shrines running on the edge of the roof plate and 
inter-connected by a low parapet — the panjaras correspond- 
ing in their position to the projecting bays in the walls below, 
and the parapet with its cornice to the recesses. The second 
tala repeats the same grouping of panjaras as below, but the 
ardhamandapa part of it is simply a walled enclosure with a 
row of nandis along the edge on top. The third, fourth, and 
fifth storeys repeat the same arrangement of the panjaras and 
are confined to the central shrine. Above the fifth storey 
rests the circular gnv a with niches at the cardinal points 
flanked by outfacing nandis at the corners, and surmounted 
by a dome ( sikhara ) also circular, with an outward bulge 
across the middle and slightly splayed out at the bottom. The 



FEATURES OF AIRAV ATESV ARA 719 

metal stiipi is now missing and only its central rod is in situ. 
Much of the top portion is covered and obscured by stucco 
and possibly this was the part plated with golden tiles by 
Kulottunga III. 

To the north of the agramaiidapa (IX, fig. 16) is a shrine 
of Parvatl facing the porch. The pillars of this mandapa 
and porch have attached pilasters on their sides with ydlis 
and elephants as their bases, furnishing thus examples of the 
earliest type of composite pillars which became so common 
in later epochs. Built against the south wall of the mahd- 
mandapa is the shrine of Siva in the form of a Sarabha; 43 this 
shrine is also raised on a double plinth with upapitha and 
pitha and has a small pillared porch in front reached from 
the east by a flight of steps flanked by curved ydli balu- 
strades. 

An interesting feature is the extension of an alternating 
series of the three types of panjaras, square, rectangular, and 
apsidal, over the ydli frieze along the edges on three sides 
of the terrace over the mahcimandapa and agramandapa. a 
feature noted in the front mandapa of Vijayalaya-colesvara 
and in the Calukyan temples; the porch of the Airavatesvara, 
however, carries not panjaras. but nandis on the edge of its 
terrace. 

In front of the agramandapa is a small nandi shrine 
and a balipitha showing the early characteristics of the Tan- 
jore style in square pilasters and bevel and tenon corbels, but 
with flights of steps and balustrades of a definitely later epoch. # 
In the court to the north of the mahdma-ndapa is the shrine of 
Candesvara with features very similar to those of the corres- 
ponding member in Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram. 
Round the court is a peristylar pillared cloister coeval with 
the main temple and containing six subshrines now traceable 
along its length. 

Separated from the axial group and in front of it to the 
north is another shrine of Parvati, locally known as Deva- 
nayaki (X, fig. 18) . Essentially the same as the main temple 
in many ways, its vimana has two talas, its niches carry devi 
images, and it exhibits features which place it among the 
tiru kkdwa hkottam s of a slightly later epoch; it was perhaps 



720 


COLA ART 


erected by Kulottunga III. The outer gopura is now in ruins; 
its empty niches bear inscriptions indicating that they once 
contained icons of the thirty-six gods and goddesses named;- 4 
the inner gopura survives and has two talas. 

Stylistically this temple marks in many ways the transi- 
tion from the full plenitude of the Cola style as seen at Tan- 
jore and Gangaikonda-colapuram to the great temple-com- 
plexes of the post-Cola epoch. 

The Kampaharesvara, called Tribhuvanaviresvara in its 
inscriptions, is clearly the work of Kulottunga III as testified 
by the undated duplicate Sanskrit inscription of his reign on 
the walls of the garbhagrha and the gopura of the temple 
(X, fig. 19). Its traditional name is due to the belief that 
the god removed the quaking ( kampa ) of a Cola king who 
was afflicted with the sin of having killed a Brahman. This 
has much in common with the Darasuram temple including 
the o gramandapa and entrance epoch. The 
Tnbhuvanam. pii as t e rs of the basement carry scroll work 
(kodikkarukku) while the recesses are adorned by dancing 
figures representing Bharata-natya poses accompanied by 
drummers and other musicians constituting the mela; there 
are riders on yalis, lions and elephants as elsewhere. In the 
pillars of the temple, the square abacus ( palagai ) , as in Dara- 
suram and other later Cola temples, is thinner in contrast to 
the thick massive palagais of the Pallava and early Cola 
temples including Tanjore. The corbel is also an early type 
of puspabodigai, the earlier angular central tenon being trans- 
formed into an inverted bell-shaped ‘palastara’ and the bevel- 
lings on either side developed into curved up and foliated 
‘madalais.’ This marks a definite advance over the corbels of 
the Airavatesvara. There is even more elaborate imitation 
of woodwork in the handling of the kapota and the adjacent 
members of the roof. The recesses on the sides of the central 
bays on the outer walls of the garbhagrha carry rectangular 
windows ( jalaka ) framed by semi-pilasters on the sides and 
a torana arch above. 

The vimana is a tapering pyramid of six diminishing talas 
of which the two lowest cover the ardhamandapa also as at 
Darasuram and Tanjore. A very striking feature is the pre- 



KAMPAHARESVARA 


721 


sence of two stout circular pilasters one on either side of the 
niche in the central panjara of the first storey; these pilasters 
carry a kudu on top. This is a motif coming down from Pal- 
lava times and seen also in some early Cola temples like the 
Anantesvara at Udaiyargudi, Muvarkovil at Kodumbalur 
and Naltunai isvara in Punjai. The recesses between these 
projecting panjaras have miniature shrines in relief. The 
circular griva and domical sikhara are apparently of brick and 
mortar while all the rest of the construction is of cut stone. 

The main pilasters in the mahainavAapa and agraman- 
dapa have square bases with nagapadam motifs at the four 
top corners from amidst which 'spring the octagonal shafts 
terminating in capitals likewise octagonal in section. The 
niches on the projections of the surface of the walls have 
shorter pilasters with the same square bases and ndgapadams 
at the scape, but sixteen-sided shafts and capitals, square 
abacus, and, what is more important, corbels of the earlier 
type with a plain median tenon and the two lateral bevels 
showing faintly the taranga (roll) ornament. The projecting 
cornices over these niches are surmounted by panjara reliefs 
with large kudus enclosing miniature models of shrines. The 
niches on the recessed parts of the walls have short pilasters 
and capitals. They bear no corbels and the projecting shelves 
above them carry torana arches. 

The porch to the south of the agramandapa is of the same 
type as in the Airavatesvara; but in the place of the lion and 
elephant-based pillars we find simple ornamental ones. The 
porch itself is a multi-wheeled chariot with two elephants in 
front of the steps and balustrade on the east; the projecting 
axles are supported by rampant lions; the detachable wheels 
are missing. On the west of the porch is a Somaskanda shrine 
of an earlier time with square pilasters, petalled idal, and 
bevel and tenon corbels. The part abutting the south wall of 
the mahdmatidapa corresponding to the Sarabha shrine in the 
Airavatesvara contains the stucco figure of a chief. 

The Devi shrine in front on the north and the Candes- 
vara shrine to the north of the vimana are both coeval with 
the main temple. Unlike its counterpart in the Airavatesvara 
C. 91 



722 COLA ART 

which retains some features of a time earlier than the age of 
the vimana, the Candesvara shrine here shows certain 
advanced characters. The adhistha na has a padmadala base 
and a semi-circularly moulded kumuda; the corbels are inci- 
pient puspabodhikas and the palagai loses its square charac- 
ter and conforms in section and shape to the capital and shaft 
below, which are octagonal. 

The temple as a whole is a veritable sculpture gallery of 
varied iconography. Of the two gopuras, the inner one is 
dilapidated at the top, but the outer main gopura is complete. 
There is another ruined gopura on the west behind the temple. 
They are all squat rectangular structures like the Tanjore 
gopura not in any way to be compared to the imposing pylons 
reared by the Pandyas of the second empire very soon after 
Kulottunga III. This is the last temple to preserve the pre- 
dominance of the vimana characteristic of the Cola style of 
architecture. 

The influence of Cola art on other countries, especially 
on Indo-China and the Far-East, is an interesting question 
to which we can make only a brief reference here. We have 
seen that the Cola empire was in active communication along 
trade channels and otherwise with China and the Hindu 
states of Indo-China. It seems possible that the great temples 
of Angkor and these temples of Tanjore and Gangaikonda- 
colapuram had a mutual influence in their conception and 
execution, and belonged to the same line of evolution in reli- 
gious architecture. A closer and more surprising parallel, nay, 
a regular copy, of Cola architectural and sculptural designs 
has been pointed out by A. K. Coomaraswamy, 45 as found in 
old Zayton, modem Chuan Chou, opposite Formosa, where in 
an old temple of about the thirteenth century a.d. or later, he 
has discovered a plinth with mouldings very similar to those 
of a Cola upapitha and sculptured panels of the lild s (sports) 
of Siva and Krsna on pillars (XI, figs. 20-A, B, C). This fur- 
nishes a glimpse into a little known chapter in the history of 
South Indian Art. 


Sculpture 

The Pallava sculptors had won the palm in the art of 
bas-relief. The primal simplicity of conception and the sure- 



NATURE OF COLA SCULPTURE 723 

ness of grouping that is seen in the depiction of Krsna as 
govardhana-dhara, or of Durga as fighting 
Relation to Pallava. the Mahisasura, the more complicated but 
not less convincing ‘tapestry on rock’ known 
as the descent of Ganga (or Arj una’s penance?) — all at Ma- 
mallapuram are works of such merit as to command a place 
in any considerable history of world art. The portraiture of 
Simhavisnu and Mahendravarman I and of their queens in 
the Adi Varaha cave also at Mamallapuram deserves in turn 
high praise for its unusual excellence. The Cola sculptors 
did not attempt the ‘large frescoes in stone’ as the Pallava 
bas-reliefs have been called. They took more to sculpture 
in high relief, nearly in the round, and they concentrated 
more on the rich iconography that had come up in their time 
as the result of the growth of the hagiology of the nayanars 
and dlvdrs, and the tremendous vogue that their popular 
hymns gave to purdnic mythology in the Tamil country. 
When they attempted narrative sculpture in stone, it was 
generally in small panels, sometimes as small as six inches 
by four as at Nagesvara in Kumbakonam. and seldom more 
than two feet by one foot — which is roughly the measure of 
the Ramayana panels of the Kampaharesvara in Tribhu- 
vanam. They did not fail even to excel the Pallava sculptor 
in portraiture when they attempted it as at Srlnivasanallur and 
Kumbakonam (Nagesvara); but for some reason not now 
clearly traceable they did not continue their work in this line, 
though they attained unexampled skill in the casting of metal 
icons of very considerable size. 

Except where metal was used, sculpture was generally 
subsidiary to architecture but did not, on that account, cease 
Classes of to belong technically to the plastic or glyptic 

sculpture. form of art. It was employed as decoration 

on the walls, pillars, plinths, roofs and other convenient spots 
in temples. The Cola sculptor, however, appreciated the 
value of plain spaces on walls and did not crowd them with 
too many figures; nor did he adopt the method of the ivory 
carver and goldsmith and seek to produce filigree work in his 
ornamentation. He generally worked on hard rock and 
depended on bold strokes and flowing lines for his effects, and 
the metal images of the time partake of the same qualities, 



724 


COLA ART 


though here the details are naturally more and more elabo- 
rately wrought. Portraits, icons, and decorative sculpture 
are the three main classes of Cola sculpture. Portraits are 
few and early; they soon fall out of use and often the line 
between a portrait and an icon is not clear particularly in the 
case of saints and other religious persons. Several sculptures, 
obviously portraits, cannot now be identified as we lack the data 
for it. Among icons which form the most important part of 
Cola sculpture, Saiva figures predominate as the Colas were 
ardent Saivas, though very fine Vaisnava and Jaina images 
are not unknown. The iconography is by no means rigidly 
fixed, 46 and the art is still fairly free from the domination of 
text-book rules; there is little that is mechanical and hide- 
bound about Cola sculpture almost to the end. Decorative 
sculpture takes many forms; architectural motifs , floral and 
vegetal patterns, friezes of animals, birds, dancing figures with 
musical attendants, and of legendary and puranic stories. It 
will not be possible to review here the enormous mass of 
material to be gathered from the numberless temples, but 
present only a few select and typical instances of each class. 
It must also be noted that many of the fine bronzes of the 
Tanjore temple described in detail in its numerous inscrip- 
tions of the reign of Bajaraja I are not now forthcoming. 

There is a singular paucity of properly authenticated por- 
traits in Cola sculpture, as to some extent in all Indian sculp- 
ture. The underlying cause is seen from a statement in 
Sukranitisara , 47 doubtless a late work, but probably embody- 
ing an authentic old tradition: ‘A divine image, though ugly, 
does good to men; while a human image, however excellent, 
Portraits does them no good.’ Again the natural 

instinct to reproduce the features of the 
subject from life was often restrained by a tendency to merge 
the individual in a type. There were some conspicuous excep- 
tions in early Cola art, but we have now no clue to the iden- 
tity of these exceptionally realistic portraits. There are three 
of them, two women and a man (XII, figs. 21-23), all sadly 
mutilated, on the walls of the Koranganatha temple at grlni- 
vasanallur; and several others, men and women (figs. 24-29), 
in the Nagesvara at Kumbakonam, which are very well pre- 
served and nearly life-size. Writing of the Kumbakonam 



EARLY COLA PORTRAIT-SCULPTURE 725 

sculptures Ajit Ghose observes: 48 ‘Here for the first time the 
Cola artist stands in sharp contrast with his Pallava prede- 
cessors and the latter’s severely abstract, ideal, and schematic 
vision. There is no difference in outward bearing between 
a Pallava king and a god, between a goddess and a queen. 
But a new and attractive conception of life and beauty had 
dawned on this C5la sculptor. These Cola ladies are pic- 
turesque and realistic human figures, full of feminine grace 
and the joy of life. This intensely human quality may be 
said to distinguish every one of the statues in the niches of 
this shrine. This art, so unconventional, is thus, refreshingly 
original in conception and spirit. This humanism is the Cola’s 
principal contribution to South Indian Art.’ In their free and 
easy poses, in the divergence of their features and forms 
which impart a pronounced individuality to each figure, in 
the excellence of their modelling and in the discerning treat- 
ment of facial expression particularly of the eyes and mouth, 
these sculptures have no parallel in any other phase of South 
Indian art, not even in the Cola period. Though not modelled 
in the round, being undetached from the blocks from which 
they are carved, their forms stand out clearly owing to the 
technical skill of the execution. The figures are generally 
posed in profile, and the exception here (as also the figures of 
Srinivasanallur) , where the traditional law of frontality is fol- 
lowed, serves only to emphasise the superiority of the profile 
presentation. The treatment of dress, coiffures of women, 
and ornament of both men and women reveal much of life 
in the high society. The more poignant is our regret that we 
can only guess that these were perhaps representations of 
royal donors or members of the royal family. A close scru- 
tiny does indeed reveal a few weak spots in the treatment of 
the fingers of the hand in one female figure, of the bust in 
another, and of the feet in all; but the general superiority of 
these statues is so pronounced as to enforce a revision of the 
common view that Cola sculpture attained its high-water 
mark under Rajaraja I and Rajendra; these sculptures of Sri- 
nivasanallur and Kumbakonam precede the accession of Raja- 
raja I by more than a century. But we have nothing else like 
them either before or after. 

The earliest definitely dated portrait of the Cola period 
is that of Tirukkaryali-piccan (fig. 30), who is said to have 



726 


COLA ART 


built (a.d. 932) the stone temple of Tiruvaduturai. 49 His 
figure is cut in relief, about a foot in height, on the south 
wall of the central shrine of that temple; by his side, in another 
panel separated by a narrow vertical band, stands the por- 
trait of Ilaiya Tirunavukkaraiyan, a devotee of the Lord of 
the stone temple. 50 Though the figures are worn by the lapse 
of time, still the features and postures of these two persons 
give evidence of the realistic reproduction of facial traits prac- 
tised by the artists of the tenth century. Piccan has a bag 
of sacred ashes slung on his left arm while the other devotee 
has set it on a stand near by. 51 

A beautiful bronze of a woman ‘whose beauty is disturb- 
ing’ (XV, fig. 31) is preserved in the Freer Art Gallery, Wash- 
ington D.C. and published by A. K. Coomaraswamy who con- 
siders that it may represent LaksmI or Parvatl, or even be the 
portrait of a queen, say Sembiyan-mahade vi ; 52 its pleasing 
proportions and workmanship certainly make it an early Cola 
bronze. We shall notice presently other instances that hover 
between being a portrait and an icon. 

The only portrait known of the reign of Rajendra I is an 
excellent bronze statue in the Kalahasti temple representing 
Colamadevi, the queen of Rajaraja I (XV, fig. 32) . The 
age and identity of the statue are alike most satisfactorily 
attested by an inscription on its pedestal saying that it was 
cast under the orders of Rajendra-Cola-deva by Niccapatta- 
lagan, obviously the sculptor. 53 We have here the first defi- 
nitely dated South Indian metal image— an excellent portrait 
and fine specimen of the art of the time. 

An inscribed metal statuette (fig. 33) of a boy with a 
dagger in his right hand, the left being held in kataka-mudr& 
at about chest height, is a figure of Kulottunga III, a gift of 
Udaiyanambi to the temple of Kalatti-Udaiyar in Kalahasti; 54 
the image may have been made about the time of his acces- 
sion; the figure wears many ornaments and the face is expres- 
sive of youthful energy and eagerness. The image is impor- 
tant as perhaps the only authentic contemporary portrait of 
a Cola monarch so far known, and its date is most probably 
somewhere about 1180. 

Three statues, one of stone from Srlnivasanallur, and two 
of metal from the South Arcot and Tan j ore districts are, like 



STONE ICONS 


727 


the female figure noticed above, on the borderland between 
portraiture and iconography. The statue from Srinivasa- 
nallur (fig. 35) stands in a niche on the north wall of the 
Koranganatha temple; the presence of other portrait statues 
in other niches here makes it likely that this too is a portrait 
much better preserved than the rest; but its position and the 
garland betweeen the palms held in anjali lead us to think 
of Adicandesa. 55 The metallic statue from Tirunama-nallur 
(S. Arcot) believed to be that of Narasinga Munaiyadaraiyar 
(fig. 36), the Milada Chief famed as the patron of Sundara- 
murti; and another from Kodikkarai (Tanjore district) said 
to represent Gojakamaharsi (fig. 34), the founder of a well- 
known line of Saiva Acaryas, are both more icons of the types 
of royal patron and spiritual leader, than portraits proper. 

We may now turn to the icons, first stone, and then metal. 
The Saiva forms predominate in those presented here as in 
the Cola period generally; Vaisnava icons 
1 1 will not be treated separately, but as far as 

possible in their chronological order together with Saiva forms. 
The reader will be left to gather iconographic details from a 
study of the reproductions and the specialised treatises on the 
subject as full details cannot find a place in a general historical 
account. The relative legends should also be gathered from 
these treatises. 

We may start with two images of Vinadhara Daksina- 
murti enshrined in appropriate niches in the temples of Tiruk- 
kattalai (fig. 37) and Kodumbalur (fig. 38) in Pudukkottah; 
the difference in the shape and disposition of the Vina in the 
two cases should be noted. It is possible, however, that the 
Tirukkattalai figure is that of Tripurantaka, as may appear 
from a comparison with another figure found along with that 
of Tripurasundari at Kodumbalur (figs. 39, 40). From 
Kodumbalur again we get a fine image of Ardhanarisvara 
(fig. 41); though somewhat mutilated the excellence of the 
sculpture and the deft handling of the right male and left 
female half is apparent. The male half often has two arms, 
one resting on the bull and the other holding a symbol such 
as trident, so that the whole image has three arms; here we 
find, however, only two arms. Krishna Sastri reproduces a 
drawing of an unusual image from Tiruvadi (Tanjore district) 



728 


COLA ART 


where the right half is the female part, and the left the male 
part with only one arm held akimbo, the elbow resting on the 
head of the bull. 56 From the Koranganatha temple of Srlnivasa- 
nallur we have the sadly mutilated but superb renderings of a 
standing Siva (fig. 44), probably resting his right foot on the 
shoulder of a gana, and of a seated Daksinamurti (fig. 45) 
beneath a tree in a finely wrought torana pavilion surrounded 
by pupils and characteristic animals, demi-gods and so on. 

The Siva temple at Tiruvalisvaram (Tinnevelly district) 
is a veritable museum of superb early Cola iconography of the 

time before Rajaraja I. In the niches of the 
Tiruvalisvaram _. ..... ... , 

panjaras of its vimana and the recesses be- 

lcons. 

tween them, there are magnificent sculp- 
tures of Siva in his various forms. On the southern side, for 
instance, there is Nataraja in the centre (fig. 48) , with Vrsa- 
bharudha and Gangadhara on his proper left (fig. 47), 
and Virabhadra and Devi on the right. The western 
side has Lingodbhava with Visnu and Brahma on either side 
in the centre, Kalaharamurti and Kiratamurti on its proper 
left, and Yoga Daksinamurti and Umasahita on its proper 
right (fig. 49). The northern side shows Gajarimurti in the 
centre (fig. 50), Candesanugraha and Sukhasanamurti on its 
proper right (fig. 51) and Somaskanda and an unidentified 
sculpture on its proper left. Elsewhere we get an a rdhavArl 
of the usual type with three arms, and a group of Soma- 
skanda (?) standing with Nandi and a gana sportfully seated 
near by (fig. 46) . Another seated Daksinamurti from Kaveri- 
pakkam (fig. 52) with a book in left fore-arm and the right 
fore-arm (which was perhaps in Jnanamndrd ) broken, fur- 
nishes instructive comparison with the Yoga Daksinamurti of 
Tiruvalisvaram, and the two Vlnadharas from Pudukkotah 
mentioned earlier. 

Other interesting early Cola sculptures are the relief of an 
eight-armed Durga — on a slab from the Virattanesvara with 
two devotees kneeling on either side, the one on the left appa- 
rently about to offer his head in sacrifice to the goddess, and 
a group of Visnu and his two consorts from 
Other stone icons. the ruined temple of Visnu at Olagapuram, 
South Arcot. The walls of the two Brha- 
disvara temples of Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram con- 



BRONZES 


729 


tain numerous icons of large size and forceful execution, of 
which only a few can be reproduced here. First may be placed 
an image of Sarasvati (or Lalita ) from Tanjore, (XXIII, 
fig. 54), and a magnificent Nataraja on the south side of 
the garbhagrha of Gangaikonda-colapuram (XXII, fig. 55), a 
conception of Siva in cosmic dance of which more will be said 
later when we consider metal Nataraja images. The fine 
Harihara (fig. 56) on the same side comes next. The Cande- 
sanugrahamurti (fig. 57) on the north side is well known as 
it has often been reproduced and admired by several writers, 
but cannot on that account be omitted here; it may be com- 
pared with the smaller panel of the same subject from 
Tiruvalisvaram, (fig. 51) where the bull serves as the foot- 
stool for Parvatl; the later sculpture is grander and per- 
haps more perfect in its technique. The Kamantaka panel 
on the north wall (fig. 58) is a fine composition whose correct 
identification is suggested by Parvati doing penance on one 
leg on right top corner, Manmatha and Rati represented to 
the proper right of the seated central figure of Siva as flying, 
obviously after the command of Indra, to go and disturb Siva’s 
meditation; the panel is thus part icon and part narrative. We 
must also notice an image of Visnu with his two consorts 
facing him from the sides, all framed in a typical niche on the 
wall (fig. 59). There is a curious Surya stone in the form 
of a Kamala-yantra drawn by seven horses on the west face of 
the mahnmandapa of Gangaikonda-colapuram temple (fig. 60) ; 
it contains all the paraphernalia of Surya, but no image of 
the deity who seems to be represented by the lotus form of 
the top of the stone. We shall conclude this rapid survey of 
Cola iconography in stone with a reference to an image of 
Kankalamurti (fig. 61) and a vigorous representation of Gaja- 
hamurti (fig. 62) with frightened Uma and Skanda by the 
side — both from Darasuram. 

‘Bronzes’ is a convenient and conventional term for metal 
images v irrespective of the exact number or proportion of 
metals mixed in the amalgam out of which 
Metal icons. the images are cast. Most of the Cola bronzes 
were made by the c ire perdu process, and the Tanjore inscrip- 
tions give some indications of the technical details, and men- 
tion images which were made solid, hollow, or semi-hollow 
with thick sides. They also describe many iconographic 
C. 92 



730 


COLA ART 


groups of images representing the stories of the lives of the 
Saiva saints, but none of them seems to have survived. But 
what we now possess of Cola bronzes from different parts of 
South India is enough by quantity and quality to bear undy- 
ing testimony to the great height reached by metal-casting in 
those days. The Nataraja image in its various forms natu- 
rally holds the first place among the Cola bronzes. Some 
fine stone images of this form have been mentioned above; 
the best bronzes of this type are not only spread over the 
museums of the world, but are still under worship in the live 
temples of South India. The Nataraja image in the Nagesvara 
temple, for instance, which has never been photographed, is 
one of the largest and finest images known. We have repro- 
duced an image of the usual classical type from Tanjore 
(fig. 63), another with eight arms in Kalika-tandava from 
Nallur (fig. 66), and a third in Catu.ra-tandava from Tiru- 
varangulam in Pudukkottah (fig. 67). Two other figures 
belonging to the Madras Museum and got from Tiruvalan- 
gadu (Chittoor, fig. 65) and Velanganni (Tanjore, fig. 64) 
are also given. The conception of the Divine Dancer and its 
cosmic significance, and the excellence of the Cola sculptor’s 
presentation of it have often won the highest praise from dis- 
cerning critics including great modern sculptors like Rodin. 
This is what Grousset writes : 

‘Whether he be surrounded or not by the flaming 
aureole of the tiruvacci (prabhdmandala ) — the circle of 
the world which he both fills and oversteps — the King of 
the Dance is all rhythm and exaltation. The tambourine 
Natara'a which he sounds with one of his 

right hands draws all creatures into 
this rhythmic motion and they dance in his com- 
pany. The conventionalized locks of flying hair and 
the blown scarf tell of the speed of this universal move- 
ment, which crystallizes matter and reduces it to powder 
in turn. One of the left hands holds the fire which ani- 
mates and devours the worlds in this cosmic whirl. One 
of the God’s feet is crushing a Titan, for “this dance is 
danced upon the bodies of the dead”, yet one of the right 
hands is making the gesture of reassurance ( abhaya - 
mudrd ) , so true it is that, seen from the cosmic point of 
view and sub specie aeternitatis. the very cruelty of this 



FORMS OF SIVA 


731 


universal determinism is kindly, as the generative prin- 
ciple of the future. And, indeed, on more than one of 
our bronzes, the King of the Dance wears a broad smile. 
He smiles at death and at life, at pain and at joy alike, 
or rather, if we may be allowed so to express it, his smile 

is both death and life, both joy and pain From this 

lofty point of view in fact, all things fall into their place, 
finding their explanation and logical compulsion. Here 
art is the faithful interpreter of the philosophical con- 
cept. The plastic beauty of rhythm is no more than the 
expression of an ideal rhythm. The very multiplicity of 
arms, puzzling as it may seem at first sight, is subject 
in turn to an inward law, each pair remaining a model 
of elegance in itself so that the whole being of Nataraja 
thrills with a magnificent harmony in his terrible joy, and 
as though to stress the point that the dance of the divine 
actor is indeed a sport (Ilia ) — the sport of life and death, 
the sport of creation and destruction, at once infinite and 
purposeless — the first of the left hands hangs limply from 
the arm in the careless gesture of gajahasta (hand as the 
elephant’s trunk). And lastly as we look at the back 
view of the statue, are not the steadiness of these 
shoulders which uphold the world, and the majesty of 
this Jove-like torso, as it were a symbol of the stability 
and immutability of substance while the gyration of the 
legs, in its dizzy speed would seem to symbolize the 
“vortex of phenomenon.” ’ 

We have a fine early Cola Siva — two armed, and his con- 
sort (fig. 68) recently discovered from Tiruvenkadu. 
A four-armed image of standing Siva, most probably 
Vrsabharudha though the bull is missing, from Gangaikonda- 
colapuram (fig. 69). and a seated ( sukhdsana ) figure from the 
other forms of Pudukkottah Museum (fig. 70) may be noted. 
Siva. The first is an early Cola image of this great 

God whose cult was promoted so much by the Cola rulers; 
the other is perhaps of the late Cola period. The episode in 
the Mahabharata celebrated in Bharavi’s great poem Kira- 
tarjunlya seems to have been very popular in those days. Its 
incidents are sculptured in stone in several places in stone 
including perhaps Mamallapuram, and metal images of the 
Kiratamurti of Siva are some of the finest among the South 



732 


COLA ART 


Indian bronzes. Here Siva is shown standing and with two 
arms, a bow in one and arrow in another; a really early image 
with an ovoid prabhamandala and the left arm raised to it 
in position to hold the bow comes from Tiruvetkalam, 
(fig. 71) near Cidambaram, one of the sites where, as the 
name shows, the Kirata incident is localised; though this 
bronze has been thought to be Pallava, 57 there is no conclu- 
sive reason for placing it earlier than the early Cola period — 
the period of transition as we have called it. Another 
slightly later image is a perfectly wrought bronze which comes 
from Radha Narasimhapuram (Tanjore district, fig. 72) and 
we give two views of this fine bronze showing details of 
Jatamakuta and the ornaments of the neck besides the ex- 
pressive facial features. An dlinganamurti with a prabha- 
mandala is a fine piece of early Cola work from Tiruvatfu- 
tutai (Tanjore district, fig. 73) ; the proportion of the figures, 
and their stances are very pleasing, and the details of coiffure, 
ornamentation and drapery worth careful study. Another 
popular Saiva legend is that of the deity wandering as a naked 
beggar ( bhiksatana ) in expiation of the sin of Brahmahatya 
incurred by his cutting off one of the heads of Brahma. All 
the wives of the sages of Darukavana except Arundhati, the 
wife of Vasistha, are said to have been entranced by the 
overwhelming beauty of the naked god’s form, and this 
episode has given rise to many sculptures in stone and metal 
of the Bhiksatanamurti and the closely allied form of 
Kankalamurti reproduced above from Darasuram. We have 
a very pretty metallic image, a really early one, from the Siva 
temple at Tirunamanallur, (fig. 74) , which by its boldness and 
simplicity offers a striking contrast to a later, more ornate 
image from Tiruccengodu (Salem district, fig. 75) which has 
a deer to the right of the God and a gana bearing the alms- 
bowl on his head and is therefore more complete and equally 
pleasing with the earlier icon. The Tiruccengodu figure is a 
Bhiksatana. The earlier image has no symbols in its arms as 
seen now excepting the adhering skull of Brahma in the upper 
left arm. Skanda or Subrahmanya, the younger son of Siva 
and Parvati, is a very popular deity, held by some to be an 
original Tamil god — Muruga, though, as in the case of many 
other members of the pantheon, modem criticism has recog- 
nised here also a syncretism of Aryan and pre-Aryan elements 



EARLY VAISNAVA BRONZES 


733 


in the attributes and achievements of the deity; an early Cola 
bronze of this god with an ovoid p rabha comes from Tiruvidaik- 
kali (Tanjore district, fig. 76); a much later image from 
Tiruvarangulam, Pudukkottah (not reproduced) with circular 
prabha, the peacock-mount and the two wives of the god 
standing on the sides may be compared with advantage for 
two different representations of the same concept; the earlier 
image with only one head and four arms, two of them bear- 
ing the characteristic attributes, is much more pleasing as a 
work of art, though devotees of the cult may see many reasons 
to prefer the later image and others of its class. 

Four Vaisnava bronzes, all early Cola, from a ruined 
temple in Sermadevi (Tinnevelly district) next claim our 
attention. 58 Here are two figures of Visnu, (fig. 77, 78) one 
of RukminI (? fig. 79), according to Ajit Ghose, and 
the last of LaksmI (fig. 80). Both the Visnu images 
are in samabhanga pose, with the body in perfect 
equilibrium, and both on a p adrmsana supported by a 
bhadrasana. The symbols on the hands and gestures are the 
same in both. The larger image is simpler and bolder and 
may be of the time of Rajendra I; it is 3 feet 2 inches 
high, the largest South Indian bronze of Visnu known. The 
figure of RukminI (or is it also LaksmI?) is also remarkable 
for its severe simplicity and must be earlier than the 
Tanjore stone Sarasvatl mentioned above, or the Laks- 
mI bronze now noticed. Both RukminI and LaksmI 
stand in tribhanga pose and. being early images, lack 
the breast-band ( kucabandha ) ; the former has her left 
leg slightly bent, and the latter the right, and there is a cor- 
responding difference in the pose of the rest of the body 
resulting from the respective postures, Of these figures it has 
been said: ‘LaksmI is a slender young goddess; RukminI is a 
matron in the full glory of maturity. Both are idealized but 
not exaggeratedly so.’ As regards the dates of the four 
bronzes, the same writer observes: "The RukminI is the oldest, 
next comes probably the smiling Visnu and then the LaksmI, 
while the large Visnu is later than these. All the images may 
be dated between a.d. 875 and 1032.’ But their order 
in dates is not so sure. A group of three bronzes 
of Rama, Laksmana and Sita from Tirukkadaiyur (Tanjore 
district) with Hanuman in an attitude of worship (fig. 81) is 



734 COLA ART 

obviously one of the finest products of the best age of Cola 
bronze-casting, the time of Rajaraja I and Rajendra, and is 
representative of a large number of similar groups many of 
which luckily are still extant in temples and museums. A 
unique group representing Parvati’s marriage with Siva 
(fig. 82) is also a recent discovery made at Tiruvenkadu. 

This brief study of the metal art of the Colas may be con- 
cluded by a notice of the many finely executed seals borne on 
the big copper rings which bind the sheets of the copper- 
plate grants of the Colas. One of the best preserved is also 
one of the most recent discoveries, and it is one of the two 
seals on the Karandai plates from Tanjore (fig. 83). 59 

The last division of sculpture in stone that remains for 
consideration is that of decorative motifs. Half-way between 
portraits and icons on the one side and pure decoration on 
the other are the dvdrapalaka figures at the sides of the gate- 
ways and entrances to temples and shrines. Perhaps it was 
the rule of old to make effigies of conquered rulers serve as 
gate-keepers in palaces and temples as suggested by certain 
epigraphic references of early date. But soon this gave place 
to the habit of employing conventional figures of semi-divine 
beings, at first with two arms, then with four, in that capacity. 
The symbols borne in the hands of the dvarapdlakas differed 
with the cult followed in the shrine or temple. Dv5.rapd.Ukds 
(women door keepers) also came into vogue especially for 
shrines of goddesses, sometimes even more generally. A 
dvarapala from Vijayalaya-Colesvaran (fig. 84) and a female 
door-keeper (?) from the Kamparharesvara of Tribhuvanam 
(fig. 85) may be seen to mark the features of this type at the 
beginning and end of the period covered in this survey. Be- 
sides figural sculptures like the dvarapdlakas and icons which 
adorn niches on the exterior of temple walls, many other 
features contributed to the decorative effects of the structure. 
There were the mouldings often heavy and impressive in the 
larger temples broken by string courses of animals or birds, 
of which a good example of a frieze of alternating ele- 
phants, lions and yalis comes from Narttamalai (fig. 86) . Other 
friezes of ydlis. and ganas and birds below and above cornices 
have been noted in the descriptions of individual temples given 
above. The plinth was also often broken by niches ( devago - 



DECORATIVE SCULPTURE 


735 


sthas) of varying sizes and designs so as to produce a plea- 
sant relief in the great length of uniform mouldings; three 
examples of these are reproduced from the last great Cola 
temple of Tribhuvanam (XXXV, figs. 89-91), and attention 
may be invited to the absence of the lion pillar in one of them, 
to its presence in another, and to the presence besides the 
lion pillars of another larger set of rearing lions on either side 
of the entire niche in a third — an anticipation of many later 
developments under Vijayanagar. Flights of steps and the 
balustrades on their sides were other ornamental features of 
note. Two balustrade sides — one from Darasuram depicting 
a lion attacking an elephant in the open (fig. 87) , and the other 
from Tribhuvanam showing a more usual pattern of the pro- 
boscis of yali forming the top of the curved balustrade with 
sculptured scenes beneath (fig. 88) are fairly typical. On the 
balustrade of the steps leading to the southern entrance to the 
transept in the Tanjore temple we have panels of Buddha’s 
enlightenment used as decoration, which is interesting in more 
ways than one. Lastly, there are panels of purdnic stories 
figuring as decoration at suitable places on the plinth, especial- 
ly on the broad flat member which in large temples is about a 
foot or foot and a half in height, and provides an admirable 
field in the open circumambulatory for devotees to study them 
at leisure and be pleased and instructed. The Ramayana. 
Mahabharata, Siva’s sports, the lives of the Saints and other 
edifying topics furnish the subject-matter for this type of 
sculpture. Ranking very high as skilful works of art, these nar- 
rative panels are not without their own interest. One of the 
Ramayana scenes from Tribhuvanam (fig. 97) shows Ravana 
with many hands and heads carrying off Sita in his chariot, and 
the bird Jatayu which fought Ravana, was mortally wounded 
in the fight, and gave up his ghost later. Much smaller panels, 
in positions not so readily accessible to the devotee unless he 
cares particularly to look for them, sometimes covering small 
rectangles of about six inches by four, are tucked away under- 
neath the pilasters of the exterior of the garbhagrha in some 
temples, e.g. Nagesvara, Pullamangai. Punjai. From the 
Ramayana panels of Nagesvara, are reproduced, (1) Agni 
presenting pdyasa to king Dasaratha, (fig. 92), (2) the King 
distributing the pdyasa to the queens, (fig. 93), (3) birth of 
Rama, (fig. 94), (4) his fight with Tataka. (fig. 95) and 
(5) Hanuman’s meeting with Ravana in Durbar (fig. 96). 



736 


COLA ART 


From the Punjai temple we get the Varaha-avatara panel, 
(fig. 98) and that of Krsna sucking milk out of Putana’s 
breast along with her life (fig. 99). The Periya-Puranam 
sculptures on the Darasuram temple are well known. Above 
all there are many interesting patterns, floral and vegetal, 
sometimes even geometrical as in Muslim art, too numerous 
for detailed treatment here. In fact, Cola architecture and 
sculpture have remained neglected fields, and comprehensive 
monographs on the best extant temples are an urgent 
desideratum. 

Painting 

Cola painting, like all other forms of Cola art, was a 
continuation and development of Pallava-Pandya work in the 
field. Literary evidence on the extent and excellence of early 
Tamil murals is both authentic and extensive; but no speci- 
mens have survived, and we have no means of forming any 
close idea of the nature of the art as it was practised then. 
In fact paintings are delicate products of art and are the first 
to suffer by the action of time and weather, not to speak of 
chemical changes in rocks or in the materials used. Often 
excellent early paintings have been overlaid, as at Tanjore, 
by later work not so good. In the midst of many gaps and 
much uncertainty, there remains no doubt about the conti- 
nuity of a painting tradition in the Tamil country. 

The fragmentary Pallava paintings still traceable in the 
‘Cave temples’ of Tirumayam and Mamandur, and in the struc- 
tural temples of Panamalai and Kanci and Mamallapuram as 
also in the rathas of Mamallapuram date from the seventh and 
eighth centuries, while the outer layer of paintings in Sittanna- 
vasal, often mistaken to be Pallava, and those in the Tirumalai- 
puram cave temple in the Tinnevelly district are both Pandya 
in origin and belong to the ninth century. 60 Of the Cola 
paintings, the most important are those in the pradafcsina pas- 
sage round the sanctum of the Tanjore temple, most probably 
coeval with the temple and belonging to the time of Rajaraja I 
and Rajendra I. 

From the standpoint of the technique employed, the 
South Indian paintings stand apart from the better known 
paintings of Ajanta, Sigiriya, Bagh, Badami and Ellora. Here 
the ground-plaster is of coarser lime mortar below with a 



TECHNIQUE OF PAINTING 


737 


finer coat of lime wash above it on which the pigments have 
been laid in accordance with the ‘fresco’ or ‘lime medium’ 
technique. The absence of any adhesive such as gum or glue 
in the laying of the pigments is the important feature that 
distinguishes them from the painting in the Deccan and 
Ceylon. There the ground-plaster is of mud — clay or alluvium, 
and sand mixed with very small quantities of lime and con- 
taining organic materials like cowdung and husks or vegetable 
fibres acting as ‘binding medium’; this ground-plaster is cover- 
ed by a lime wash of egg-shell thickness and painted with 
mineral colours mixed with glue or gum as a fixitive; the 
technique is ‘tempera’ and the painting could be done after 
the lime wash had dried up. In Sittannavasal on the other 
hand, the ground-plaster is a mixture of lime and sand form- 
ing a coarse ground with a thin layer of fine lime-plaster over 
it; on this the paintings have been executed in mineral colours 
without the mixture of any adhesive. Since on examination 
the colours appear to have been mixed in lime water and 
applied on the dried up surface, this is strictly ‘fresco-secco’, 
different from true fresco work where the paint is applied on 
the still wet lime surface, a very good example of which we 
find in the Tanjore Cola paintings. All the other paintings in 
the South Indian series found in the temples of Mamandur, 
Tirumayam, Kanci, Narttamalai, Somapala- 
KSnci ‘ yam, Lepaksi, Tirugdkarnam, Malaiyadi- 

patti, Travancore, Cochin and elsewhere belong to the class 
of fresco-secco . 61 

In Tanjore, as elsewhere, the coat of fine plaster seems 
to have been laid when the coarse plaster below was still wet. 
The painting (in true fresco method) was also applied when 
the surface was still wet. In this process the pigment pene- 
trates the surface, and soon, the wet calcium hydroxide in 
the lime, as the water-content evaporates, reacts with the 
carbon dioxide of the air forming a thin protective and trans- 
parent film over the surface. The same thing happens even 
where the pigments are laid in lime medium on the dry 
surface; though there is no penetration of the pigment, the 
glassy protective film is still there. This is the merit of the 
fresco process. In Tanjore old and well-slaked lime burnt 
over a wood fire and derived perhaps from shell or lime-stone 
seems to have been used; no marble dust has been found in 
C. 93 



738 


COLA ART 


analysis. The pigments with the exception of black are found 
to be of mineral origin, the principal colours used being black, 
yellow, brown, red, blue, green, yellowish green and light 
blue; the materials employed are lime for white, wood char- 
coal or lamp black for black, ultra-marine for blue, toned 
down with lime or fine sand for light blue, ochres for yellow, 
brown and red, terreverte for green, ultramarine and yellow 
ochre for yellowish green, ultramarine and terreverte for 
bluish green. The technique employed has restricted the 
palette to material which will not react and change when 
mixed with lime — a limitation of the fresco process. Since 
again in the fresco all the pigments dry out lighter and that 
gradually in a few week’s time, the artist must have a good 
idea of the relative warmth of the tones to be ultimately 
expected. The Tanjore artists have understood this so well 
as to achieve a fine harmony of colour. In some places the 
colour films do not adhere so firmly as in general they do, 
and here the pigments seem to have been applied in lime 
medium. Apparently the paintings were begun in fresco, 
and were finished or retouched in lime medium. True fresco 
work demands greater swiftness and precision of execution 
than the lime medium technique. This means the execution 
of the work panel by panel and the careful jointing of the 
panels to match in tone and colour. In the Cola frescoes at 
Tanjore the joints are so well concealed that it is not quite 
possible to estimate the rate at which the painting was done 
and the area covered by an artist in a day. The plaster coats 
are so thin that they could not have retained their moisture 
for more than a very short time. The artists seem to have 
completed one wall per day or during such time as it remain- 
ed wet, in which case no joint would be visible. This would 
not have been impossible, since the wall is conveniently 
divided into horizontal panels by patches of colours and each 
panel may have been worked by a single artist or a group. 
As a matter of fact the themes are made up of many small 
scenes on each panel; each scene may have been painted by 
one artist, a number of them working simultaneously. The 
area of the panels varies from 24 square feet to 60. It is not 
also impossible that the joints are concealed by the horizontal 
patches of colour. To put in so much detail of dress and oma- 



RELIGIOUS THEMES 


739 


ment, and to achieve so much general decorative effect even 
in the disposition of the figures under such limitations of 
time as the fresco process imposed required great skill of the 
artists indeed. 

The paintings in the Tanjore temple in the walls and ceil- 
ings of the pradaksina underneath the vimdna were originally 
lighted by three doorways in the middle of the exterior walls 
of the garbhagrha on the south, west and north; these open- 
ings were closed by Vijayaraghava Nayak between 1653 and 
1659 by rubble walls which have now been demolished by 
the archaeological department. The openings correspond in 
position to the devagosthas (niches) in the central bay on 
each side on the inner walls enshrining large sculptures appro- 
priate to them. Vertical pilasters corresponding to the system 
of bays and recesses of the outer wall divide the pradaksina 
passage into fifteen chambers each separated from its neigh- 
bour by a constriction which is really an opening composed 
of joists, lintel and sill. There are two chambers on either side 
of the main entrance on the east, five each on the north and 
south, three behind on the west. The first three chambers, 
starting in pradaksina order from the south of the main ent- 
rance, are entirely covered, walls and ceilings, with the 
Nayak series of paintings of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries which do not seem to cover any Cola paintings 
underneath. The fourth, eighth and twelfth chambers, those 
with the openings on the outer wall, are dominated by the 
large sculptures on the inner wall, and the last three cham- 
bers (13-15) have again only Nayak paintings with no Cola 
layer underneath. The remaining six chambers have excel- 
lent Cola paintings, visible where the Navak layer overlaying 
them has pealed off, and the biggest problem facing the arch- 
aeologist is to find a successful way of stripping the Nayak 
layer elsewhere without damaging the underlying Cola paint- 
ings. 62 

The theme of the Tanjore Cola paintings is religious, 
drawn mostly from the hagiology that was later worked up 
into the Periya-Purinam. The episodes of the life of Sundara- 
murti form the subject of some of the best panels. On the 
top of the panel on the west wall (chamber 7) is the Kailasa 
scene — Siva seated in Yogasana on a tiger skin with the 
couchant Nandi (bull) in front and a group rsis with a couple 



740 


COLA ART 


of apsara maidens dancing at the opposite end; Siva is painted 
red and one of the rsis blue. Just below is the picture of Sun- 
daramurti and his friend Ceraman Perumal, another ndyandr. 
The scene depicts the journey of the two friends to Kailasa 
at the invitation of Siva; the youthful Sundara is seated on the 
fast moving elephant sent to fetch him, and Ceraman on his 
horse speeded by his whispering the p ahcaksara (Saiva credo) 
into the ears of his horse which, as a result, soon mounted 
the sky and overtook the divine elephant ridden by Sundara! 
The white elephant of Sundara is the centre of the picture, 
and right in front is the prancing steed, its rider looking back 
and beckoning to Sundara. The king wears a long moustache, 
a close beard, and a large tuft of hair behind his head. He 
is bare-bodied except for the dhoti round his waist. Round the 
neck he has a tight necklet and a dangling cord with a 
rudrdksa bead strung in it. The harness and trappings are 
well worked out on the body of the white horse. At the right 
and left top corners are a group of celestial beings half hidden 
by the clouds — the right group consisting of apsara maidens 
and gandharvas showering lotus petals, dancing, and playing 
on musical instruments. The left group seems to comprise 
rsis. Right in front of Ceraman’s steed is the most elegant 
of the dancing apsara maidens, her body bent in rhythmic 
curves and her right arm stretched out in front and left bent 
in abhaya pose, her face turned back. Her diaphanous cloth- 
ing and the elaborate coiffure, jingling anklets and wristlets 
add charm to her graceful form (frontispiece) . 

Below this panel is the scene of dispute between Sundara 
and Siva on the eve of his marriage (ante, p. 474) . On one 
side we see Siva as a bearded old man, sitting in front of 
Sundara, clutching the palm-leaf document, and speaking to 
the sabha with raised arm and uplifted face. Again on the 
other side is the old man producing the palm-leaf deed exe- 
cuted by Sundara’s grandfather, the bewildered Sundara 
standing before him in eager expectation of the verdict. On 
the faces of the members of the sabha is depicted a varying 
conflict of emotions. The right side of the picture depicts 
the culmination of the episode — a temple entered by the whole 
lot of them. The lower panel showing some women engaged 
in cooking may be part of the portrayal of preparations for 
Sundara’s marriage. 



TRIPURANTAKA : NATARAJA 741 

Elsewhere on the west wall (chamber 9) we get a grand 
scale painting of Nataraja and his devotees, and the subject 
is apparent though much of the original painting is still over- 
laid with later work. There are many women of high rank 
included in the scene. 

But the grandest composition in the whole series is the 
Tripurantaka panel on the north wall (eleventh chamber) . 
It is a battle scene. Siva is standing on the deck of the 
chariot in alidha pose, his left knee bent, and the whole 
weight of his body thrown on the right leg which is placed 
forward; his eight arms carry different weapons, one of them, 
holding a long bow in front. His vibrant frame and defiant 
expression suggest vigorous action. On the driver’s seat is 
the four-headed Brahma holding the reins and the whip. This 
is the centre of scene. In front are the horses of the asuras 
facing Siva and his ganas, the whole foreground depicting 
fights with different weapons between the two groups. On 
the top is seen Durga on her lion thrusting her spear into 
the body of an asura while her lion is holding another by 
the neck. 

Another panel on the western wall of the shrine recently 
uncovered depicts Nataraja in Kanakasabha worshipped by 
a royal devotee attended by his many queens and retinue. 
There is no difficulty in identifying the royal figure as Raja- 
raja I, the founder of the temple, who called himself Sivapd- 
dasekhara and named every unit of measurement Adavallan. 
indicating his intense devotion to the Lord of the Dance — 
Nataraja. His principal queens and consorts are portrayed 
on a large scale as standing behind him, while the other 
queens and also the retinue are smaller. 

There is a second eircumambulatory over the one in 
which the Cola paintings have been discovered. The inner 
walls of this eircumambulatory contain traces of old Cola 
plaster and painting showing that it was also painted as the 
one below. Running round the inner wall at almost eye-level 
are bas-relief sculptures depicting the tandava poses of Siva. 
Though there is provision for 108 sculptured panels, only 
82 have been completed and the rest are blank. These rather 
crude sculptures were perhaps covered by painted stucco and 
illustrate the poses described by Bharata. 



742 


COLA ART 


The lines of the figures are drawn in light red or brown 
and deepened by forcible blacks and reddish browns. The 
other colours used for flesh and drapery are defined by deli- 
cate brush work in different colours. There is a conscious 
attempt at modelling here. Though there is not much diver- 
sity in the poses of figures, yet they are far from being stereo- 
typed. The celestial beings, apsaras and gandharvas ‘have a 
certain bend of the body as if they had floated into shapes 
on waves of an invisible sea.’ The lines of the seated figures 
of women have more grace and charm than the standing ones. 
The dancing forms are full of action and expression. The 
faces are drawn in three quarters front and profile visible 
and square in outline with pronounced chin. The hair is done 
into elaborate coiffures of different patterns with small ring- 
lets falling in front on the face, and decked with flowers, 
buds, and ornaments shaped like crescent and star. The eye 
brows are set low in human forms and high in celestial beings; 
the eyes themselves are linear and pisciform and the eyelids 
are not pronounced, but none the less expressive of emotion. 
The noses are long, straight, and sensitive, very rarely curved, 
the nostrils wide and mobile. The variety of ornaments worn 
by women is a study by itself. The drapery consists of a 
sari of diaphanous muslin worn round the waist and cover- 
ing down to the ankles and thrown into graceful folds de- 
corated by floral patterns or horizontal lines, and held in 
position round the waist by sashes of different colours, their 
ends hanging in folds. The bust is generally bare except for 
a piece of cloth worn over the left shoulder and passing be- 
tween the ample bosoms under the right arm. The men are 
of strong build, with beard, moustache and knots of hair on 
the head. 

The panels in the Cola layers exposed so far do not sug- 
gest any grouping except in the Tripurantaka and Sundara- 
murti panels, and till the entire Cola layer is exposed, one 
cannot say definitely that the figures in the other groups are 
not inter-related. 

The fragments of paintings in the Vijayalaya-Cojesvaram 
are much faded. The two large ones are on the north wall 
of the ardhamandapa. The two large figures are those of 
Bhairava and Nataraja; the stiff pose of the figures indicates 



NOTES 


743 


a late age when the mural art was decadent; but the frag- 
ments of plaster revealing a few pretty cherub-like faces on 
the south wall are strongly reminiscent of the Tanjore School, 
and these paintings may tentatively be assigned to the late 
Cola period — late twelfth or early thirteenth century. 


1. El. xvii pp. 14-7. 

2. Studies. 

3. Archeologie du sud de Vlnde, i. p. 116. 

4. 167 of 1894; JMU. xiv p. 28. 

5. 392-4 of 1924. 

6. 36 of 1931; 91 and 92 of 1895. 

7. See drawings reproduced from J. Dubreuil at the end of the 
chapter for an idea of the technical terms of South Indian architecture. 

8. Indian Art and Architecture ( Buddhist and Hindu), p. 98, 

9. Name in 282 of Pudukkottai Inscriptions (PS/) of Yr. 11 of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya I (1227). Original construction by Rattan 
pudi alias Ilangodi-araiyar and restoration by Mailan Viduman alias 
Tennavan Tamiladi Araiyan after damage to temple ( karrali ) in storm 
and rain — both mentioned in a recently found inscription on the base- 
ment of the central shrine underneath the dvarapalaka to the north of 
the entrance. JOR. viii pp. 208-9. See also JISOA. v (Coomaraswami 
vol.) p. 85. 

10. For all the Pudukkottah temples discussed here see generally 
K. R. Venkataraman — Manual of Pudukkottai, the reports of the State 
Museum for faslis 1349-51, JOR, vii-xii and JISOA (Coomaraswami 
volume)— articles by Venkararanga Raju and S. R. Balasubrahmanyaa. 

11. 310-11; and 316 and 319-320 of 1903. 

12. JISOA. vii pp. 113-5. 

13. 586, 589 and 605 of 1904. 

14. 148 and 155-8 of 1919. 

15. 141 of 1904 (SI/, vii 154) of Yr. 5 of Rajakesari (Sundara Cola) . 

16. 104 of 1914, El. xix p. 86. 

17. 558 of 1921. 

18. 199 of 1907; SII. iii. No. 124. 

19. 364 and 378-80 of 1924. 

20. 335 of 1902, El. vii p. 133. 

21. 348, 359 of 1903. 

22. JISOA, vii, pp. 113-5. 

23. 192 of 1925. 

24. PSI. 24; tm. pp. 24 and 30 ff. 

25. PSI. 14. 

26. Such instances, among others, are, the Uttarakailasa in the 
Pancanadesvara temple of Tiruvadi (Tanjore) built by Rajaraja’s queen 
Dantisakti (219 of 1894); the Vaidyanatha of Tirumalavadi (Trichino- 
poly) rebuilt in the last years of Rajaraja I and completed under his 



744 


COLA ART 


son Rajendra I (91 and 92 of 1805); the twin shrines of Siva and Visnu 
at Dadapuram (S. Arcot) built by Rajaraja’s sister Kundavai about 1016 
(8 of 1899); the Arinjigai-Isvara, now called Colesvara at Melpadi 
(Chittoor) built by Rajaraja I as pallipadai in memory of Arihjaya who 
fell at Arrur (ante p. 187); the Siva Devale No. 2 at Polonnaruva in 
Ceylon (ASC. Report 1906 pp. 17-22); the Irungolesvara, now Nila- 
kanthesvara of Laddigam (N. Arcot) which bears an inscription of the 
ninth year of Rajaraja (551 of 1906); the Haratirthesvara at Tiruva- 
rangulam (Pudukkottah state); the Gangaikonda-colesvara of Kulair - 
bandal (S. Arcot) built before 1034 (414 of 1902) ; and Tripurantakesvara 
of Kuvam (Chingleput district) built about 1050 (328 of 1909). 

27. JISOA, ii, p. 4. 

28. Ante, p. 184. 

29. JISOA, ii, p. 4. 

30. Ante, p. 235. 

31. This is the reason why the ground plan of this temple given 
by Percy Brown can no longer be held to be accurate or complete; 
there is no ground plan or section in existence for Tanjore — a state of 
affairs that calls for the early and serious attention of the Archaeological 
Department. 

32. JISOA, ii, p. 5. 

. 33. SII. ii, No. 61; Intr. p. (13). 

34. 22 of 1895 (SII. v. No. 578). 

35. 335 of 1917. 

36. 65 of 1890 (SII. lii. No. 22) from Karur (Rajendra II); 307-8 
of 1901, from Dharmapuri (Kulottunga I); 70 of 1911 from grivanjiyam 
Rajaraja II) and so on. 

37. See 429 of 1912 (Valluru, Tanjore), 577 of 1905 (Vijayaman- 
galam Coi.), 504 of 1912 (Uttattur, Trichi), etc. 

38. Acaryapuspahjali, p. 6. 

39. 47 of 1918. 

40. 227 of 1921. 

41. The account of these temples that follows is based on K. R- 
Srinivasan's paper 'The last of the great Cola temples’, JISOA, xvi. 
(1948), pp. 11-33. 

42. ARE. 1920, pp. 102-7 and pis. I-VI; also 1908, II, 66-7. 

43. Hindu Iconography, T. A. G. Rao, ii, pp. 171-4. 

44. ARE. 1908. p. 81, para 68. 

45. OZ. (N. F. 29), 1933, p. 5. 

46. H. K. Sastri in his South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses 
draws attention to several instances of iconographic variations in images 
of the same deity. 

47. IV. 11. 157-8. 

48. OZ., 1933, p. 165. 

49. 132 and 136 of 1925; ARE. II, 10. 

50. 131 of 1925. 



NOTES 


745 


51. Tirukkarrali-piccan (the mad man of the stone temple) is a 
title rather than a name, and was borne later by Parantakan Siriya- 
velar, the general of Parantaka II (291 of 1908), and Aruran Kamban 
of Tirumananjeri (a.d. 991, No. 9 of 1914). Other portraits in Tiruva- 
duturai, similar to that of Piccan, are that of Ambalavan Tiruvisaluran 
Tirunavukkaraiyan (133 of 1925) and some others of less certain date 
(106 and 141 of 1925). See SII. iii, plate xi for images (artistically not 
important now) of Gandaraditya worshipping the deity of Tirunallam- 
udaiyar at Konerirajapuram (Tanjore district), built by his queen 6em- 
biyan-mahadevi (SII. iii, Nos. 146 and 147 = 450 of 1908 and 626 of 
1909); the king’s head-dress, simple and elegant, with strings of pearls, 
and his ornaments on the arms, neck, and chest, in a way recall the 
similar decoration of the so-called Cdla-pratima of the Bhoganandisvara 
temple in Nandi (MAR. 1914 and 1915), which is a good example of the 
type of idealised portrait mentioned above in the text. 

Epigraphical references are found in Inscriptions to portrait bronzes 
of (1) Sembiyan Mahadevi (am. 1020) in a village of the same name — 
ARE. 1926, II, 24, (2) Parantaka II and his queen Vanavan Mahadevi, 
mother of Rajaraja I, and of Rajaraja I himself and his queen Loka- 
mahadevi, all solidly made, in the Tanjore temple — the inscribed image 
of Rajaraja I now in use there is obviously a much later substitute— 
ARE. 1925, II, 12, ante. pp. 168, 189 «. 3. 

Some stone portraits, not well preserved, are: (1) a king and queen 
worshipping a linga in the Siva temple of Tiruvisalur (Tanjore dis- 
trict) below which is a record of the tulabhara and hiranyagarbha per- 
formed there respectively by Rajaraja and his queen Lokamahadevi 
(42 of 1907, El. xii, p. 121, n. 2); (2) a king or noble seated cross-legged 
on the floor and worshipping a lingo in a ruined Siva temple at Olaga- 
puram (S. Arcot)— 129 of 1919; (3) Anantasiva worshipping a lingo 
in a manijapa built by him in the temple of Tiruvisalur (T. G. Ara- 
vamudan, Portrait Sculpture, fig. 10); and (4) Kundavai dancing before 
Siva in the temple built by her at Dadapuram (S. Arcot)— 17 of 1919. 

T. G. Aravamudan (op. cit., pp. 38-9 and fig. 13) identifies a Cola 
general Kettan Adittan and his sister Kaliyawai— of 168 (a) of 1922- 
in a couple of bronze statuettes from the Kalahasti temple. In the 
Siva temple of Srlmusnam (S. Arcot) is a portrait of Tambiran-tolan 
Manakkanjaran who used to recite Tiruppadiyam in the temple (255 of 
1916). At Anbil the people set up (c. 1250) an image in the Prema- 
purisvara temple of a certain Paludaiyandan who, at the cost of his 
life, protested against unjust revenue demands on the villagers (596 
of 1902). 

Popular local tradition identifies a large stone figure in the Srl- 
rangam temple with poet Kamban; two damaged stone figures at Tera- 
lundur with Kamban and his wife; and a large well preserved loose 
stone image in Ekamranatha temple at Kanclpuram with Karikala Cdla. 

52. Rupam, 1930, No. 40. p. 1. 

53. 168(b) of 1922. 

54. 168(a) of 1922. 

C. 94 



746 


COLA ART 


55. H. K. Sastri, South Indian Images, p. 162. 

56. Ibid., p. 125 and fig. 80. 

57. AnnamaXai University Journal, vol. iii, p. 43. 

58. OZ. (N. F. 10) 1934, pp. 176-86. 

59. The plates are still unpublished as already noted (p. 15, n. 1 
ante), and the seal is reproduced by the kind permission of the Govern- 
ment Epigraphist, Mr. N. Lakshminarayana Rao. The details of the 
seal are described elsewhere. 

60. Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, vii, (1944) , pp. 168-76. 

61. The technique of Indian paintings has been studied by Dr. S. 
Paramasivan, Archaeological Chemist, and the details are to be gathered 
from his valuable papers of which the following may be mentioned in 
particular : 

(1) Indian Wall Paintings, JMU. xii (1940), pp. 96-128, and xiii, 
(1941), pp. 1-15; 

(2) Annual Reports of Hyderabad Archaeology Department, 1936-7, 
pp. 25-38 on Ajanta and Ellora; 

(3) Technical Studies, Harvard; v. 4, (1937) pp. 222-39 on Tanjore, 
viii, 2, (1939), pp. 83-9 on Sitt anna vasal; 

(4) Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences : 
vii, 4, (1938), pp. 282-90 on Vijayalaya-Colesvaram; 
x, 2, (1939), pp. 77-84 on Kanclpuram; 

x, 9, (1939), pp. 85-95 on Bagh 

62. S. K. Govindaswami described the subject-matter of these 
paintings first in the Annamalai University Journal, ii, (1933), and in 
JISOA. i, (1933), pp. 73-80, but he went wrong over the technique of 
the paintings. See also C. Sivaramamurti in Triveni, vi, (1933), 
pp. 227-34; O. C. Ganguly in IAL. (NS. ix), 1935, p. 86, and Dr. Para- 
masivan in JOR. ix, (1935), p. 363. 







Pallava style Cola style Pandya style Vnayanagar Madura st , e 
style 

(5) Evolution of the Corbel. 



Drawings according to Jouveau-Dubreuil, Archeologie du sud de V hide 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


BY 

P. R. Srinivasan. M.A. 

Frontispiece. — (a) Panel of painting showing a group of celestial 
musicians — Gandharvas and Apsarases. The one on the right is playing 
on cymbals. The other three hold their hands in t nsmaya pose. They are 
in the posture of flying through the air which is suggested by their being 
hidden below their waist in the cloud-motif, which is called “Chinese”. 
This panel is placed between the panel above showing Siva in Kailas 
and the panel below showing Sundaramurti Nayanar on Airavata and 
Cheraman Perumal on horse proceeding to Kailas, to demarcate the 
two different regions. The bhangas, the head-dresses and ornaments 
and colour compositions are wonderful. That the artists of Tanjore 
were masters of line is easily borne out by the sure and suave rekhas. 

(b) Apsaras dancing. It occurs in the same scene mentioned above. 
Here the Apsaras is exhibiting a difficult pose of dancing. There is 
a suggestion that she is whirling. Being a celestial, she is not bound 
by gravity. The mastery of the artist is easily seen here especially in 
the powerful and flowing lines, the beautiful decorative details and 
the charming bhangas. The cloud-motif all around her suggests the 
celestial region. 

Pig. 1. Vijayalayacolesvara temple, on Melamalai, Narttamalai, 
‘Puddukkottah State.’ Circa 9th century a.d. 

It has a circular garbhagrha in a square. Third floor of vimana is 
also circular. Cupola with kudu designs on all four sides. Walls have 
simple mouldings and pilasters. Heavy cornice runs round the entire 
structure. Linked kosthas and solas form the parapet above cornice. 
Two-handed dvarapa lakas of slender and beautiful form in the niches 
on either side of entrance. The ruined prakara had perhaps a gopura 
over the entrance at north-eastern side. Six single-storeyed shrines 
( ekatalaprasada ) and traces of another, are found inside the prakara. 
Each of these has a square sanctum with bulbous sikhara and rectan- 
gular mandapa in front. They were probably dedicated to Surya, 
Saptamatrkas, Candra, Subrahmanya, Jyestha, and Candikesvara as in 
the case of the temple at Tirukkattalai where, however, an additional 
contemporary shrine and a later Amman shrine are also found. 

Fig. 2. Main temple of Vijayalayacolesvara on Melamalai Vide 
fig. 1. above. 

Fig. 3. Agastyesvara temple, from north-west. Panangudi, Puduk- 
kottah State.’ It is one of the many simple and beautiful single-storeyed 
( ekatalaprasada ) shrines occurring in the ‘State.’ Transverse platform 



750 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 

in front of sanctum was perhaps a pillared mandapa. Simple mouldings 
and pilasters, corbels with chamfered comers. Probably there was a 
prakara. Elegant couchant nandis on the comers. 

Fig. 4. Siva temple. Enadi, ‘Pudukkottah State.’ It is simpler, more 
beautiful and probably earlier than the above temple. Has cubical 
sanctum topped by a square s ikhara. Pilasters simple with bevelled 
corbels above. Finely worked kudus with kirtimukha apexes are found 
one on each face of sikhara. Mukhamandapa is borne by two heavy 
and squat pillars. One end of terrace rests on the cornice of sanctum. 
No niches on the sanctum walls but outlines of a niche on the walls 
below sikhara, which recalls the roof of the ‘Draupadi Ratha’ of Maha- 
balipuram. 

Fig. 5. Siva temple, from north-east. Korkai Tirunelveli District 
Its sanctum is similar to that of fig. 4. Here, however, the basement is 
high; a short parapet with a frieze of animals in high relief all along 
the cornice is seen and the niche-motif is pronounced. Pillared portico 
has given place to a walled up antarala. Other structures are of later 
date. The frieze of animals became a recurring motif in temples from 
now on. 

Fig. 6. Main shrine of Nagesvara temple, Kumbakonam, Tanjore 
District. It is a beautiful example of two-storeyed ( dvitalaprasdda ) 
shrine. Heavy indentations on plan. Sharp light and shade effect on 
elevation due to projections at the comers and the centres of each 
side. Kamakosthas on corners and salas in the centre of parapet with 
the frieze of animals in bas-relief, which occurs again above. This 
motif has not yet been employed for the base also as in still later 
temples. Square sikhara with kudus on its sides. Figure sculptures in 
the niches and below kudus. Mouldings and pilasters are simple. The 
corbels are rounded, survival of an earlier feature. 

Fig. 7. Muvarkovil, No. 1, south view. Kodumhalur, ‘Puduk- 
kottah State,’ Timchirapalli District. It is one of the two shrines that 
now survive of the group of originally three shrines which stood within 
a prakara. Has roll-moulding in the plinth, above it the yalivari 
occurring for the first time, projecting central niches on three sides of 
garbhagrha with sculptures, heavy cornice with yalivari above, square 
kamakosthas and central said of which the top is taken up to the second 
floor, nandis in comers, square sikhara with prominent kudus on its 
faces. Taller and simpler than the Nagesvara temple (fig. 6). 

Fig. 8. Agastyesvara temple, Melappaluvur, Tiruchirapalli Dist- 
rict. Roll-moulding and yalivari in plinth and arrangement of the 
kosthas and said above comice shows a combination of elements oc- 
curring in Muvarkovil No. 1, and Nagesvara. Bulbous sikhara with 
a prominent kudu containing beautiful sculpture on each of the four 
sides is distinctive of this shrine but would recall the sikhara of Vijaya- 
layacolesvara. 

Fig. 9. Inscribed lion pillars in the above temple. These pillars 
are similar to the pillars in the Vaikunthaperumal temple at Kancipuram. 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 751 


But their later date is clear from the stylised form of the manes of the 
lions, panel-like flutings above their heads, petal decoration on the 
kumuda portion, unpronounced abacus (palagai) above cushion and the 
bevelled corbels above palagai. Introduction of ydli as base of pillar 
is also in support of the late dating. 

Fig. 10. Koranganatha temple, from south-west, Srlnivasanallur, 
Tiruchirapalli District. Larger than the temples noticed above, but 
has a combination of elements found in them. Here is found a repeti- 
tion of the ground floor in the first floor. Above this are the kosthas. 
salas and also panjaras which occur for the first time here. Square 
sikhara on the summit with arched niches on its sides. Beautiful sculp- 
tures adorn the niches in both the tiers. Tier repetition here is an 
anticipation of the same feature in the famous temples at Tanjore and 
Gangaikonda-colapuram. A mahdmandapa is attached in front. Like 
the Nagesvara temple, this also is found to rise from below ground 
level. 

Fig. 11. Brhadisvara temple. Tanjore. A magnificent example of 
South Indian temple architecture, built by the great Rajaraja. Its ele- 
vation, sculptures and frescoes have evoked universal admiration. In 
the pavilion in the fore-ground is the big nan di, the second largest in 
India. Has a single prakara with closed verandah lining the interior. 
Smaller shrines are located at intervals in the verandah. It has two 
entrances with stunted gopuras, not seen in the figure. 

Fig. 12. Brhadisvara temple. * Gangaikonda-colapuram, Tiruchira- 
palli District. Another beautiful temple. Built by Rajendra Cola I. 
The two tiers are distinctly seen here. Kosthas, panjaras and iotas are 
well marked. The niches contain beautiful sculptures. Unlike the ele- 
vation of the vimana at Tanjore. the elevation here is concave in shape 
and the contour rather rugged. 

Fig. 13. North doorway in the above temple. The surul balustrade 
is simple unlike in later examples at Darasuram and elsewhere. Roll- 
moulding is fine. Pilasters are developed in their section. Dvarapalas, 
as usual in Cola temples of this period, are fierce-looking and 
vigorous with their firm stances and the tarjani and vismaya mudrds 
of their hands. 

Fig. 14. Entrance gopura, Laddigam. It is a simple and beautiful 
gopura and is one of the very early examples of its kind. It is single- 
storeyed ( ekatala ). Kirtimukha designs one each over the ends of the 
vault is all the decoration that the gopura has and it is clearly the 
prototype for the later day elaborately worked yali heads of the 
gopuras. 

Fig. 15. Airavatesvara temple, general view from south-east. 
Darasuram, Tanjore District. This is another example of the style in 
which the temples at Tanjore and Gangaikonda-colapuram are const- 
ructed, but later than those temples. Development of details evident 
in the pillars, mouldings, niches and balustrades. New addition is the 
open pillared marydapa in front of the mahdmandapa with which the 
earlier temples stopped. More significant and interesting are the horses 



752 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


attached to the mandapa to make it a chariot, a novel idea given con- 
crete form. (Cf. examples of this kind at Cidambaram and Kumba- 
konam). Simple surul balustrades occur side by side with balustrades 
showing figures of elephants alone and figures of elephant being 
attacked by lions. It is in this temple that there is a series of carvings 
in bas-relief representing the lives of the famous 6aiva saints accord- 
ing to the Periya-puranam of Sekkilar. Lives of a few of the saints 
have not been carved but the original sketches in red ochre of the scenes 
to be carved are still to be found. As usual the gopura is stunted 
although it has become ornate. But the vimana here shows signs of 
diminishing size. 

Fig. 16. North-east view of the above temple. Brick and mortar 
miniature salas etc. on top all along the cornice, the large and heavy 
pillars with composite designs, the projecting cornice ( kodungat ), the 
deep niches with sculptures and the lotus petals with pointed ends on 
the upapitha are innovations here. 

Fig. 17. South-west view of the Alankara mandapa, in the above 
temple. The pillars show interesting developments of motifs. The 
corbels have foliage designs instead of simple earlier ones. The palagai 
is thin and very broad. Yd Its and lions on the bases are in a variety 
of postures. Panjara design is found applied to the basement. The 
wheel and horse suggest that the mandapa is a chariot. The elephant 
design on the balustrade is exquisitely carved. 

Fig. 18. Devanayaki Amman shrine, south-east view, in the above 
temple. It is one of the earliest examples of separate shrines dedicated 
to Amman as consort of the main deity. Prior to about aj>. 1100 it was 
not customary to build a separate shrine for Amman in the compound 
of a temple. New and interesting features met with here are the pro- 
jecting kudus of the adhisthana; the pilasters with rampant lion bases: 
cornice ( kotfungai ) with prominent kudus in pairs; three-storeyed 
vimana with a prominent projection in front and the long covered 
ardhamandapa, all employed tastefully so as to render the shrine 
beautiful. 

Fig. 19. Kampaharesvarasvami temple, north-west view, Tribhu- 
vanam, Tanjore District. It is another of the last great temples of the 
Cola period. Its plan and elevation are on the model of the temple 
at Tanjore. But here the repetition of the ground tier above it, is 
absent. The mouldings, the pillars, cornice and the arrangement and 
decoration of the miniature shrines above show further development. 

Fig. 20. (A) Basement frieze of the Ta-hsiung-pao tieu hall. Zayton 
(Chuan Chou) in China. The basement has the padmapitha as well as 
the vyalavari motif , both characteristic of South Indian temples of the 
Cola times. Instead of the continuous ydli frieze of the South Indian 
temples, here a ydli or simha or a composite figure is enclosed in a 
separate panel. 

Fig. 20. (B) Elephant worshipping Siva-linga, same place. Siva-linga 
is shown under a tree and amidst creepers which suggest that the linga 
was hidden under creepers in a forest. The elephant accidentally came 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 753 

upon the linga and began to worship it. Here the elephant is placing 
a lotus flower on the top of the linga. Although the general features 
of the figures are in South Indian style, the details of the elephant and 
of the tree and creeper show unmistakable local influence. 

Fig. 20. (C) Cow worshipping a Siva-linga, same place. The model- 
ling of the cow and the workmanship of the tree suggest that the 
sculptor was of local origin but influenced greatly by traditions of the 
art of South India. 

Fig. 21. Devotee, in a niche in the temple at Srinivasanallur, Tiru- 
chirapalli District. Stands in the samabhanga pose on the double lotus 
pedestal. Hands crossed across the chest and kept in the attitude of 
reverence and obedience. Karandamakuta and other ornaments are 
seen. Right leg of the figure is broken. The modelling is fine, pro- 
portions of limbs are excellent, the decoration is restrained and the 
general treatment is highly realistic and aesthetically of high order. 
These are characteristic of sculpture of the 9th-10th centuries in South 
India as exemplified at Kumbakonam, Kodumbalur, Srinivasanallur 
and other places. The figures are, as a rule, slender and beautiful and 
placed in niches on the walls of sanctum. Flanking the niche is a pair 
of beautiful pilasters. 

Fig. 22. Princess or Apsaras(?), in the same temple. It is a mar- 
vellous example of sculpture of a woman. Her left leg and arm and 
right hand are broken. The workmanship is similar to fig. 21. She stands 
on padmasana. Karandamakuta and Mras and lower garment are 
beautiful. Full breasts, slender waist and broad hips are executed with 
consummate mastery and with an eye on canonical formulas relating 
to feminine beauty. Sharply bevelled corbels above pilasters are 
noteworthy. 

Fig. 23. Princess or Apsaras(?), in another niche. Similar to 
above. Here the left hand and right leg are broken. The sculptures 
from 21 to 23 are distinctive of the Srinivasanallur school, and are 
different from examples of sculpture from Kumbakonam and other 
places. 

Fig. 24. Woman, in a niche in the Nagesvara temple, Kumba- 
konam. Here the figure stands on simple pedestal, wears dhammilla 
head-dress decorated with flowers, pendant haras, closefitting lower 
garment with beautiful folds, valayas and nupuras. Prominent vajl- 
bandha below the arm and triple folds ( trivali ) on stomach. The 
elongated face, the slender form and decorative details and fine feeling 
expressed by facial features evident in this sculpture are characteristic 
of all the sculptures of this school. 

Fig. 25. Another woman, in another niche, in the same temple. 
Similar to above with minor differences in regard to ornamentation, 
hand poses and stance only. She also wears dhammilla head-dress with 
usual flowers, gem-set kundalas, jewelled necklaces and armlets and 
close-fitting lower garment with beautifully folded ends. They reveal 
the high degree of careful finish of details coupled with classical rest- 
raint. The bhanga and the more than three-quarter profile endow the 
figure with a rare charm. 


C. 95 



754 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


Fig. 26. Another woman in another niche, in the same temple. 
Similar to above. Noteworthy are kundalas and the beautiful lily in 
her left hand. 

Fig. 27. Another woman. Here the beauty and charm inherent 
in these sculptures are high-lighted. Details of decoration such as the 
Chandra and Surya prabhas on the head, hair falling in graceful curls 
over the shoulders and the kundalas and necklaces show the remark- 
able delicacy of treatment. Added to these is the splendid modelling 
as evidenced by the full bosom, slender arm and waist, and broad hip. 

Fig. 28. Man standing, in another niche, in the same temple. 
Workmanship similar to above figures. The hand poses, the slight 
bhanga and other features are beautiful and realistic. The modelling 
is fine. The figure probably represents a monk. 

Fig. 29. Man standing, in another niche in the same temple. Here 
probably a prince is depicted. He wears kesabandha with a jewelled 
fillet below. Holds a lotus flower in his right hand. The treatment of 
eyes and nose, the full lips, the rounded face, the disposition of the 
legs, the three-quarter profile and the general softness of finish distin- 
guish this figure from others here, and suggest that this is by a sculptor 
trained in a different school, probably of that of Srlnivasanallur. 

Fig. 30. Two devotees, in the Siva temple. Tiruvaduturai, Tanjore 
District. The figure on the left is in anjali pose. A bag is hanging from 
his left arm. Wears a very simple loin cloth. The other devotee on 
the right holds his hands in anjali above his head. Wears a rosary of 
beads around his neck. His bag is kept on a stand behind him. These 
figures, in bas-relief, are beautifully done. They display, by the ex- 
pression on their faces a calmness and devotion that distinguish men 
of this class. (See p. 725). The Tamil characters are of the early 
Cola times. 

Fig. 31. Goddess or Queen?. Bronze. Locality unknown. She 
stands in tribhanga pose on padmasana. Wears karaTu}amakuta, a broad 
necklace, ndgavalayas on arms, vaji bandha, valayas, yajnopavita, beau- 
tifully arranged lower garment and nupuras. Right hand is in kataka 
pose and the left is in tola. The expression in the face is calm and 
meditative. The modelling and decoration suggest an earlier date than 
that of Sita from Vadakkuppanaiyur in the Madras Museum. But the 
unusually slender limbs, the drooping shoulders and the style of the 
lotus pedestal point to Ceylon. 

Fig. 32. Colamadevi. Bronze. Kalahasti, Chittoor District. The 
figure stands in the tribhanga pose on padmasana. Wears elaborately 
worked ornaments and dress. Dhammilla head-dress, realistic lotus bud 
in her hand, the tasselled keyiira and vajibandha are interesting. It is 
intended to be a portrait of a great Cola queen of the 11th century a.d. 

Fig. 33. Kulottunga m. Bronze. Kalahasti, Chittoor District. 
Stands erect on the two pit has. Curly hair. Elaborate ornaments and 
dress. Holds a dagger in his right hand. Expression is smiling. The 
general treatment of the figure is excellent and of late Cola times. 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 755 

This is a fine example to show that the art continued to maintain its 
high level for a long time. 

Fig. 34. Golakamaharsi. Bronze. Kodikkarai, Tanjore District 
Being almost a nude study, it shows bare the excellent modelling and 
realistic delineation of features. Jatabhara of a peculiar shape, the 
thick fillet of beads, and the stance are particularly interesting. This 
is one of the figures which provided the model for later ones. 

Fig. 35. Candikesvara, in the Koranganatha temple. Srinivasa- 
nallur, Tiruchirapalli District. Similar in workmanship to other figures 
from this temple noticed above. The jatamakuta and the ahjali hands 
with flower in between show this as Candesa, though it has been held 
by some to be the portrait of a prince. Lotus pedestal and the fine 
pilasters add beauty to this figure. It is another beautiful example of 
Sculpture of the period. 

Fig. 36. Described usually as Narasingamunaiyadarayar, but pos- 
sibly Rama. Bronze. Tirunamanallur, Tanjore District. It stands 
in the tribhanga pose. Hands in position of holding bow and arrow. 
Wears usual ornaments. The high kirita, broad necklace and loin cloth 
are beautifully worked. The fine facial expression radiating supreme 
grace, the beautiful bhanga of the body and the wonderful plastic 
quality, the Cola ideals of bronzes, are well exemplified here. Never- 
theless elaboration of details etc., makes it definitely later than the 
Rama of the Vadakkuppanaiyur group in the Madras Museum as well 
as the Golakamaharsi fig. 34 above. 

Fig. 37. Siva, in a niche on the south wall of central shrine. 
Tirukkattalai, ‘Pudukkottah State.’ It stands on simple pedestal. It is 
slender and perfectly proportionate. Wears jatamakuta, broad neck- 
lace, udarabandha and beautiful waist-band. Holds a bow in his left 
hand and an arrow (?) in the right hand. The two other hands are 
not clearly seen. The face, looking down, has the expression of vismaya. 
Described as Vlnadhara Daksinamurti in the Pudukkottah Manual. 
But the features noted above may warrant identification as Tripuran- 
takamurti. (Cf. similar features in the Tripurantakamurti fig. 39 
below) . 

Fig. 38. Vlnadhara Daksinamurti, in a niche in Muvarkovil No. 1. 
Kodumbalur, ‘Pudukkottah State.’ A magnificent example of the icon. 
Characteristically, the face expressing complete absorption, is lifted up. 
Wears high jatamakuta. Ornaments and waist-bands are pronounced. 
Holds the Vina in the two front hands. The back hands are not clear 
here. The bhanga and the general treatment of the figure enhance its 
grandeur. 

Fig. 39. Tripurantakamurti. From the same place. Now in the 
Government Museum, Madras. It stands gracefully in the tribhanga 
pose. The back hands are in pataka hasta. Beyond them are quivers. 
The front right arm is in vyakhyana pose, while the left hand is hold- 
ing the long bow. The jatamakuta, channavira, hara, the upper gar- 
ment tied in two loops and with beautiful bows, and the yajhdpavita 
are executed in a splendid manner. Here too. as in the Tirukkattalai 



756 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 

example, the facial expression is suggestive of vismaya caused by the 
Lord’s destroying the Tripurasuras. The swaying rhythm, the wonder- 
ful modelling and the supple as well as realistic delineation of the limbs 
make this figure a superb specimen of the art. 

Fig. 40. Tripurasundari. From the same place. Now in the Gov- 
ernment Museum, Madras. It forms a group with figure No. 39 above. 
The samabhanga (erect) pose here is unusual in figures of goddesses. 
Right hand holds a flower and the left is on the thigh. Decorated with 
elaborately worked karandamakuta, kundalas and necklace. Yajhopa- 
vita prominent. Lower garment is beautifully worked with tassels and 
folds. Unlike her consort, she looks in front with her face beaming 
with divine grace and splendour. Stylistically akin to the previous 
figure this is also the work of the same master hand. 

Fig. 41. Ardhanarlsvara, in a niche in Muvarkovil No. 2. Kodum- 
bajur, ‘Pudukkottah State.’ Stands in the tribhanga pose. Only one 
hand on the right side, which is Lord’s. Parvati’s side has one hand 
which holds a mirror. A grand conception is given a wonderful form. 
Prakrti and Purusa here combined to form the substratum of the cosmos. 
This figure almost achieves the impossible, and combines high aesthe- 
tic qualities with strict rules of iconography. The workmanship bears 
a remote resemblance to the Ardhanarl figure at Mahabalipuram. The 
designs of the flanking pilasters lend charm to the figure. 

Fig. 42. Ardhanarlsvara, in a niche in the Nagesvara temple, 
Kumbakonam. Similar in conception to the Kodumbalur figure; but 
here the execution is marvellous and unsurpassed. Perhaps 9th-10th 
centuries a.d. in South India witnessed the arts reaching their zenith 
of development. This is the finest of all the figures in this temple. 
The great mastery of the Cola sculptor is evident in each limb of the 
figure. Its style of workmanship is apparently of local origin and quite 
distinct from the styles that were in vogue at Kodumbalur and other 
places. Here the pilasters are not interesting. 

Fig. 43. Brahma, in the same temple. The youthful figure with 
three faces, radiating divine wisdom stands on padmapitha, in the 
samabhanga pose. The upper hands hold rosary of beads and kundika, 
his cognizances. Workmanship same as in the previous figure. 

Fig. 44. 6iva as Kankalamurti, in a niche in the Koranganatha 
temple. Srinivasanallur, Tiruchirapalli District. Stands right side to 
front. Right leg broken but must have been placed on the head of 
the dwarf Apasmara. Jatamakuta and other ornaments are as usual 
worked very beautifully. 

Fig. 45. Daksinamurti, in a niche on the south, in the same temple. 
A magnificent figure but badly mutilated. The immense j atabhara, 
delicate carving of the ornaments and splendid modelling of the figure 
make it a great master-piece. Branches of the tree above form an ef- 
fective setting. The beauty of the figure is enhanced by the figures 
of animals, such as deer and lions as well as the Vidyadharas, Rsis and 
Apasmara. The workmanship of these is apparently the same as that 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 757 


of the main figure. Architectural features such as the roll-moulding, 
yalivari, the graceful pillars, the fine torana and the characteristic 
bevelled capital make the scene really attractive. 

Fig. 46. (PI. xx) Siva as Ardhanarlsvara, and Siva as an Anugraha- 
murti, on the vimana of Vallsvara temple. Tiruvallsvaram, Tirunelveli 
District. This temple dates probably from the early years of the 10th 
century a.d. Architectural details, although developed, have affinities 
with those of the Pallava temples at Panamalai and Kancipuram. 
Ardhanarlsvara stands in the tribhanga pose beside a marvellously 
carved bull and in front of the karnakostha. The representation is 
vigorous and its features are somewhat rugged. ( Cf . beautiful Ardha- 

narisvara sculptures figs. 41, 42 above). The other figure of Siva is 

shown in the attitude of pacifying some one of the attendant figures. 

Beautiful creeper designs are found on kudus. The ydlis are in high 

relief as at Narttamalai, which is an early feature. 

Fig. 47. (PI. xx) Siva as Vrsabhantikamurti and Siva as Gangadhara, 
in the same temple. Vrsabhantika stands with Parvati beside the finely 
executed bull. Both of them are shown in graceful tribhanga postures. 
The facial expression of both indicates supreme bliss. The fine model- 
ling and the flowing beautiful flexions and the attractive stances en- 
hance the merit of this composition. 

The Gangadhara group is also beautifully done. Siva is engaged 
simultaneously in receiving the Ganges on his locks of hair and in 
pacifying Parvati who took objection to that action of her Lord. This 
icon has been a favourite with Saivites in all ages. A magnificent and 
unparallelled representation of this theme is found in the Mahendra- 
varman’s cave temple at Tiruchirapalli. 

Fig. 48. (PI. xix) Nataraja, on the vimana of the same temple. It is 
one of the earliest dancing Siva figures in South India. Its posture is 
bhujangatrasita; but better known as ananda tdndava, as it gave 
supreme joy to all the devas and fsts, men and beasts. Its other 
names are sandhya tdndava and Gauri tdndava. Dance of Siva gave 
the artists of all periods a great opportunity to display their mastery. 
When it is coupled with unshakable faith and rare devotion to the 
Lord, the creation gives joy for all and becomes an object of wonder 
for ever. The Colas were ardent Saivites and Adavallan or Nataraja 
was their patron deity. Hence the Nataraja figures of this period are 
marvels of art. This figure has all the features commonly met with 
in such figures of later date, except the whirling locks of hair. Its 
movement is rhythmic and graceful and the general treatment vigorous 
and dynamic. Unfortunately the left hand is broken. The elephant, 
among the animals on the frieze below, is a splendid study. 

Fig. 49. (PI. xxi) West side of vimana, in the same temple. A beautiful 
Yoganarasimha, with four hands, seated on lotus pedestal is seen in 
the niche at top. Couchant nandis with garland of bells around their 
necks are placed over the corners. A frieze of animals is seen below. 



758 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


Seated lions here may have been intended as humourous studies imi- 
tating the posture of Narasimha above. (Cf. the cat's penance in the 
sculpture of Arjuna’s penance at Mahabalipuram). 

In the lower storey the following sculptures are found from left 
to right. (1) Kankalamurti accompanied by Parvatl and a gana. 
Parvatl is done in a charming manner. (2) Daksinamurti seated on a 
hill. (3) Lingodbhava on padmdsana. Quite unusually Visnu, of the 
same size as of Siva, stands on the left while similarly Brahma stands 
on the right. Both of these are in anjali pose which indicates their 
defeat. Icons of this kind, of later date, show Visnu in the form of a 
boar or a man with a boar’s head burrowing down to see diva’s feet 
and Brahma either in the form of a swan or riding it going up to see 
Siva’s head. (4) Kalarimurti with many hands. His left foot is raised 
in the urddhvajanu pose and his front hands are in the posture of 
destroying Kala (not distinct here). This type is simplified in the 
examples at Tanjore and Kodumbalur. The figure at Kodumbalur is 
superb. (5) Tripurantakamurti at the extreme right. This is a splen- 
did representation. The pose recalls that of .the Rama figures and 
Tripurantaka figures from Tanjore and Mayuram. As mentioned 
above this icon is a great favourite of the Colas. Rajaraja the Great 
was particularly struck by this and therefore had not only filled a 
number of niches on the exterior of -the walls of the sanctum of the 
Tanjore temple with Tripurantaka figures but had dedicated the entire 
wall space of a room in the temple’s ambulatory for a magnificent rep- 
resentation in painting of the complete scene depicting Siva’s great 
fight with the Tripurasuras. 

The frieze of animals, in high relief, the stone construction and 
the simple ialas etc., are early features. 

Fig. 50. (PI. xix) Gajantakamurti, in the same temple. Siva has eight 
hands. His left leg is placed on the elephant’s head. Its hide is spread 
by 6iva behind him. The representation is vigorous and awe-inspiring. 
The decoration is, as usual, fine. Parvatl is shown on the right, run- 
ning away from the gruesome scene. 

Fig. 51, (PI. xxi) Siva and a devotee and Siva as Candesanugrahamurti, 
in the same temple. The first sculpture shows iSiva seated in the sukha- 
sana pose, holding his emblems parasu and mrga in his upper hands. 
The lower right hand is in the pose of pointing to the devotee to his 
right. Apasmara is not distinct. Devotee in the atibhanga pose holds 
a vessel in his hands. He wears karandamakuta and other ornaments. 

In the second sculpture Siva is shown in the very easy posture 
commonly seen in the Daksinamurti sculptures. He is seen decorating 
Candesa’s head with a garland. Candesa is shown kneeling and his 
hands are in anjali pose. Parvatl with karandama kuta and wearing 
other ornaments including channavna and beautiful garment, and 
holding a flower in her right hand is seated on the pedestal in the 
nikntikasana pose. Her left foot is placed on the vigorous couchant 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 759 


bull shown below. The workmanship of the entire composition is such 
that it is unsurpassed for beauty by any other example of its kind. 
( Cf. less vigorous but more ornate and larger representation of this 
at Gangaikonda-colapuram fig. 57 below). 

Fig. 52. Daksinamurti, in the Angalamman shrine. Kaveripakkam, 
North Arcot District. Siva is seated in the utkutikasana on a pedes- 
tal. A pair of deer and a serpent are carved on the pedestal. Points 
of interest in the sculpture are the big j atabhara in curls or knots, 
the vastrayajnopavita and the leaves of the book of Cosmic Wisdom 
(Vedas) in the hand. The general treatment of the figure is charac- 
teristic of figures of earlier period. At Kaveripakkam there was a vast 
quantity of antiquities of Pallava and Cola times. 

Fig, 53. (PI. xix) Siva as Bhiksatana, in the Nagesvara temple. Kumba- 
konam. 6iva wears a high jatamakuta and other ornaments. A ser- 
pent forms the waist-band. A damaru, a kapala and a staff are held 
in three hands, the fourth is reassuring the deer. A rare masterpiece, 
it possesses all the charming features of a perfectly handsome person, 
correctly answering the textual description of Bhiksatana as he ap- 
peared before the wives of the rsis of the Darukavana. 

Fig. 54. (PL xxiii) Sarasvatl?, in the niche on the north side of ambu- 
latory around the sanctum in the Brhadisvara temple, Tanjore. The god- 
dess is seated in the ardhaparyankasana. Right hand broken and the left 
holds the book of Universal Knowledge. Wears jatamakuta, kucaban - 
dha, other ornaments. Beautiful umbrella and branches of 
a tree above. A camaradharinl is seen on either side, and a gand- 
harva hovering above. Facial expression suggests sublime spiritual 
feeling. All the classical qualities are marked here. Its wearing a 
kucabandha, occurring in a temple avowedly dedicated to glorify Siva’s 
sports, and its answering a verse in the Lalitasahasrandma may sug- 
gest that it represents a form of Uma rather than Sarasvatl. 

Fig. 55. (PI. xxii) Nataraja, in an exterior niche in the temple. Gangai- 
konda-colapuram. This sculpture is one of the most beautiful dancing 
giva figures in this pose, in which the Cola sculptors revelled. (Cf. the 
earlier figure from the Valisvara temple at Tiruvalisvaram, Tirunelveli 
District fig. 48). Here the figure is more evolved and fully stan- 
dardised. The following subsidiary figures in bas-relief are not only 
beautiful but also interesting as they complete the entire scene. 
Behind Nataraja is Kali in the catura dancing pose. Beyond the niche 
on the right side is Parvat! standing and leaning against the fine bull. 
Beautiful Ganesa and Subrahmanya figures are shown on the left. Be- 
low them is a magnificent representation of Visnu playing on drum 
and upper hands in vismaya pose which suggests his great admiration 
of diva’s cosmic dance. Apasmara is large. Below him on the pedestal 
are shown a gana (Tandu?) playing on drum and Karaikal Ammaiyar, 
the woman-saint playing on cymbals. On either side of this is a panel 
with gamts in various dance postures. 



760 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 

Fig. 56. (Ibid.) Harihara, in a niche in the same temple. The figure 
stands in the samabhanga pose. Siva’s parasu and his jatamakuta are seen 
on the right side of the figure. Visnu’s conch and kiritamakuta are on the 
left side. The treatment of this figure appears to be a little stiff, unusual 
in the sculptures of this period. On the contrary the indistinct bas- 
relief sculptures on the base are fine. 

Architectural details of this niche and of the niche of Nataraja 
(fig. 55 above) when compared show interesting differences occurring 
side by side in one and the same structure. 

Fig. 57. (Ibid.) Siva as Candesanugrahamurti, in the same temple. 
Siva seated in the sukhasana posture is tying the garland on to the head 
of Candesa shown kneeling and in anjali pose. Parvatl is seated beside 
in the utkutikasana with her hand in the ahuyavarada pose. The group is 
reputed for its beautiful modelling, fine plastic sense, and interesting 
decorative details. (Cf. more beautiful figure from Tiruvalisvaram 
fig. 51 noticed above). The fine bas-relief group with beautiful rhythm 
and dynamic action on the left obviously depicts the scene of Candesa 
attempting to cut off the legs of his father who prevented his son from 
worshipping Siva, in his own way. This sculpture is interesting because 
it confirms the story of Candesa. Its rendering is effective and forcible. 

Fig. 58. (PI. xxiv) Siva as Kamantaka, in the same temple. Iconographi- 
cally rare sculpture. Siva is seated on padmapitha in the sukhasana pose. 
Wears jatdmakuta, mukta -yajhopavita etc. The emblems in the upper 
hands are not clear. The lower right hand is in sucihasta, pointing to 
a scene occurring below. The left hand is on the lap. The facial expres- 
sion is terrifying. The modelling and treatment are fine. Around the 
niche are sculptures in bas-relief. On the left side Manmatha or Kama 
with his consort Rat! is flying towards Siva in the niche. On the corres- 
ponding left side is a sculpture showing them standing with hands in 
anjali pose, which indicates their defeat at Siva’s hands. The other 
figures one of them being Parvatl in penance also relate to the episode. 
All of them are rendered with vigour and liveliness and are beautiful 
examples of sculpture in bas-relief, a technique although discontinued 
long before, was still lingering on, and occasionally, as in these examples, 
employed very successfully. 

Fig. 59. (PI. xxiii) Visnu, in the same temple. The figure represented 
is Srinivasa and it stands erect on padmasana. Sridevi and Bhudevi stand 
on either side. The figures show signs of conventionalisation. 

Fig. 60. (Ibid.) Navagraha stone, in the mahamandapa of the same 
temple. It is one of the unique representations of the Planets. The 
conception and execution here are grand. The disposition of the planets 
around the open lotus which represents not only the Sim but also the 
universe itself, is quite interesting. Usually the Sun would dominate 
the panel, but here he is one among others. But his grandeur is how- 
ever evident in his chariot etc. 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 761 


Fig. 61. (PI. xxiv) Kankalamurti, in the Airavatesvara temple. Darasu- 
ram, Tanjore District. Now removed to the Art Gallery at Tanjore. Siva 
wearing sandals stands in the tribhanga pose. Front hands play on a 
kettle-drum, the lower right hand is engaged with the deer and the 
upper left hand holds the bundle of bones across the shoulders. Wears 
high jatdmakuta and other ornaments. These are elaborate and combin- 
ed with the acquiline nose indicate the beginnings of stylisation. There 
is a gana on Siva’s left side. The modelling is excellent and the execu- 
tion delicate. These go to make this figure imposing and one of the 
very fine specimens of the art of sculpture of the 12th century a.d. 

Fig. 62. Gajantakamurti, from the same place. Now removed to 
the Art Gallery at Tanjore. This is a wonderful representation of 
another great theme, and the treatment is powerful and energetic. 
Though it is in high relief, the execution of the limbs and the atibhanga 
posture is such as to make it appear in the round. The controlled 
dynamism of this figure recalls the MahisamardinI sculpture at Maha- 
balipuram but with this difference that here the face expresses intros- 
pection while MahisamardinI’s face beams with divine grace and un- 
ruffled tranquillity. Parvati is shown in all her tenderness on the left 
of §iva, but her face expresses mingled feelings of terror and visviaya. 
This representation differs from that at Tiruvallsvaram (fig. 50) noticed 
above. The deviation shows the freedom of the sculptors to render a 
theme according to their genius but within canonical bounds. The 
elephant’s head, the legs, and the padmasana are highly realistic. 

Fig. 63. Nataraja. Bronze. In the Brhadlsvara temple at Tanjore. 
It is installed in the sabha in the temple and offered worship 
to this day, It was called, as is known from the inscriptions in the 
temple, Adavallan. This is one of the most magnificent Nataraja 
figures so far known. Siva’s dancing on Apasmara is exquisitely poised. 
The face radiates supreme bliss and spiritual splendour. The swings and 
pulls of the limbs are highly rhythmic, the balance being sought to be 
maintained by the whirling locks of hair arranged schematically and 
by the gracefully flowing ends of the udarabandha. The arch of glory, 
with beautifully worked makara heads on it, encompasses the figure 
and adds beauty to the figure. Rarely this kind of makara motif occurs 
in such figures. 

Fig. 64. Nataraja. Bronze. Velanganni, Tanjore District. Now in 
the Government Museum, Madras. This is another complete and beau- 
tiful example. Has become widely known through the writing of the 
great French artist A. Rodin. It is very similar to the one from Tan- 
jore noticed above. But here the details such as the prabha, the pad- 
masana, Apasmara Purusa and ornaments are simpler than in the Tan- 
jore Nataraja. This fact may suggest that this figure is earlier than 
the Tanjore one, by a few decades or years. 

Fig. 65. Nataraja. Bronze. Tiruvalangadu, Chittoor District. Now- 
in the Government Museum, Madras. By far the best known ananda 
tandava Nataraja image. No prabha. It is acclaimed as a wonderful 
C. 96 



762 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 

specimen of the ‘art of bronze.’ What a stone carver could not achieve, 
the image caster has achieved here. The movements of the limbs are 
rhythmic and the posture graceful. The little exaggeration of the 
limbs evidently adds poetic flavour to the sculpture and thus make, 
it a splendid piece. The rounded limbs, the details such as head-dress 
in high relief, and the long necklace may not indicate a late date but 
show the depth of knowledge in his art and capacity of the master 
sculptor to render the details clearly and effectively. 

Fig. 66. Nataraja. Bronze. From Nallur, Tanjore District. It has 
eight hands and is in catura pose. This is another rare icon. The fea- 
tures of the figure, both on the front side and on the back may indicate 
that this is an early figure. The treatment of the prabha , of Apasmara 
and of the pedestal would support an early dating. 

Fig. 67. Nataraja. Bronze. From Tiruvarangulam, ‘Pudukkottah 
State,’ Tiruchirapalli District. Here Siva dances the graceful catura 
taadava. It is a rare figure, not only because of its posture but also 
because of its classical qualities such as the smiling facial expression, 
restrained ornamentation including the characteristic vajibandha and 
the beautifully worked jatamakuta. Added to these are the fine figure 
of Apasmara and the nicely worked pedestal. It is one of the grand 
specimens of bronzes. 

Fig. 68. Vrsabhantikamurti with consort. Bronze. Tiruvenkadu. 
Tanjore District. Now in the Art Gallery, Tanjore. These, along with 
Kalyanasundara (fig. 82) and two other figures were discovered 
recently while ploughing in a field at the village. All these figures arc 
done by one and the same master sthapati and belong to the early 
Cola period. As usual in this group, Siva with only two hands, stands, 
leg crossed, as if leaning against the bull which is missing. His left 
hand is in katyavalambita pose. The jat&bhara here is simple but 
beautiful the like of which is not found in any other bronze so far. 
The modelling is excellent and its beauty is enhanced by the fine finish 
and the delicate details. Parvatl also is equally beautiful. She is 
rendered life-like and as the very embodiment of feminine tenderness, 
grace and beauty. The workmanship of karandamakuta, necklaces, 
yajnopavlta, kataka and lola-hastas, vajibandha, broad hip and the 
beautiful lower garment enhance the charm of the figure. 

Fig. 69. Vrsabhantika. Bronze. In the temple at Gangaikonda- 
colapuram. This figure has four hands and it stands leaning to the 
left. A makarakundala is present in the right ear. The necklaces and 
other ornaments are simpler than in the previous example. This figure 
is also executed in a beautiful way characteristic of the Cola times 
But comparing this with the previous one, the different styles of work- 
manship between them are apparent, due to the difference in the loca- 
lities, they come from. 

Fig. 70. Siva as Sukhasanamurti. Bronze. In the Pudukkottah 
Museum. Siva is seated in the sukhasana pose on the padmapitha. 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 763 


Upper hands hold parasu and deer. The lower right hand is in abhaya 
and the lower left hand is in ahuyavarada poses. The general treat- 
ment of the entire figure is characteristic of late figures. 

Fig. 71. Kiratamurti. Bronze. In the Pasupatesvara temple. 
Tiruvetkalam (modem Annamalainagar) , near Cidambaram, South 
Arcot District. Siva stands in the tribhanga pose on padmasana over 
a large bhadrasana. He has two hands which are shown in position to 
hold an arrow and bow. A graceful ovoidal prabhavali encloses the 
figure. The beauty of the figure is apparent. The fine modelling, the 
delicate decorative details, the elegant stance and subtle way of sug- 
gesting that the figure is the source of power and energy, are all quali- 
ties which are characteristic of figures dating from not later than 
A.E. 900. 

Fig. 72. Kiratarjunamurti. Bronze. Radhanarasimhapuram. Tan- 
jore District. Two views of the figure are seen. It is another example 
of the same theme. But compared to the previous item, here the model- 
ling is heavy and the ornaments and other features are pronounced 
which proclaim it to be of a later date than the previous figure. Never- 
theless this image may belong to llth-12th centuries a.d. 

Fig. 73. 6iva as Pradosamurti. Bronze. Tiruvaduturai, Tanjore 
District. Siva standing in the beautiful tribhanga pose, embraces Par- 
vati on his left who is also shown in the same pose. Both of them 
stand on a common padmasana over a bhadrasana to which is attached 
a prabh&vali of beautiful form. In spite of the late date suggested by 
the workmanship and elaboration of the prabha, j atamakuta, the flexion 
and of other ornaments and drapery, the sculptor’s attempt to emulate 
the ideals of earlier models has remarkably succeeded. 

Fig. 74. Bhiksatanamurti. Bronze. In the Siva Temple at Tiru- 
namanallur. 6iva wears, as usual, a pair of sandals and is naked. The 
arrangement of j atas with the locks standing on their ends and forming 
a halo behind his head is beautiful. A skull and a serpent are seen on 
the head. The upper right hand holds a damaru; the lower one is in 
simhakarna pose; the upper left is in kataka pose (the trident which 
should have been held here is missing) and the lower left holds a 
kapala. A simple broad necklace (kantln) , prominent yajhopavita, 
)idarabandha and a naga waist-band are seen on the body. The nude 
study shows bare the fine quality of the modelling. The grandeur of 
the image is accentuated by the realistic features, the beautiful expres- 
sion and the restrained but finely worked details. All these make the 
image a superb example in bronze. 

Fig. 75. Bhiksatanamurti. Bronze. Tiruccengodu. Salem District. 
Here the features are completely stylised. Additional figures of a deer 
and a gana each standing on a padmasana. are also’ seen. A late 
specimen. 

Fig. 76. Subrahmanya as Devasenapati. Bronze. Tiruvidaikali, 
Tanjore District. He stands in the tribhanga pose on padmasana over 



764 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


bhadrasana. A beautiful prabhavall encircles him. The ends of prabha 
show the beginning of the makara motif which develops into a signi- 
ficant decoration for the prabha of the Nataraja image in the Tanjore 
temple (fig. 63) noticed above. Of the four hands the two front ones 
are in position to hold a bow and arrow which suggests his being 
Devasenapati. His characteristic emblems sakti and vajra are held 
respectively in the upper right and left hands. His karandamakuta, 
channavira and other ornaments are simple and beautiful. It is a fine 
example of the art at its best during the Cola times. Its style has 
definite affinity with that of the Kiratamurti image from Tiruvetkalam 
(fig. 71) noticed above, although the latter is earlier. 

Fig. 77. Vi?nu. Bronze. Sermadevi; Tinnevelly District. Stands on 
padmasana over bhadrasana in the samabhanga pose. Holds discus and 
conch in the upper hands. The lower right hand is in abhaya and the left 
is in katyavalambita pose. High kirita on head. The elaborate lower 
garment with bows on either side reaches to the ankles. The treat- 
ment and decorative details show that this is a Cola work. 

Fig. 78. Visnu. Bronze. Same place. Similar to above but 
of a later date. 

Fig. 79. 6rldevi. Bronze. Same place. She stands on the 
usual asanas. Wears karandamakuta, channavira etc. but no kucdban- 
dha. Holds a lotus in her left hand. Its style suggests relatively a late 
Cola date. 

Fig. 80. Sridevi. Bronze. Same place. Similar to above, 
but with difference in workmanship, e.g. the less pronounced lotus 
pedestal. 

Fig. 81. Rama, Sita and Laksmana with Hanuman. Bronze. In 
the Visnu temple at Tirukkadaiyur, Tanjore District. Rama stands 
on padmasana in the tribhanga pose. Wears a high kiritamakuta, maka- 
rakundalas, a number of necklaces etc. Holds a bow in his left hand 
and an arrow in his right hand. The execution of the figure is excel- 
lent and the details, although elaborate, are pleasing and effective. The 
flexion is especially fine. Laksmana is similar to Rama; but the head- 
dress here is j atamakuta, and the figure is smaller. Sita also stands in 
the beautiful tribhanga pose on padmasana; jatamakuta. patrakundalas. 
channavira and the lower garment are all excellently done. Hanu- 
man is very small, but shows all the details in a beautiful manner. 
The group may be dated to about the 12th century a.d. 

Fig. 82. Siva as Kalyanasundara. Parvati is being given in mai- 
riage to Siva by Visnu and Laksmi. Tiruvenkadu, Tanjore District. 
Now in the Art Gallery, Tanjore. This is a unique group and was 
discovered only recently along with images of figure 68 ante. 

Siva, the dominating figure in the group, holds the right hand of 
Parvatl, to his right. The form of marriage called Panigrahana, is the 
most commendable of all the forms of marriage. Parvati’s shyness 
and modesty are indicated skilfully by her looking down a little. Thai 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 765 


she is very young ( kanya ) is suggested by the softness of treatment. 
The graceful bhanga in which she stands supports this. 

Visnu stands in the dbhanga pose. Holds his front hands in the 
significant position of giving away Parvatl to Siva. The other hands 
hold discus and conch. He wears his usual kirita and makarakundalas. 
Laksmi or Sri, Visnu’s consort, is shown to his left and is in the at- 
titude of encouraging shy Parvatl to approach Siva. 

The workmanship of all the figures is exquisite and unsurpassed. 
The group is a magnificent one and is the only one of its kind in metal 
sc far met with. 

Fig. 83. Seal on Karandai copper-plate grant of Rajendra Cola I. 
The tiger, the Cola emblem, with gaping mouth, is seated on its 
haunches, with its tail brought forward. It faces proper right. A pair 
of fish, the Pandyan emblem, is seen in front of the tiger. At the 
end on proper right are a lamp stand, a standard and a stand. At 
the opposite end, behind the tiger, are seen a lamp stand, a standard, 
a dagger in scabbard, and an ankusa. All these are shown on a thick 
straight line. Below the tiger are seen a boar with head lowered and 
a svastika sign. In front of the boar is a low chair probably represent- 
ing a simhdsanp and beyond it is a drum. Except the boar, the other 
symbols indicate auspiciousness. The boar shown just below the tiger, 
when taken together with ankusa above, suggests the subjection of the 
Calukyas whose emblems they are. There is a five-petalled lotus 
shown lowest in the field. Above the tiger and fish is a pair of camaras 
flanking an umbrella, the emblem of royalty, worked like a lotus in 
blossom in its upper part. These figures are enclosed within a circle. 
Along the periphery of the seal is a legend in Grantha characters 
v/hich reads: 

Rajad-rajanya-makuta-sreni ratnesu-sasanam / 
etad-Rajendra Colasya Parakesarivarmmanah / / 

Fig. 84. Dvarapalaka, on the right side of entrance to central 
shrine in the Vijayalayacolesvara temple. Narttamalai, ‘Pudukkottah 
State.’ He stands in the usual atibhanga pose and has only two hands, 
a feature met with in early dvarapdlakas. His hair is arranged like a halo 
behind his head. Tasselled mukta-yajnopavita and other ornaments are 
seen. The terrifying expression is characteristic of images of its kind. 
The workmanship is fine and shows the mingling of the late Pallava 
and the early Cola traditions of the art. 

Fig. 85. 6alabhanjika (female door-keeper) in the Kampahares- 
vara temple. Tribhuvanam, Tanjore District. This motif goes back 
to very early periods. It has been cleverly adapted to decorate the 
colossal monolithic pillars that support the huge towers over the main 
entrances of South Indian temples. The woman stands gracefully with 
her right foot and back resting on a tree behind, whose branch she 
holds in her hands. Her figure is a splendid example of the art of 



766 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 


the period, and this is emphasised by the tasteful workmanship of the 
kondai, the ornaments and drapery. Although the acquiline nose, the 
profusion of ornaments and the emphasis on the details show the begin - 
ings of stylisation, yet in this case they tend to add grace to the figure. 

Fig. 86. Platform with a frieze of animals. In front of the Sania- 
nakudagu. Narttamalai, ‘Pudukkottah State.’ The portion of the frieze 
here shows three beautiful little elephants in interesting postures, two 
lions with yali-like faces and a yali with elephant trunk. The lion 
with looped-tail motif is found on the coins of the Visnukundins and 
of the Pallavas, and on the seals of copper-plate grants of the former 
dynasty. Its occurrence here indicates a very early date for the plat- 
form. The high relief and the beautiful workmanship also support the 
early dating. 

Fig. 87. Lion attacking an elephant, on the balustrade of the 
raandapa in the Airavatesvara temple. Darasuram, Tanjore District. 
It is another common motif which is worked in a variety of ways in 
Indian art. Here it is magnificently executed in spite of the defect in 
showing the lion larger than the elephant. For vigour and dynamic 
action this piece is remarkable. 

Fig. 88. Surul yali on the balustrade, in the temple at Tribhuva- 
nam, Tanjore District. The animal is a composite one, with a lion’s 
body and head and with an elephant’s trunk which forms the wavy 
balustrade. The combination of two animals into one shows the de- 
velopment of a motif from period to period. In the previous example 
the powerful lion symbol of royalty is represented as attacking an 
elephant whose trunk was required to serve as the balustrade. The 
sculptor here has dispensed with the elephant’s body, but has 
retained its trunk only to which is added the lion's body 
which is dominating in the Darasuram example. This device 
indicates the desire on the part of workmen to economise 
labour and time to which the kings of this period also gave 
their assent. The incongruous nature of the combination of the two 
animals and the tameness of the lion are proof positive for the weaken- 
ing of the royal power and for the consequent deterioration of art and 
culture from now on. 

Fig. 89 (PI. xxxv) Ornamental niche, on the north basement of vimana 
of above temple. It is a representation of a miniature gbpura with a 
single-storey ( ekatala ). Noteworthy features here are the p advia 
motif at the base, simple pillars and lack of floral and other designs. 

Fig. 90. (Ibid.) Ornamental niche, on the south wall of mahamandapa 
basement of the same temple. Similar to above, but details differ. 
Here are seen a roll-moulding at the base, rampant lions at the base 
of pillars, carved kudu on the s ala and finials, which are absent in the 
pievious example. 

Fig. 91. (Ibid.) Ornamental niche, in the same temple. It is called as 
kosthapanjara which is different from kambhapanjara. All the de- 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 767 

tails met with in the previous examples are seen here except the 
said which is replaced by a single kudu. The architectural design 
within the top kudu and the terrifying rampant yalis on either side 
of the panjara are interesting. 

Fig. 92. (PI. xxxiv) Agni presenting pdyasa to Dasaratha. Nagesvara 
temple, Kumbakonam. The sculpture, in bas-relief, is reminiscent of 
sculptures in the same technique, of very early period and maintains still 
the high standard. The scene shows on the left Dasaratha with his 
queen, and rsis and others on the right. From the agnikunda appears 
the divya Purusa who hands over the vessel containing pai/asa to 
Dasaratha. The sculpture is lively and each figure is beautifully 
executed making the entire composition a fine one. 

Fig. 93. Dasaratha distributing payasa among his queens. From 
the same temple. Dasaratha, seated in the beautiful sit-at-ease pos- 
ture, is in the attitude of pouring pdyasa from one vessel to another. 
He wears jatamakuta, kundalas, other ornaments and a thick waist- 
band. Two of his queens are seated in front of him while the third 
is seated behind him. Their postures, and their kondais are interesting. 
The minister, is seen in the back-ground. That the tradition of doing 
sculpture in bas-relief with delicacy and beauty, as in earlier periods, 
was lingering on for a long time in South India is exemplified by this 
and other examples of this kind. 

Fig. 94. Birth of Rama. From the same temple. Kausalya is 
reclining on a cot. The two other queens are behind her. An atten- 
dant woman is seen on either side. Baby Rama is seen lying near 
Kausalya. Her posture is significant and it bears a striking resem- 
blance to that of Mayadevi in sculptures from Amaravati and other 
places. This composition is another proof to show the continuity of 
artistic traditions. 

Fig. 95. (PI. xxxvi) Rama’s fight with Tataka. From the same temple. 
The demoniacal Tataka is shown on the right rushing towards the 
young brothers. She wields a trident. The sage Visvamitra is found 
between them. This scene is full of vigorous action. The whirling 
locks of hair of Tataka may be contrasted with the jatamakutas of the 
Princes. 

Fig. 96. Hanuman in conversation with Ravana. Ravana, with 
only a single head, is seated in the sukhdsana pose, on a large throne. 
His left hand is in sucihasta pose, pointing to Hanuman in front of 
him. Ravana’s regal splendour is remarkably suggested by his beauti- 
ful figure, his posture and by the workmanship of the throne. Hanu- 
man is seated on the coils of his own tail. His hands are placed on his 
knees. Between these is a figure holding a bow, probably Vibhlsana. 

Fig. 97. Ravana’s encounter with Jatayu, while carrying away 
Sita. In the temple at Tribhuvanam, Tanjore District. Ravana with 
all his heads and arms stands within his divine chariot as suggested 
by the hiding away of his legs below knees He is in the attitude of 



768 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 

fighting. SIta is seated in front of him and is in the attitude of mourn- 
ing for her plight. Jatayu, the king of the birds, with a gigantic body 
and a stylish but beautiful beak is shown on the right side. This bas- 
relief is comparatively later than the ones from Kumbakonam, but still 
the sculpture is remarkable for its composition as well as for the 
vigorous depiction of the scene. 

Fig. 98. Varahavatara of Visnu. In a temple at Punjai, Tanjore 
District. It is one of the beautiful representations of the theme. It is 
also dynamic. Visnu with boar’s head, is running away from the 
ocean with Bhudevi on his lap. This way of depicting the theme is 
rare. The Naga king with a bow in his hand is hurrying to follow 
Varaha but is held back by his queen. (Cf. static but beautiful re- 
presentations of the theme at Mahabalipuram and other places). 

Fig. 99. (PI. xxxv) Krsna and Putana from the same place. Putana, 
the demoness was sent by Kamsa to destroy baby Krsna. She came to 
Krsna as a foster mother and; wanted to suckle him with the poison 
in her breast. But divine Krsna, while drinking from her breast, 
sapped her very life. Here the baby is beautiful quite in contrast with 
the ugly and uncouth Putana whose abject condition is apparent. The 
head-dress of Krsna is interesting. 

PLATE XXXVII— COINS 

Fig. I. Circular disc of sheet of pure gold. Diameter about 3-3 
cms.; thickness about -29 mm. Weight about 4-35 grammes or 67 '2 grains. 

Obverse: Seven punches along the periphery with Tamil legend in 
Tamil and Grantha characters of 11th century a.d. The 
legend in six punches reads: Kan gai ko nda co Ian. 
Seventh punch shows 4000 over 32 in Tamil characters. 
The latter number stands for the regnal year. The large 
central punch shows the Cola emblem: Tiger with gaping 
mouth and with a parasol above its head seated on its 
haunches with tail lifted up, facing a pair of fish (Pand- 
yan emblem) to proper right. Lamp stands flank them- 
Tamil letter Ca above fish. 

Reverse: Convex and blank. 

Fig. 2. Same as above but with the significant difference in that 
the syllable Raja occurs above the pair of fish instead of a single letter 
as in above. 

Fig. 3. Coin shape and measurements etc. similar to above but 
with a difference in legend and workmanship. 

Obverse: Eight punches are seen here. Seven of them have Tamil 
and Grantha letters with the Tamil legend: Ma la nd- 

du ko nda co lan. Eighth punch has 4000 over 34 the latter 
standing for the regnal year. The central punch shows 
the tiger seated on its haunches with the tail lifted up. 



DESCRIPTION OF FIGURES IN THE PLATES 769 

facing a pair of fish to proper right. A lamp stand is on 
either side. Above tiger is an umbrella, the sovereign’s 
symbol. Above fish is a letter probably I. 

Reverse: Blank. 

Fig. 4. Similar to above. Here the regnal year is 35 and the letter 
above fish in the central device is probably Ca. The central design is 
not clear. 

Fig. 5. Similar to above in shape and measurements. This and 
the following are coins of the Eastern Calukya dynasty. 

Obverse: Six punches with the legend in five of them in old 
Telugu characters viz. Sri Rd j a Rd ja. The sixth one 
has Sa 33, i.e. Samvat 33 the number standing for the 
regnal year. The central device has a boar standing 
facing proper left and ankusa above it which were the 
Eastern Calukya emblem. An umbrella is seen above. 

Fig. 6. Similar to above. Here only four punches are seen along 
the periphery. The legend is Sri Rd ja Sa. 33 ( Samvat 33). The central 
device is the same as in the above example but here it is clearer. This 
coin is one of the four from the hoard with this legend. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The sources for the illustrations described above are as follow and 
their copyrights rest with the respective parties named : — 

Nos. 25, 28, 29, 53 and 70 are from the private collection of 
Sri K. R. Srinivasan, Superintendent for Archaeology, Southern Circle, 
Madras. 

Nos. 39, 40, 64, 65 and Coin illustrations Nos. 1 to 6 are from the 
Madras Government Museum, Madras. 

No. 20 is from Ostasiatische Zeitschrift, 1933, N.F. 9, Nos. 54, 59 
and 77 to 80 are also from the same periodical for 1934, N.F. 10 and 
No. 31 is from Rupam, 1930. 

Frontispiece and Nos. 84, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 97 are from the author’s 
private collection. 

All the rest are from the Department of Archaeology, Government 
of India. 


C. 97 




INDEX 


Abbasid Khalifat, 604 
Abhaya (the Cola contemporary of 
Nambi Andar Nambi), 637 
Abhaya (Kul. I), 305, 330, 347 
Abhaya alias VIrarajendra, 293 
Abhidhammavatara: Buddhadatta, 101 
Abhimanottunga Samanta, envoy sent 
by the king of Kadaram to Kul. I, 
318 

Abhimanyu, 286 

Abu Zaid (Hasan), 459, 460, 482n, 605 
Acaryabhoga, 642 
Acaryas, Vaisnava, 681 
Accan (Adittan) Vikrama Kesari, 
165n 

Acca-tari, 533 

Accuta Kalabha alias Accutavik- 
kanta of the Kalabhrakula, men- 
tioned by Buddhadatta and said to 
have kept the three Tamil kings in 
confinement, 102, 107 
Accutavikkanta, 102 
Acyutadevaraya, 438 
Adanur (Tj.) birth place of Nanda, 
12, 568 

Adavalam gadyana, 618 
Adavallan (weight), 620, (measure) 
622 

Adeisathros (of Ptolemy), 28n. 
Adhikari (official of the government), 
513 

Adhikarikal Parasaryan Vasudeva- 
Narayanan alias Ulagalanda-sola 
Bramamarayan, guru of Rajadhi- 
raja I, 259 

Adhirajendra, Parakesari, 247, 267, 
274, 285, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297; 
chosen heir apparent (1067-8), 285; 
his legitimacy was recognised by 
Kul. I, 296; Jayangondar does not 
mention him, 293; troubles of his 
reign, persecution of Ramanuja, 
294, 295; Rajiga come to the south 
after his demise, 296; 303, theory of 
a war with Kul. I highly impro- 
bable, 304, 306, 310, 472, 482n, 533, 
561, 643, 644 

Adhyayana-patha-sala (Veda school), 
632 

Adicandesa, 727 

Adicca, Tamil general sent against 
Ramanna-desa by Parakramabahu 

I, 216 

Adicca -Pidari, 136n. 

Adigal Kandan Marambavai, queen 


of Nandi-Pottaraiyar of the Pallava- 
tilaka race, 114 
Adigaiman of Kudalur, 404 
Adigaimans of Tagadur, 326, 393, 405, 
406 

Adigan, 105 

Adigariccis (wives of adigaris), 463 
Adigari(gal), 462, 463, 539, see Adhi- 
_kari 

Adil Shah of Bijapur, 143 
Adimais (slavery), 555-557 
Adimandi, 35 

Adinagar, fight at, and defeat of 
_ Indraratha by Rajendra I, 207, 208 
Adittapura (Manigramam), 488 
Aditya I Rajakesari, 110-116; dura- 
tion of his rule. 111; accession, 113: 
overthrow of Aparajita, relation to 
the Gangas, 113, 114; conquest of 
Kongu, 114; relation to Cera, 115; 
temples erected by A., 115; his 
death at Tondaimanad 115, 120, 135, 
466, (a temple builder), 641, 697, 
701, 703 

Aditya II, Parakesari ‘who took the 
head of VIra Pandya’, 144, 146, 147; 
perhaps identical with Parthiven- 
dra Varman, 149, his part in the 
battle of Cevur, 154; his assassina- 
tion and Uttama Cola’s part in it, 
157-158, 479, 558, 581, 602, 618, 707 
Adityavarman, son of Vikrama Kesari 
by Karrali, 155 

Aditya of Muvalur, father of Kam- 
ban, 671 

Adityesvara temple (at Tondamanad), 
115, 453, (at Kalandai), 678 
Adiyama, Cola Samanta, 326, 327 
Adiyarkku-nallar, 665, 683, 686 
Adu (Lit. sheep), 623 
Aduturai (Tri.), 45, 327, 559, 594 
Advaitism, of Sankara, 647 
Aelius Gallus, Arabian expedition of, 
84 

Africa, 604 

Agambadi mudali, 401, 404 
Agapparivaram (personal retinue), 
346 

Agarapparru, 505 

Agastya, released the Kaveri, from his 
water pot, 18, 31, 201; hill, 202 
Agastyesvara temple, 697, 701, 706; of 
Melappaluvur, 703 
Aghora sivacarya, 688 



772 


INDEX 


Agil, 82, 83 

Agmkunda (fire-pit), 551 
Agnisvaram, the temple at Cittur, 704, 

Ahalya, 90 

Ahamargam system of music, 653 
Ahananuru (Aham), 3; Moriyar, 20. 
67, 667 

Ahapporul , of Nambi, 684 
Ahavamalla, W. Calukya, 224, 225, 
246, 256, 257, 264, 270, 273; see 
Somesvara I. 

Ahavamalla -Kulantaka, title of Ra- 
jadhiraja 1, 259 

Ahavamalla-Kulakala, title of Vlra- 
_ rajendra, 274 

Ahavamalla Kula Kalapuram alias 
Ayirattali, 318 
Ahicchatra, 20 
Ahitagni, 465 
Ahmad-ibn Majid, 460 
Aihnle, inscription, 105 
Aimperungulu, 69 
Ainiiurruvar, 595 

Airavatlsvara, the temple of Dara- 
suram, 717-720, 721 
Aitareya Brahmana, 687 
Aiyai, daughter of Tittan, 50 
Aiyar (sages), 93 
Ajanta, 736 
Ajivakak-kasu, 532 
Ajivakas, 532 

Ajnakrayam (sale by royal order) 
479, 601 

Akalanka, title of Kul. I, 330 
Akitti, 23 
Akkam, 618 
Al. 531 

Alagerudu-kasu, 588 
Alagiya Pallavan, father of Koppe- 
runjinga, 402, 403, 404 
Alagiya Siyan (Kopperunjinga), 403, 
424 

Alangudi, 296 

Alankara, Art ha, 683, !§abda, 684 
Alappirandan Alagiya Pallavan alias 
Kadavarayan of Kudal, 402, 403-404 
Alappirandan Virasekharan alias Ka- 
davarayan, 402, 403 
Alatti, 307, fight at 308 
Alattur-kilar, 40, 41 
Alexander the Great, 183 
Alexandria, centre of Indo-European 
_ trade, 84 
Alinagar, 636 
Allahabad, 233 

Allahabad Pillar Inscription of Samu- 
dra Gupta, 104 

Aludaiya Nambi (Sundaramurti) , 640 
Alunda, battle of, 52 
Alunganam, 494 
Alupa, king, 272 


Alvar Parantakan 6n Kundavai: 

_ Pirattiyar, 186; see Kundavai. 
Alvars, 13; Vaisnava, 635, 636, ( 
641, 644, 647 
Amanji, 531, 594 
Amankudi, 188, 493 
Amarabharana Siya Ganga, Pava- 
nandi’s patron, 401, 684 
Amarabhujanga, the Pandyan ki',_ 
captured by Rajaraja, 169, 170 
Amaravati, Greco-Roman influence 'r 
87; Yuan Chwang at 102 
Ambalam, 513 

Ambalavan Paluvur-nakkan of Kc. 

valalam, 160 
Ambalappuram, 576 
Ambanavar, 504 
Ambar, 53 
Ambattar, 528 

Ambikapati, father of the author ot 
Dandiyala.ngfi.ram, 683; Kambar. 
son, 683 

Amitasagara, 13, 102, 682, 685 
Amma II, (945-70); Eastern Calu- 
kya king, 179; fled to Kalinga, 180 
Ammaiyappan Sambuvarayan, Sen- 
geni, 373 

Ammangadevi, daughter of Rajen- 
dra I and queen of E. Calukyn 
Raja Raja I and mother of Kulo- 
ttunga I, 228, 260, 285 
Ammanna Dandanayaka (a Maha- 
pradhani of Hoysala Vishnuvai- 
dhana Vira Narasingadeva) , 428 
Anaimalai, 583 

Anaimangalam, grant of, 185, 22>' 
460, 466, 504, 602 
Anaiyatkal (elephant corps), 454 
Anaimeirunjina ( r) , title of Rajadhi- 
raja I, 258. 

Anandatandava Nambi, erected a 
gopura in Madura in, aj>. 1227. 677 
Ananta, grand-father of Aniruddha, 
Minister of Parantaka II, 638 
Anantapalayya, the Dandanayaka of 
Vikramaditya, 329 
Anantapur, 2 
Anantasambhu, 240n, 642 
Ananta-varman, Coda-ganga, 
Eastern-ganga, 289, 322, 323, 328 
Anantesvara, the temple at Udaiyar- 
gudi, 721 

Anapaya, title of Kul. II, 349; (who 
covered the Perambalam with gold), 


Anatti, 466, 468 

Anhil, copper-plate, grant of Sundara 
Cola, 8, 53; 113, 115, 141, 145, 153, 
465, 469, 480n, 483n, 577, 602, 638, 641 
Ancient Accounts: Renaudot, 192n. 
Andadi: Nambi- Andar-Nambi, 61n, 
106 



INDEX 


773 


Andhra Bhdrata, 225 
Andhra -patha (Andhra road), 594 
Angadikkuli, 509 
Angkor, Temples of, 722 
Anikanga, 41 2n 

Aniruddha, 465; (Brahmadhiraja) , 577, 
638 

Aniyadigaram (Dandiyalangaram), 
683 

Aniyanga Bhimadeva Rahuta; Kalinga 
ruler, 431 

Aniyilakkanam, Aniyiyal (Dandi- 
yalangaram), 683 

Annan Pallavarayan alias Palaiyanur- 
Udaiyan, Veda-Vanam-Udaiyan, 
Ammaiyappan, 369-371, 373, 378 
Anniyaya-vava-danda-irai, 535 
Anradu-narkasu, 61.4 
Antarayam, 531, 532, 533 
Antarvedi, 551 
Anubogap-parrolugu, 580 
Anuloma (Castes), 549 
Anumakonda (territory), 329 
Anupama, daughter of Parantaka I, 
134 

Anuradhapura, fiery battle near, 310, 
311, 315 

Aparajita, Pallava king, 110; over- 
thrown by Aditya, 113, 120, 466 
Apastamba sittra, 468 
Appanna Dandanayaka, 423, 424, 428 
Appar, 51, 185, 703 

Appimayya, Dandanayaka, Governor 
of Mahgrajavadi (7000), 259 
Aprameya, Cola general, 190n 
At, a Cola emblem; Karikala fighting 
with the garland of ar, 23, 32, 38 
Arabia, 84. 85, 604, 607 
Arab(s), the, 603, 604, 607, 610 
Araccalabhoga, 507 
Aragalur (Salem), 401 
Aragalurudaiyan, 401 
Aragandanallur (S.A.), 401 
Araisur, 674 

Araiyam(r), 462, 490, 584 
Araiyan Adittan, Viman, 152 
Araiyan Kadakkan-gondasolan, Sena- 
pati, 266 

Araiyan Rajarajan alias Vikrama 
Cola Coliya-Varaiyan, the Cola 
general of Rajendra I, 205 
Araiyan Rajarajan alias Virarajendra 
Jayamuri-nadalvan, Senapati, 266. 
Arangerrukadai, of the Silappadi- 
karam, 77 
Arangu, 91 

Aranilaivisakhan Trailokyamallan 
Vatsarajan of Arumbakkam, 664 
Arasanarayanan Elisaimogan alias 
Jananatha Kacciyarayan, 402, 403 
Arattamukkidasan, 490 
Aravanavadigal, 95 


Aravolai (Charity deed), 467 
Arayirappadi, Commentary on Nam- 
malvar’s Tiruvdymoli, 681 
Arcana, 575 

Ardhanarisvara, image of, 727 
Ardra, festival, 640 
Argaru, 22 

Arikulakesari, son of Parantaka I, 125, 
134, 142, 151. 153 
Arimukkai 532 
Arindama, 141, 144, 152, 551 
Arindigai, 134 

Arinjaya Parakesari, son of Parantaka, 
134, 142, 145; reign, 152, 453 
Arinjigai-Caturvedimangalam, 539 
Arinjimadevadigal, 552 
Aristanemibhatara, 655 
Arrur, death of Arinjaya at, 142, 153, 
453 

Arinjigai-isvara built by Rajaraja at 
Melpadi, 187, 453 

Arinjigai Varman, who died at Arrur, 
142. See Arinjaya. 
Arinjigap-pirattiyar, daughter of a 
Prince Arikulakesari and wife of a 
Bana King, 153 
Arisil, battle of, 112 
Arivudai Nambi, 45 
Ariyak-kuttu, 575 
Ariyam, 653 

Arjuna, 160, Kulottunga I, compared 
to, 312 

Arkadu, merchant community of, 595 
Arkatos, of Ptolemy, 22 
Arkkadu of Narrinai, 23, 28n. 
Arkonam, 131 

Arpakkam (Chingleput Dt.), 332, 

368, 373 

Arpisi (October-November) , months 
of, 640 

Arnippattam, 531 
Arruppadai, 76 
Arsa, form of marriage, 65 
Arulala Perumal, deity of Little 
Kancipuram, 645 
Arumbakkam, 664 
Arumbait-tolldyiram, 670 
Arumolidevan, 552; liquid measure, 
622 

Arunacalesvara, aspect of Siva, 707 _ 
Arunandi, author of Sivanana-sittiyar, 
679, 680 

Arthasastras, 66, 223 
Arumolideva-lsvara (at Palaiyaru) , 
449' _ 

ArumoU-nangm, queen of Vira- 
rajendra, 274 

Arumoli-nangaiyar Piranar, daughter 
of Rajendra I, 228 ’ 

Arumoli -V arm an , Rajakesari, 158, 169, 
186. See Rajaraja I. 

Arundhati, 78 


774 


INDEX 


% 


Aruvalar, 33 

Aruvanadu, the lower valley of the 
Pennar, 35 

Aryan culture, 63, 64, 89 
Aryavarta, 116 

Ascarya-Cudamani, by Saktibhadra, 
687 

Asela, 24 

Asita-Vaktra ascetics, 648 
Asoka, and the Colas, 20, 21 
Ast&dhyayi, provision for the study of, 
630 

Astangahrdaya of Vagbhata, 632 
Asura, form of marriage, 64 
Asvalayana Srauta Sutra, 687 
Asvamedha, performed by Rajadhi- 
raja I, 259, 451, 671 
Atakur, inscription, 130, 131 
Atharvaveda, provision for the study 
of, 630 

Atavi (troops), 457 
Atci, 474 
Atkolli, 403 

Atkolli Kadavaraya. 416n 
Atreya Nambi Kada Nambi, 679 
Attan Atti, Cera Prince, 35 
Attivarana, elephant, 228 
Attur (Tanjore), 372 
Augustus, 84 
Auvaiyar, 48 
Avai, Sabha, 70 
Aval, rice-flakes, 89 
Avani (Mys), 400 

Avanimulududaiyal, queen of Raja- 
raja II, 351 

Avani-Narayana title of Kopperun- 
jinga, 424 
Avanti, 36, 88 
Avenika (Gotra), 465 
Avur, 42, 66, 92 

Ayalar-tangal-katci (testimony of 
eye-witnesses), 474 
Ayam, 522, 531 
Ayana-Sankranti, 580 
Ayirattali (alias Ahavamalla-kula 
kalapuram) , 318, 332, 353, 356, 398 
Ayirattali (alias Mudigonda- 
solapuram), 386 

Ayirattali (alias Nandipuram) . 525 

Ayodhya, 251 

Ayogavas, 549 

Ayturai (Salt pans at), 593 

Ayyappa, father of Gannarasa, 175 

Ayyapvdal, 597 


Babylon, 234 

Bacaladevi, queen of Madhurantaka 
fPottappiccola Manumasiddharasa. 
413n; 428 

Badami, Calukyas, 126 




Baddema, powerful chief of Jata-cc.’a 
Bhima, put to death by Sakii • 
varman, 181 
Baghdad, 604 

Bahur (Vakkur), 473, 583 
Balarama, 94 

Balasubramanya, The, temple o 
Kannanur, 701 
Bali, the demon King, 90 
Ballala I, 326 

Ballala II, Hoysala, his titles, 1 
southern conquests, 396-397, 406 
Banas, 100, 120, 126, 127, 128, 11. 
188, 401, 430 505 

Banadhiraja, title conferred o. 

Prthvipati II, by Parantaka I, 12 
Banapuram, 556 

Banavase (12000). 131. 197, 198, 306. 

308, 309 
Bandon, 216 
Bapatla, 593, 615 
Bastar, 208 
Bauddhas, the, 644 
Baudhayanagrhya, 630 
Bayal Nambi, Western Calukya 
general, 182 

Belagamve, The inscription of 
Calukya j ay asimha (1019 a.d.), 20 4 
Bellary, 277 
Belur, 396 

Belur copper-plate grant, 326 
Belvola (300) 131. 256, 258 
Bengal, 209, 210 

Benjamin of Tudela, Jewish travel!^'. 
606, 609 

Bennevuru (12), 255 
Beta, the younger son of Erasiddh'., 
388 

Beta, father of the Kakatlya Prola, 329 
Betarasa, son of Nallasiddha, 389, 
413n 

Bezwada, battle of, 270, 292, 303, 595 
Bhadra (Mysore), 265 
Bhagavata, the, 687 
Bhagavati, 596 
Bhagiratha, 206 

Bhaktajanesvara, The, temple c,f 
Tirunamanallu r (S.A.), 707 
Bhaktiraja, 438 

Bhdrata, Provision for the study of, 631 
Bharatap-Pangu, 512 
Bharatasvamin, Commentator on the 
Samaveda, 687 

Bharatavenbd of Perundevanar, 662 
Bhargava, 201 

Bhaskara Ravi Varman Tiruvadi (978- 
1036), 169 
Bhasya-Vrtti, 640 

Bhattas (r), 478, 487, 490, 494, 504. 

514, 549, 579 
Bhatta school, 631 
Bhattan Gandaraditti, 552 



INDEX 


775 


Bhatta-Vfttis, 576 

Bhavaprakdia, work on. rhetoric, 688 
Bhavisya (Sutra), 513, 519n. 
Bherundas, 420, 428 
Bhiksamatha, of Varanasi, 642 
Bhiksatanamurti, image of, 702, 732 
Bhima, Coda, 180, 181 
Bhima II, Calukya, Vengi ruler, 128 
152 

Bhima, Kota chief, 323 
Bhima (Viman) of Kulam 321; 

Telinga Bhima, 342 
Bhimesvara, (Bhagavan in Drakssa- 
rama), 309, 329 

Bhogadeva, 183; another name of 
Jata-Coda Bhima, 192n 
Bhogam, 570, 575, 585 
Bhogavati-Pura-Varesvara, 208 
Bhoja, of Dhara, 208 
Bhoja, Samanta, 435 
Bhojaraja, adigarigal descended from, 


Bhrgukula, 202 
Bhrtaka (mercenary), 457 
Bhujabala-madai, 616 
Bhujabalaviran, of Gangamandalam, 
616 

Bhujabala-vira, Nallasiddhanadeva, 
Cola Maharaja, 390. 413-414n 
Bhujagavara-bhusanamaharajulu, 
title of Nagavamsi rulers, 208 
Bhumidevi, image set up, 526 
Bhupendra Cola, title of Rajadhiraja 
I, 222 

Bhutadeya-nayaka of Dorasamudra, 


Bhutamangalam, the hub of Cola- 
rattaha, 102 
Bhutapandya, 91 

Bhuti Aditya Bhattarika, queen of the 
Cola Prince Arikulakesari, 703 
Bhuti- Vikramakesari, 155 
Bhuvana-mulududaiyal, queen of 
Rajaraja II’ 351 

Bilhana, 255, 258, 270, 272, 287, 294, 
295, 303, his account of Vikrama- 
ditya’s digvijaya, 306, 307, 308, 309 
Bilvamangalasvami alias Lila-suka, 
the author of Krsna-Karnamrta, 688 
Bindusara, 21 
Birudamadas, 615-16 
Bittiga Visnuvardhana, Talakadu- 
gonda, 326 
Brahmadesam, 226 

Brahmadeya, 531, 536, 570, 573, 576, 
577, 578-580, 664 
Brahma-Vaisya, 549 
Brahmadhiraja (title of distinguished 
brahman Senapatis), 456, 465 
Brahmendra, an official, 499 
Brahma-mimamsa bhS-yija by Sri- 
Kantha, 688 


Brahmapurisvara, The, temple of 
Pullamangai (T.J.), 706 
Brahmesvara, temple of, in Brahma- 
desam (S.A.), 696 
Brhannayaki, The temple of, 715 
Brhat-katha, the Original of Perun- 
gadai, 665 

Brhadtsvara-mahatmya 
( = Colav amsacarita) , 14 
Buddhadatta: on Accutakalabba and 
Kaveripattana, 101; 107 
Buddhaghosa, 101 
Buddhasiha, 102 

Buddhamitra, author of Vira-Sotiyam, 
13, 275, 683 
Buddhavarma, 104 

Buddhism, 19, 93, 101, 275; its 

influence on the Indian outlook, 
445, 446; (its main features absorbed 
by Hinduism) 635; (Buddhist 
deities) 641, 643; its vestiges at 
Kanci, 645, 656-657, 679 
Burma, 213, 214; Lower B., 216 
Butuga H, 128, 130, 131 
Byzantium, 447; (Rum), 460 


Cagis, 387 

Cakkarak-kottam, 270 
Cakrakotiya, 208 

Cakrakuta, 208, 269, 270, 292; 297, 
conquest by Vikramaditya, 303, 325 
Calukki - Kula - Kala - Caturvedi- 
mangalam (The Sabha of Nemali, 
S. A.), 584 

Calukyas (Western), 4, 103, 104, 110; 
the rise of later Calukyas, 175, 177, 
178, 198, 224, 225, 269-70; 301, 305-8, 
323, 326, 329-30, 343, 349, 352, 386, 
393, 419 

Calukya-Cola line. 2, 245, 386 
Calukya-Narayana, a surname of Sak- 
tivarman, 182; title of Manumasid- 
dharasa, 430 

Calukya-Vikrama era, 273, 329, 330 
Camara, of the Periplus, 22 
Camaramadas, 615 

Cambay, Plates of Govinda IV, 232, 
233 

Campa (Kavirippum-Pattinam) , 31 
Campa, in further India, 242n 
Camundaraya, W. Calukya general, 
263, '264 

Candakausikam: (Kse mis vara) , 229, 

230, 234 _ 

Candesanugr^amurti, The image of, 
729 

Candesvara, image of, 646, 728 
Candesvara, 646; C. Peruvilai, 602 
Candiran Suvarkki of Muranainagar, 
673 

Chandragupta, Maurya, 233 



776 


INDEX 


Candramaulisvara temple, at Tiruvak- 
karai, 642, 643 
Cangalvas, 172, 227 
Canganad, 227 
Caraknsamhita, 632 

Catural Caturi, a married courtesan, 
554 

Caturanana Pandita, 648, 649, 671-672 
Caturvedatatparya Sangraha, work on 
Saiva philosophy, 688 
Caturvedimangalani, 452, 492 
Caturvedi-mangalam (Rd.) 4l2n 
Cavanarasa, the Western Cajukya 
general, 210 

Cebrolu, Inscription, 178, 343 
Cedi, Haihayas of, 405 
Cedimandala, 434 
Cedirayas, 426, 430, 671, 672 
Cellur Plates (of Vira Coda), 288, 
291, 319, 320, 349 
Cengama (N. A.), 406, 406 
Cennaya Balaya, 438 
Cera, 7, 32, 169, 171, 172, 183, 203, 204, 
22 1; power destroyed by Kul. I, 313, 
380, 381, 383, 385, 406, 459, 596 
Cera-Pandiyan-tambiran, 382 
Cerobothra, of the Periplus, 22 
Cevur, battle of, 151, 153, 154 
Ceylon: 3, 23-25: Gajabahu synchro- 
nism, 53-54, 86, 121; unsuccessful 
invasion by Parantaka, 124, 132, 
154; Rajaraja I’s naval expedi- 
tion, 172-3, 183, 196; conquest by 
Rajendra I, 199, 216, 223, 231; war 
of Rajadhiraja I, 248-53; Ceylon 
war of Virarajendra 271, 273, 305, 
309; Ceylon war of Kul. I, 310-11; 
314, 316, 323, 330, 333, 355, C. war 
under Rajadhiraja II, 366-372; 
under Kul. Ill, 378-385; 408n, 412n, 
458, 465 

‘Ceylon type’ coins, 11 
Chandella king, Har?adeva, 233 
Chandogasama, provision for study, 
630 

Chatras (senior pupils), 630, 631 
Chau Ju-kua, 215, 216, 217; (on Cola 
state banquet), 250; (on Cola sys- 
tem of justice), 480; (on products 
in the Cola counrty), 608-609 
Che-li-fo-che (=Sri Vijaya), 214, 215 
China trade, 84, 85, 194, 214; Cola 
missions to China, 219; Kul. I, rela- 
tions with, 316-17, 459, 597 , 598, 603- 
606, 607, 608, 609 _ 

Chinese writings as a ™urce for the 
Colas, 15 
Chryse, 85 

Chuan-Chou, S. Indian sculptures of 
Indian p uranic themes in, 608 
Chulam (Quilon), 609 
Chu-lien (=Cola), 219, 316, 606 


Cidambaram, 106; Parantaka I, cover-: 5 . 
with gold the Siva temple of C 
132; Rajamahendra’s fragment - 
inscription at C., 266, 274, 312, '• 
331, 333, 342, 344, 345, 346, 348, -i 
372, 379, 380, 381, 383, 395, 399, 

438, 473, 561, 585, 641, 643, 644, 

663; composition and publication ‘ 
Periyapuranam, 675, 677, 679 
Ciddanna, Cola-Maharaja, 258 
Cittira-melip-periya-nadu, 490 
Cittira-meiip-periya nattar, the ; 
semblage of, 595 

Claudii, trade in the times of, 84 
Coda, son of Gonka I, 343 
Coda, Bhima, 181. See Bhima. 
Codaganga, 320 
Cola-ganga tank, 210, 227 
Cola-gangan, 261, 448 
Cola-Keralan, 261 

Colakulaikaraksa (title of Vira Nara- 
simha), 396 
Colam, 19 

Colamahadevi, queen of Ballala lb 
Hoysala, 400, 406 
Cola-maharaja, 103, 104 
Cola-maharajadhiraja Vikramadity- 
Satyaditya, 104 

Cola-mandala Pratisthacarya, title o- 
Narasimha II, 423 

Cola-martantfa, title of Rajaraja I. 
186 

Colana-Cakra, title of Araiyan Raja 
rajan, the general of Rajendra I, 20 j 
C ola-narayana, title of Rajaraja 1, 174. 
182 

Colandia, Indian boat, 85 
Cola-Pandiyan-mandalam, 382 
Cola-Pandya Viceroys, 196, 201, 203, 
228, 261, 530, 573 
Colapati, title, 395 

Cola-rajya-prati§tha-caryam, title of 
Ballala II, 396 

Colarattha (Cola country), 24 
Colasthapanacarya, title of Nara- 
simha II, 396; title of Tikka, 434 
Colavamsa-Caritram, 1, 14 
Cola-Varidhi of Sholingur, 583 
Colchi, 22 

Colendra, title of Madhurantaka, son 
of Virarajendra, 267 
Colendrasimha, title of Rajaraja I, 186 
Colendrasimha, title of Rajaraja H. 
353 

Coleroon, Kollidam, 18; Koleiun 
(river), 234, 423 

Colesvara, Arinjigai-isvara at Mel- 
padi, 187 

Colombo museum, 200 
Coorg, 171, 172, 227 
Cora, Cola, 19 
Cora(e)ya-deva’s war, 225 



INDEX 


777 


Corayya Nolambadhi raja, 175 
Coromandel (corruption of Cola- man- 
dalam), 438, 459; (Ma’bar), 608 
Cou-ku-fei, 219 
Covelong (Komalam), 623 
Ciidamarii (Lexicon), 685 
Cudamani Vihara, built at Negapatam 
by the Sailendra king, 185, 219, 220, 
318, 466, 656 

Culamani-Varama-deva, Sri, 214 
Cu-li-ya, of Yuan Chwang, 102 


Daiva of Deva, 689 
Daksinalada in Gauda-desa, 368 
Daksinamurti (Vinadhara), image of, 
646, 701, 702, 709, 727, 728 
Daligapadi, 175 

Damilas, 24, 155, 200, 249, 250 
Damirica, 22, 85 

Damodara, a Cola samanta, 327 
Damon and Pythias, 45 
Dana, preferred to yajna, 451, 452, 
650 


Danamava, Eastern Calukya, 179, 180, 
181 

Danatonga, 454 

Danda bhukti, 208, 209, 229, 231 

Dandanatha, Commandant, 169, 368, 
422, 423 

Dandanayakan Narakkan Krsnan 
Raman, 226 

Dannada (Dhanyakataka) , the battle 
of, 224 

Dandapura, 643 

Daksinameruvitankan, (standard 
weight for jewel), 620 

Damanakacceri, 595 

Dandam, 521 

Dandi, author of Kavyddarsa, 683 

Dandit/alangcmm, 668, 683, 684 

Danma Vaniyar (the just merchants), 


595 

Dantisakti Vitanki alias Loka Maha- 
devi, queen of Rajaraja I, 186, 575 
Dapptda IV, 123 
Darukavana (sage), 732 
Dasapanman, 257 
Dasa-Vandam, 531, 532 
Davanac-cettis, 595 
Dekabbe, 553 

Desi system of music, 653 
Devadana, 113, 529, 531, 532, 533, 541, 
548, 570, 571, 572, 573, 576, 578, 580- 


Devadana-nattavar, 490 
Devagosthas, 734 
Devakaia (or kulo) not correct resto- 
ration of Tia-hua-kia-lo, 316, 317 
Devales, 200 
Devakanmis, 506, 581 
Devagiri, king of, 306 


C. 98 


Devanatha, W. Calukya general, 268 
Devaradiyar, 6, 490, 554, 556 
Devaraja cult, 452 

Devaram, 6, 54, 184, 638, 646, 662, 695 
Devaranayakam, Superintendent of 
Devaram, 638 
Deyvaccilaiyar, 685 
Dhananjaya-Varman, 103 
Dhanustra, 596 
Dhara, of Bhoja, 208 
Dharani-mulududaiyal, queen of 
Rajaraja II, 351 

Dharanendra, the serpent king, 20 
Dharavarsha, king of Cakrakuta. 292 
Dharmapala of Dandabhukti, 208, 209, 
229 

Dharma Pala of Pala dynasty, 232 
Dharmapuri (Tagadur), (Sm,), 326 
Dharmasana, 473, 474 
Dharmasana-bhattas, 474 
Dharma-sastras, 5, 89 
Dharma-sutras, 64 
Dharma- Variyam, 511 
Dharma Varma, 106 
Dhvaja-Patas, 549 
Digambara Jains, 655 
Dinacintamani, the surname of Ma- 
dhurantaki. the queen of Kul. I, 332 
Dinnaga, 55 

Dirghasi, Inscription of Vanapati, 289 
Divakara, a restoration of Ti-hua- 
kia-lo, 316 

Diva karam of Sendan, 484n, 685 
Divya Prabhandam, 695 
Divya-suri-caritra, 13, 106, 295, 636 
Domitian, 21, 84 
Donur (Bijapur dst.), 176 
Do'-asamudra. Hoysala capital, 423. 
428 

Draksarama, 256, 309, 321, 329, 330, 

Dravidas, the five, 205, 306 
Droham (treason), 427 
Dulu country, 250 
Durga, 646 

Durga-Paramesvarl, 646 
Durvinita, Ganga ruler, author of the 
Sanskrit version of the Brhat-katha. 
665 

Dutch, the 222 
Duttha gamani, 24 
Dvaraka (Tuvarai), 350 
Dvarapalaka, figures in Cola period, 
734 


Eastern Archipelago, 194 
Eastern Calukya Copper Plates, 1, 10, 
100. 179, 182, 245 
Eastern Ganga Inscriptions, 10 
East Indies. 194 
Eccoru, 532 


» 



778 


INDEX 




Eciga (Ecama), 326 
Edagam (Eiagam), 408 
Edeooie, 197, 205 
Edirilisola, tule of Kul. II, 349 
Edirilisola, Rajaraja il's title, 353 
Edirilisola Sambuvaraya (his part in 
the Pandyan civil war), 368, 478 
Edmli Sola alias Sengeni Ammaiyap- 
pan Siyan Ammaiyappan, 373 
Edirttavarkalan (Tam. death of oppo- 
nents), title of Araiyan Rajarajan, 
general of Rajendra I, 205 
Egypt, 84, 85, 86 
Ekabhoga-iraiydi, 373 
Ekamresvara temple at Kanci, 399 
Ekapada, 596 

Ekavalli-Vadam (necklace of pre- 
_ cious stones), 404 
Ekavira, the great general of Bhima, 
killed by Saktivarman, 181 
Eiagam (Edagam), 408 
Elagappadai, 382, 408 
Elagattar, 370, 408n 
Elara, 24, 25, 54 
Eli-malai, rat hill. 222 
Elini, Cera king, 406 
Elisaimogan alias Jananatha Kacciya- 
_ rayan, 402, 403 

Elisaimdgan Manavalap-Perumal Va- 
nilaikandan RSjaraja Kadavarayan, 

. Kudal, 405 

Elisai-mohan, a mandapa at Vrddha- , 
calam, 350 

Elisai-Vallabhi (with title Elulagu- 
daiyal) , Kul. I’s queen, 332 
Elieri, sack by the Hoysalas, 423 
Eluppelupadu, 669 
Eluttu, 468 
Enadi, 72, 74, 462 
Enicceri, 49 

Engaraya, one of the minsters of 
Kul. I, 322 

Ennayiram (S.A.), 546, 559, 560, 598: 
college at, 630-631; strong centre 
of Vaisnavism, 646 
Enperayam, 69 
Erelupadu, 672 

Ereyanga, Hoysala king, 306; son of 
Vinayaditya, 326 

Erama Siddharasa alias Madhuran- 
taka Pottappicolan, 389, 430 
Eri-ayam, 531, 583 
Eri-!vu, 530 
Eri-mudal, 511 
Eri-patti, 523, 576 
Erra siddha, son of Beit, 388, 390 
Erumur, 585 

Eyarkon-Kalikkaman. 106 


Fo-che, 214 
Foulkes, 17n 


'Four Thousand Hymns’ (Nalayj 
Prabandam), 662 


Gadilam, 423 
Gadval Plates, 105 
Gadyakarnamrta , a historical rom, - - 
421, 422.' 424 

Gadyana, 611, 617, 618, 619 
Ganapati, icon presented to Tanio. . 
temple, 646, 703 

Gajabahu I, synchronism, 3, 53, 51. 5 
Gahadvalas, The, of Kanauj, 325 
Gajari, image of, 709 
Ganam, 494 

Ganapati, Kakatiya ruler, 391, 435, 4 . 
Gandagopala (alias Tikka), 430. 4C 
436 

Gandagopalan-madai, 616 
Gandappayya, 224 

Gandadaradittan, Madurantakan, an 
official of Rajaraja I, probably the 
son of Madurantaka Uttama Co'a, 
158, 161, 188 

Gandaraditya (deva), Raja Kesari. 
son of Parantaka I. 134, 141; ah^ 
Mummadi Cola, 142, 144. 145, 146. 
147, 149, 151, 152, 153, 158, 161, 1«! 
453, 522, 641 

Gandaradityarasa, lord of Mahisma'i- 
pura, 255 

Gandharan, art, 87. 657 
Gangadhara, image of, 709 
Gangas, 110, 114, 115, 120. 121, l-o- 
127, 128; conquered by Rajaraja I 
174, 175, 176, 177, 268, 319, 326, 34' 
401, 403, 430 

Gangaikonda-Cola, title of Rajen- 
dra I, 227, 293 

Gangaikonda Cola : Dr, S. K. Iyen- 
gar, 229 

Gangaikonda-Cola-miladudaiyar, 226 
Gangai-konda-CoJapurain, 19; a 19th 
century description of 234-35, 325. 
332, 345, 346, 349, 357, 449, 450, 571, 
642, 694, 695, 710; description of, 713- 
717, 719, 720, 722, 728, 729 
Gangai-konda-Colesvara, temple, 449 
Gangai-konda-colapuram, 143; not 
Mudigonda-cdlapuram, 227, 267, 268, 
274. 398, 438 

Gangai-konda-sola, Cdla-Pandya Vi- 
ceroy, 267 

Gangai-kula-tilaka (Sekkilar), 675 
Gangamadeviyar, wife of Vira-sola- 
Ilangovelar, 553 

Ganga-mandala, 172, 177, 187, 307, 
308, 342, 352, 372, 616 
Ganga-nadu, 406 

Gangapadi, conquered by Rajaraja I> 
174, 176, 263, 264, 265 
Ganga-Perumanadi, 258 



INDEX 


77 ? 


Gangapuri, 227, 260, 274, 332, 353, 448 
Gangaraja, Hoysala general who cap- 
tured Talakad, 326, 327 
Gangarasayira, 174 

Gangasurapperumballi of Rajendra- 
puram, 655 

Gangavadi, loss of G. under Kul. I. 
325-28, 330, 343 

Ganges, 20, 83, 86, 19S; Gangetic ex- 
pedition of Rajendra, I. 208-10 
Gangeya, a chief, 455 
Gangeyan, Kuttan’s patron, 669 
Gannarasa Nolamba, 175 
Gauda-desa, 368, 642 
Ghatika, at Vembarrur, 633 
Ghatti-nulamba Bhujabalavira Aho-. 

mallarasa Cola Maharaja, 372 
Ghola-mukha, 596 

Girindraja (Sivakami), (of Cidam- 
baram temple), 399 
Goa, Kadambas of, 618 
Godavari, 206, 207, 270 
Golakamaharsi, Saiva Acarya, 727 
Gomadattu Arulala Bhattan, 648 
Gonka I, 320, 343 
Gonka II, Velananti, 387 
Golaki matha, 651 
Gopayya Dandanayaka, 424, 428 
Gopracarabhumi (grazing common) , 
532 

Gotami, 322 

Govinda IV, the Cambay Plates, 233, 
234 

Govinda Candra, of Vangala, 207, 209, 
232 

Govindanahalli. 396 
Govindaraja, shrine in Cidambaram, 
removal of this shrine bv Kul. II, 
349 

Govinda Vallavarayar. 134. See Vira- 
madevi. 

Grahi (Kia-lo-hi). 215 
Gramadrohis, 501 

Gramakaryam (village executive), 500 
Guhai, 650. 652 

Guhai-idi-kalaham in the 22nd year 
of the reign of Kulottunga III, 652 
Gunabhadra, author of Uttara Purana, 
666 

Gunadhya, 665 
Gunamudita, 103 

Gunasagara, (the Guru of Amita 
Sagara), 682 

Gunavira Pandita, author of Nemi- 
nadam, 684 

Gurjara-Pratihara emr>ire, 229-233 
Guru-devar of Rajadhiraia I. 452 
Guni-Paramparai, 13, 106. 107, 143 
Gururaja Rudradeva-Sola-Maharaja. 

Mahamandalesvara, 438 
Guttas. of Guttal, 101 
Gutti, 272 


Haihayas, The, 309, 405 
Halahalasya temple, at Madura, 399 
Haldsya-mdhatmya, 677 
Halebid, some images sought to be 
carried to, 327 
Hangal, 226 
Haradattacarya, 688 
Harihara, image of, 729 
Harihara-ta.ratam.ya, a sectarian pole- 
mic, by Haradattacarya (d 1119) . 
688 

Harnahalli (Mys.), 424 
Harsadeva, Chandella King. 233. 
Hasti-giri-alvar or Arulala Perumal 
at Kanci, 645. 

Hastimalla, Ganga King, 121, 126. 
Hemagarbhas, performed by Paran- 
taka I, 135. 

Hemavati (Mys.), 400. 

Himalayas, the; Karikala's expedi- 
dition to, 10, 36, 44. 93 
Hinduism (its relation to Budd- 
hism), 635; (beginning of secta- 
rian intolei aiice. 636, 643, 647 
Hipparchus, 84 
Hiranyagarbha, 186, 452. 

Hoogly. 232. 

Hottur. inscription of Satvasraya 
(1007 ad.) 176, 182, 197, 1S8. 
Hoysalas, 5. 7, 10, 172. 301, 306; rise 
of 325; win Gangavadi 328. 352, 
378, 386, 393. (begin to intervene 
for Colas against Pandyas), 396- 
397, 406, 417, 418, 419, 420, 422, 
424. 425; (influence in Cola coun- 
try) ; 428-429, 432; (change sides), 
433: (relations to Rajendra III), 

436. 437. 

Hulimadda, 478. 

Huzur Treasury Plates of Tiruvalla, 
139n. 

Hyder Ali, 593. 


Ibn Hawqal, Arab writer, 604 
Icons, of the Cola period, 727-736; 

Stone I., 728; Metal I., 729. 
Idaikkadar, 668 
Idavai, 112. 

Iditurai-nadu, conquered by Rajen- 
dra I, 197. 

Idangai (class), 454. 
liada (chiefs), 535 
Iladaraya, late chiefs of N. Arcot 
district, 188* 

Ilakkarungasu, 617 

Ilaiya Tirur.avukkaraiyan, portrait 
of, 726. 

Hak-kasu (Ceylon Kasu), 617, 618 
Iiam (Ceylon), 152, 172, 249, 372, 
377, 380. 382, 384 



780 


INDEX 


Ilamandalam (Ceylon), conquered by 
Rajaraja I, 172; by Rajendra I, 199, 
249. 

Hampuranar, 685 
riamuridesam, 213, 217 
Handattan, a minstrel, 40 
Hangasokam, Lankasoka, 211, 216, 
217. 

Ilanjetcenni, father of Karikala, 31, 
37. 

Ilanjetcenni, Neydalanganal; Serup- 
paliyerinda, Cola Princes, 49 
lias, 490" 

Ilavandigaip-palli, where Nalangilh 
died, 39. 

Ilavas, 548, 578. 

Indaladeva of Talaigrama, 226 
Indala-devi, wife of Vallaraiyar, 


Indo-China (Hindu Colonies in), 
459, 604. 

Indra HI, the Rastrakuta King, 232, 
233. 

Indraratha, 208. 

Indravati, river, 208. 

Ingallur-nadu, 188 

Irai, 331, 522, 528, 536, 537, 571-572, 
577, 582, 585. 

-dravyam, 509 

-kaval, 509, 524, 577, 586, 603 
-kudigal, 568 
-kadan (land-tax), 531 
Iraiyanar Kalaviyal, 64, 686 
Iraiyili, 491, 534, 535, 536, 540, 550, 
664. 

-devadana, 495, 536, 540 
-kasu, 531-532, 534 
Iramakudam, Ramaghata. 221. 222 
Irangal, 535. 

Irattan, 272 
Irattapadi, 268 

-Prasastis of Rajendra II, 260 
Irattaraja-kula-kalan, a title of Vlra- 
rajendra, 262 
Iravu, 522. 

Irayiravan, 552 

Irayiravan Pallavaraiyan, alias Mum- 
madi Sola Posanar of Araisur, an 
officer of Perundanam rank of 
Raja Raja I, 189. 

Ireccayan, 263. 

Irugaiyan, 262-3. 

Irumadi-solan, a title, 261. 
lrupa-virupahdu, 680 * 

Isana Siva, Rajaguru of Rajaraja I, 


Istakhri, Arab Writer on Siraf, 606. 
Isvara Siva, spiritual Guru of Kul. 
HI, 399. 

I-Tsing, 186, 218. 604, 629. 


Jagadalpur, 208. 

Jagadekamalla Udayaditya Nolamv 
Pallava Perumanadi, a vassal c 
Jayasimha n, 224, 618. 

Jaganndtha Vijaya, a Kannarl 
Campu, 397. 

Jagatipala, of Kanauj, 250, 251. 311 
Jaimimya Sdma Veda, 640 
Jainism, 93, 95, 535. 636. 644, !>' 
657, 679. 

Jaiya, 215. 

Jambai (S.A.), 188. 

Jambudipa, 121, 154. 

Jambukesvara, temple, 53. 
Jananatha, title of Rajaraja I, 186. 
Jananatha, Western Calukya. gene- 
ral, 270. 

Jananatha - Caturvedimangalam. thr 
sabha of, 575. 

Jananatha Kacciyarayan alias Aras;> 
narayanan Elisaimogan, 402, 403 
Jananathamangalam, the old name 
of Polonnaruva after the title ol 
Rajaraja I, 173. 

Janapada, 457, 505. 

Janapada-nivaha, 483n. 

Janma-bhumi (Jivita), 529. 

Jata Coda, 180-1; wrongly identified 
with Jatavarman Sundara Pandya 
192n; J. Cola, 227. 

Jatakas, 23, 51 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandyan. 
Jati-dharma, 526 

Jatilavarman, Pandya King, 166n. 
Java, Sho-Po of the Chinese. 2\ q 
Influence on, 709 
Javanese merchants, 605. 

Jayabahu I, of Ceylon, 316. 
Jayabhima temple at Tanjore, 450 
Jayadhara, title of Kul. I, 330. 
Jayaditya, 688 

Jayadratha, Sinhalese General. 368 
Jayakesi I, Kadamba King of Goa. 

273. 306. 

-Jayamada, 615 

Jayamuri-Nadalvan Senapati, a feu- 
datory of Rajendra II. 266 
Jayangonda, a name of Rajaraja I. 
186, 682 

Jayangondar, author of Kalingattiip- 
parani, Kavic-cakravarti, 13, 293. 
304, 320, 668, 686. 

Jayangondasola-mandalam, 465, 470. 

505, 538, 682. 

Jayantamangala, 422. 

Jayapalas, 595. 

Jayasimha II, W. Calukya, succeed- 
ed Vikramaditya V, 204; war with 
Rajendra I, 205, 224. , 

Jayasimha HI, younger brother ot 
Vikramaditya VI, 273, Viceroy of 
Banavase, 306, 308; his revolt 



INDEX 


781 


against his brother and his seek- 
ing Kul. 1’s help, 309. 

Jayasinga Kula Kala, title of Arai- 
yan Rajarajan, the General of 
Rajendra I, 205. 

Ji-lo-ting of Chau Ju-kua, 215 

Jinagiripalli, 655 

Jinalayas, erected by Ganga Peru- 
manadi and destroyed by Cola 
King,' 258. 

Jina - KancI (Tirupparuttikkunru) , 
645, 656. 

JIvaka, 666, 667 

Jnanarasi, 649 

JIvita, 464, 529, 570. 575, 580 

Jivitapparru, 505 

Jnana Sivacarya of Suryanarkoyil, 
688 . 

Julii, 84. 

Jus Connubii, of the rich Vellalas 
with royal families. 88. 

Jvala, Skt. form, of Salai, 190n. 


Kacci (Kanclpuram) , 386, 649 
Kaccip-pedu-ninran, a measure. 623 
Kacciyum-Tanjaiyum Konda, title of 
Krsna III, 130, 132 
Kadagams (Cantonments), 456 
Kadai-irai, 532 

Kadaladaiyadilangai Konda - sola- 
Vajanadu, 284n. 

Kadamai, 499, 502, 505, 522, 523, 
526, 532, 585. 

Kadamaik-kariyam, 500 
Kadambas, 198; 306, 618 
Kadamba-madevi, 115 
Kadambavanesvara, the temple of 
Erumbur (S A.) , 707. 

Kadaram : eastern limit of Rajen- 
dra I’s conquests 196; the Kada- 
ram Campaign of Rajendra I, 211- 
21; identified by Kanakasabai with 
Sri Khettara, ancient Prome 241n; 
conquest by Virarajendra 271-2; 
Kulottunga I, relations with 317-19; 
(building of Buddhist Viharas by 
King of Kadaram at Negapatam), 
318. 606, 656. 

Kadaisiyar, 87 

Kadavarayas, the. 263, 349, 353, 373, 
401-405, 419, 420, 422, 423, 424. 426, 
428, 437, 534, 663. 

Kadavarayadisapatta, title of Vira 
Narasimha Hoysala, 420. 

Kadavan Mahadevi. alias Solan Soru- 
daiyal, queen of Kul. I, 333. 
Kadigaik-kalattukkol, 621 
Kadigai-marayan, 462 
Kadiyalur Rudrangannanar. 75 
Kadungon, line of the Pandyas. 100 
Kadupattigal, a Cola queen. 114 


Kadupattigal Nandipottaraiyar (Nan- 
divarman II or III), 706. 

Kaduvetti, 352 
Kahapana, 367. 

Kaikayas, 380, 384. 

Kaikkilai, uniliteral love, 64. 
Kaikkolapperumbadai. 454, 456. 
Kaikkolar, 454. 457, 574. 599. 
Kailasanatha temple of Ellora. 695. 
Kailasanatha temple at Kancipuram, 
641, 693, 698. 

Kai-vasi, 527 

Kaiyeluttolai (Pro- note), 599 
Kajaragama. 271. 

Kakandan, 31. 

Kakatlyas, 198, chief Prola, 339, 386, 
387, 391, 419. 430, 435; Kakatiya 
Rudra, 672 
Kakandi, 31 

Kalabhra interregnum, 64; their part 
in Political Unsettlement in South 
India and the rule of Accuta Kala- 
bha, 101-2. 

Kaladdsam (bad time), 562 
Kalagam. 83; Naccinarkkiniyar on, 
218. 

Kalaharamurti, icon of. 728 
Kalahasti, 115. 120, 126, 226, 372. 388. 
Kal-alavu-kuli (toll on articles 
measured by capacity). 530. 
Kal-alavupattam, 599 
Kalakalabha. auhtor of Gadyakar- 
namrta, 421 

Kalamukhas, the, 648, 649 
Kalandai. 105; (birth place of Puga- 
lendi) , 673, 678; (birth place of 
Vaccanandi), 684 
Kalanais, 490, 588. 

Kalanju, 522, 529, 555. 557, 558- 
559, 560, 531, 562, 563. 672-573, 586, 
587, 599; 600, 601, 613-618, 619, 624, 
631, 653. 

Kala-pidari, 646 

Kalappalan, a feudatory of Rajendra 
III, 438. 

Kalappalarayan, royal official of Kul. 
Ill), 400. 

Kalapriya, (temple at Kaveripakkam, 
built by Krsna III), 641 
Kalattalaiyar, a Poet, 50 
Kalatti-udaiyar, the temple fo, 726 
Kalavali. 51, 52, 73. 94 
Kalaviyal, Irraiyanar. 64, 686 
Kalavu, 93 

Kalidasa, army leader of the Caluk- 
yas. 254. 

Kalidindi. plates of Rajaraja Naren- 
dra, 210-11 
Kali-ganam, 489 

Kaiikadinda-sola, title of Kul. II, 
Kahkkottai, 382, 385 



782 


INDEX 


Kalinga(m) country, 13, 180, 181 
218, 270, 1st and 2nd K. war of 
Kul. I, 321-23; 328, 334, 342, 347 
366, 431, 668, 696. 

Kalinganagara, 289. 

Kalingaraya, title of Naralokavira, 


Kalingarayan, name of the Cola 
throne (at Ayirattaii), 319. 
Kalingar-kon, alias Naralokavira 


Kampili, Calukya palaces destroy ] 
by the Colas, 253, 272 
Kanakasenabhafara, 655 
Kanakka-vari, 532 
Kanaikkal Irumporai, 51, 72 
Kanam, 578 

Kana-nadu, capture of, by DancLi- 
nayaka-Ravi-deva on behalf of V; • 
Somesvara, 433. 

KancI - Kancana - Kadavakulantaka 


Kalingattupparani, a Poem, 13 14 31 
54 75 116. 17 1, 217-8, 246, 261, 266,' 
2t»l 293, 294, 296; its silence on 
Adhirajendra’s reign, 295, 297, 303 
304; on Kul. I’s fight with Vlkra- 
maditya VI, 308; on Kulottunga’s 
destruction of the fleet at galai, 
313; on Kul. I’s destruction of 
Kadaram, 316; on the Kalinga wars 
of Kul. I, 320, 321; on the titles of 
230; on the queens of Kul. 
I, 332; 333, 346, 668-669. 

Kalittogai, 4, 50 
Kaliyuga era, 9. 

K 667-m a Poem of Ka,15 ^ anar - 
Kalliyur-mulai, sack by the Hoysa- 
las, 423. 

Kalpi. 232. 

Kalumalam, 63; battle, 51, 74 
Kalyanapura - KalyanI made the 
Ca ukya capita 1 , 198. sacked by the 
Colas, 224, 255, 259, 272; 306, 419 
conquest by Rajadhiraja I, 562 
great road to, 594 
Kalyanapuran-gonda-sola, title of 
Rajadhiraja I, 259. 

K 646*^ asundara ’ an as Pect of &va, 

Kdyaru, wife of Arinjaya, Vaidumba 
Princess, 142, 153. 

Kamadavalli, Caturvedimangalam 
constitution of, 5 00 
Kamakkuttam, 64 

Kamalavati, mother of Senganan, 53 
tiamaialaya - bhatta , author 664 
Kanunanacceri (artisans’’ quarter), 

Kamarasavalli (Tri.), 490 

the Eastern Ganga King 
of Kalmga, 181. 

Kdmasutra of Vatsyayana, 78 
Kamban, 25n, 667, 670-672, his son 
Ambikapati, 683. 

Kambhoja, 26n; 216; (gift by its King 
of a stone to Kul. I), 317, 325; 596 
Kampaharesvara (Tribhuvana-vires- 
v-ara), temple of, 398, 720-722. 723, 

Kampa-madevi .alias Tribhuvana- 
madevi, queen of Kul. I, 333. 


title of Vira Narasimha, 420. 
Kancipuram (Ch.) legend of co: 
quest by Karikala, 36. 95; Yuan- 
ch wang’s stay at K. 102; 105, 132, 
159, 178; Rajendra residing at. 204; 
Saivas imported from the Ganges 
region, 210; 255, 273, 294, 309. 322, 
1327, 333, 372, 373, 377, 382, 387, 
389, 390, 39 9, 404, 420, 428, 430, 434. 
435, 436, 448, 458, 467, 473, 489, 503. 
505, 526, 530, 548, 552, 589; (naga- 
ram of), 594, 598, 601, 616, 620, 641 
Buddhist vestiges at K. 645; (a 
Jaina centre in its suburb), 656, 
657. 

Kandai or Karandai, where the Cola 
awaited the Calukya, 265, 268. 
Karidan, (title of Rajaraja II), 353 
Kandan, Karivarman, alias Ramakuda 
Muvar, Tiruvadi. a Mu?aka Kin7- 

Kandan Mangalattevan, alias Tuvai5 
pativejan, 375 

Kandan Madhavan of Kulattur, 642 
Kandan Maravan, a feudatory, 504 

Kandan Sundarattolan, alias Tuvara- 
pati-Velan, 375. 

Kandar-dinakaran, 255. 

Kandavura Nuvara, 173. 
Kangani-ma-nellu, 532 
Kankalamurti, image of, 729 
Kannara-deva Krsna III, 127, 130, 
131, 140; who took Kacci and 

Tania i, 649. 

Kannata, 173, 314 

* anc * (Pandya country). 
J12: 394 . 

Kanni (=Parvati), 31 
Kannivana-Purdnam , 664 
Kani (tenure), 473, 492, 504, 540. 570, 
574-575, 576, 580. 

Kani (weight), 573, 624 
Kanik-kadan, 581 
-kani-udaiyar, 523, 539 
Kanimurruttu, 507 
Kankani, 658, 470 
Kanmalar, 550 
Kannadiyas, 427 
Kannaki, 75, 78, 91 
Kannakucci, 223; -yar, 248 
Karajan, Krsnan, 94 



INDEX 


783 


Kannanur, defeat and death of So- 
mesvara at the battle of, K. (1264), 
437 

Kannappar, 646 

Kanauj, 223, 233, 248, 311 325 
Kanhadasa. Buddhadatta lived in a 
monastery at Kaveripattanam built 
by K. 101 

Kannara country, 272 
Kantan, 18, 31 
Kanthika, necklace, 272 
Kanyakubja, 229 

Kanyakumari was held to absolve a 
woman from the sin of incest, 91; 
121, 265, 267, 270, 274 
Kanyakumari Stone Inscription of 
Virarajendra, 8, 31; on the founda- 
tion of Tanjore, 113, 117n, 116. 141, 
198, 245, 267, 274, 687 
Kapalika school of Saivism, 641. 648, 
651 

Kapilar, a Sangam poet, 43 
Karadigal, a pillar of victory, set up 
by Virarajendra I, 272 
Karanattan, 475 

Karandai (Tanjore). The Plates of 
Rajendra I, 8, 113, 141. 176, 183, 195. 
220, 602, 734 
Karanmai, 577, 578 
Karhad, grant, 132 
Karigai of Amita Sagara, 682, 685 
Karigai-Kulattur, 353, 682 
Karikala Cola, 2, 8, 20; his effort to 
civilize the nomadic tribes. 23, 30-1: 
his accession, 32; battle of Venni 
and Vakaipparandalai, 33, personal 
life, religion and death, 35; legends 
about him. 36; attempt to fix the 
Sangam age on the basis of a fifth 
century date for him, 63, 74, 90, 
102, 116, 227; origin of the classes 
Vaiangai and Idangai traced to, 550 
584 

Karikala Cola, ‘who took the head 
of the Pandya,’ 157. See Aditya II. 
Karikala Cola, title of Virarajendra, 
246, 274 

Karikala Cola, title of Kul. Ill, 398 
Karikala Cola-deva who took Madura 
and ilam (Rajadhiraja II), 372, 504, 
Karikala Cola-deva, 504; (K. Para- 
kesari who raised the banks of the 
Kaveri), 583 

Karik-kannanar, of Kavirippumpatti- 
nam, 49 

Kariyarrut-tunjiya Nedungilli, 38 
Kariyaru, battle of, 36 
Kamatas, 347, 424 

Karnatas, of Mithila, 210, 231, 233 
Karpu, 93 
Karpuravilai, 535 


Karrali, queen of Vikrama Kesari, 155 
Karralip-piratti, wife of Tennavan 
Ilango-Velar alias Maravan Pudiyar 
155 

Karttigai-arisi, 532 
Karttigai-paccai, 532 
Karumigal, 463, 465 
Karunakaramangalam, . type of eka- 
bhoga-brahmadeya, 578 
Karunakarat-tondaiman. generalis- 
simo of Kulottunga I, Lord of Van- 
dai, 322, 323, 333, 347 
Karungasu, 617 
Karungulal-Adanar, 35 
Karur, Cera capital, 36; siege and 
capture of, 41 

Karuvur, 42, 49, 51, 105, 266, 267, 377, 
382, 385, 391, 398, 400, 431 
Karuvurdevar, hymn on the Tanjore 
temple, 184 
Kasayam, 532 

Kassapa V, sovereign of Lanka, 121, 
Kassapa, son of Mahinda V: ruled 
under the title of Vikkamabahu, 200 
Kasu, 399, 400, 427, 478, 479, 502, 525, 

532, 533. 534, 537, 540, 555, 557, 558, 

561, 573, 575, 586, 587, 599, 600, 614, 

619, 620 

Kasu-kadamai, 533 
Kasu-kolla-iraiyili, 540 
Kasu-koiia-ur-kil-iraiyili, 535 
Kafci-erudu-kasu, 531, 573 
Kasyapa Gotra, of Renadu Colas, 2, 
104 

Kataha, 185, 211, 213. 217, 231 
Katti, 50 

Kattumannarkoyil, 346 
Kattur, an Ayyapulal changed into a 
VIrapattina, 597 
Kaval-karan, 533 

Katyayana, reference to the Colas, 20 
Kautilya, 67, 233; on Pranaya, 522 
Kaveri, 18, 19; origin of the Kaveri, 
31, 49. 87 

Kaverik-karai-viniyogam, 527 
Kaveripattinam (= Khaberis of Pto- 
lemy), 22; a celebrated emporium 
according to Pali books, 23; pro- 
bably the Kolapattana of the Ques- 
tions of king Milinda. 23, 31, 39. 53; 
Buddhadatta, 101 
Kavidi, a title, 88 

Kavi-Kumuda-Candra alias Tiruna- 
rayana-bhatta, 664 

Kavirippum-pattinam alias Puhar 
(= Kaveripatnam), 25n; earlier 
name Campa, 31, 35. 39, 49; des- 
cription of K., as in Sangam litera- 
ture, 80-82 

Kavyadarsa of Dandi, 683 
Kerala, 124, 125, 134; Kerala princess, 
142; Rajaraja T s campaign, 169, 173, 



784 


INDEX 


197; K. war of Rajendra I, 201-3, 
221-3, 245, 251, 256, 267, 273; re- 
conquest by Kul. I, 310, 312, 313, 
379, 380, 384, 649 
Keralantaka, 816 

Kesava, the Calukya general, 176 
Kesava-dandanayaka, 263 
Kesavasvamin in the service of Raja- 
raja II, 686 
Kesi, 268 
Kettarasan, 263 

Khaberis of Ptolemy (= Kaveripat- 
tanam), 22 

Khidrapur, identified with Koppam, 
256 

Khmer, kingdom of Kamboja, 317, 325 
Kia-lo-hi ( = Grahi at Jaiya), 215 
Kidak-kasu (cess on each head of 
male cattle), 531 
Kidaram, 217 

Kie-tch’a, Chinese form of Kataha, 
218 

Kie-t’o (later form of Kie-tcha = 
Kedah), 218 
Kilaippalor, 69 
Kilan, 464 

Kilanadigal, queen of Rajendra II, 
265 

Kilenilaya, The battle of, 367 
Killi ( = Cola) , 19, 37, 72 
Kiiii, a Cola king, 8, 116 
Kiiii— the king who settled in Ten- 
kavira-nadu, a clan of Brahmins 
exercising the right of crowning 
kings, 350 

Killi-Valavan of the Manimekatai, 
37, 77 ' 

Killi-Valavan who died at Kulamuf- 
ram, 40 

Kil-irai-pattam (smaller taxes), 531, 

Kil-mugavetti, 467 
Kiratarjunlya, image of, 646, 731 
Kish (Qais), entrepot of Indian trade, 
606-607, 609 

Kitti. 250; assumed the title of Vijaya- 
bahu, 253; freed Rohana of enemies, 
310 

K’iu-tz’i, envoys of, to China, 606 
Koccadaiyan Ranadhlra, assumed title 
Sembiyan, 105 

Koccenganan, 8, 30, 51-3, 117 
Kodai-Pirattiyar, queen of Arinjaya, 
152 

Kodandarama, surname of Aditya I, 
113 

Kodandarama, another name of Raja- 
ditya, grandson of Aditya I, 134 
Kodandaramesvara, temple at Ton- 
damanad, erected over Aditya’s 
remains, 115 

Kodavasal, Kudavayir-kottam, 72 


Kodikkarukku (scroll work), 720 
Kodikkavi, 680 

Kodumbai, 125; see Kodumbalur 
Kodumbalur, 101; Velir chiefs of, 125- 
6, 134, 145, 154, 155, 156, 165n. 595 

648 


142 

Kola ( = Cola), 19 


Kolala (Kolar), 326, 327 
Kolanu (mod. Ellore), 321, 366 
Kolerun. anikat, 235 
Kolhapur, 256, 257 . 

Koli, 46; Gandaraditya calls himse, 
lord of K. i.52 
Kol-kuli, 599 

Kolinjivadi Plates of Acyutadevara>a, 


Koliyak-kudaiyar (?) of Kuhur. 479- 


Kollam, fight at 347, 379, 384 
Kollam , Rajaraja I’s expedition 
against, 171 

Kolla-matha, at Varanasi, 642 
Kollapuram, conquest of (by Raj 
dhiraja I), 562 

Kollidam, 18; see Coleroon and Kole- 


Kollippakkai, 197; destruction of 227 
225, 330, 343 

Kol-nirai-kuli (toll on articles mea- 
sured by weight), 530 
Komaran Kulottung a- §ola - Catur v - - 
dimangalam, 372 

Kommayya, W. Calukya general, 25-1 
Kommuru (Guntur dist.), 329 
Konadu, 457 
Konas, The, 387 
Konda-Padumati, 329 
Koneri, Or of, 601 
Kongalvas, a dynasty sub -ordinate to 
the Colas, 172, 227, 618 
Kongapperuvali, 594 
Kongas, 347 

Kongu(desa) country, 51, 109n, con- 
quered by Aditya I, 114, 115, 120, 
174, 175, 326, 352, 367, 382, 391, 398. 
400, 594, 665 

Kongudesa-Rajakkal, 14, 114 
Ktmgu-mamialasdtakam, 665 
Kongu-Velir, author of Perungadi 
665 

Konkana, 172 
Konkan Mauryas, 27n 
Koppam, 246. 248; battle of K des 
cribed, 256-61, 264, 270, 393, 683 
Kopperunjinga, 10, 402, 403, 404, 420; 
422-424; 429, 430, 432, 434, 436; 
(tyrannical rule of), 573 



INDEX 


785 


Kopperunjoian, 45-7, 70 
Koranganatha, temple of, in Srimva- 
sanallur, 705, 710, 724, 727, 728 
Korkai, The Siva temple at, 695 
Korrandai, Senjiyarkon, chief of 
Jingi, Pugalendi’s Kalambakam, 673 
Korravai, 94 

Kosala (i) -nadu, 207, 232. 263; Kam- 
ban’s description of, an idealised 
picture of a Cola country, 671 
Kosalai Southern, conquest by Ra- 
jendra I, 208-9; Purvarastra, 228 
Kosar, 21 
Kotas, The, 387 
Kottam, 465 
Kottam Vagai, 472 
Kottagaram (granaries), 578 
Kottams (temples), 641 
Kottaikkarai, 18 
Kottar, 203 fights at. 347 
Kottaru (fortress), burnt at 312; set- 
tlement at K., 313, 456 
Kovalan, 75, 78 

Kovalaraya, title of the Malaiyamans, 
405 

Kovilur (Tj.), 400 
Koyil Tevarayan-pettai. 648 
Kovil-venni, in Tanjore dist.. identi- 
fied with Venni where Karikala 
won a victory, 32 
Kovirajamarayar, 149 
Kovur-kilar, on Nalangilli, 37; his 
address to Nedungilli, 39, 40, 43, 65, 
70 

Koyattur (in Chittoor dist.), 327 
Koyilolugu, 266, 345, on Koyil kottu, 
355-6' 

Koyil Vasalil ponda kudimai, 532 
Kra, isthmus, 216 

Krmikantha, who persecuted Rama- 
nuja, identical with Adhirajendra or 
Virarajendra, 295, 644 
Krsna legends, 90, 94 
Krsna river, 253, 256, 265, 269-70. 437 
Krsna III, Rastrakuta king. 10, 121, 
126-34, 137n, 138n, 140, 143, 148, 
151, 152-4, 156, 174, 179-80, 419. 600, 
641, 687 

Krsnadevaraya of Vijayanagar, 143, 
168 

Krsna-ganam, 489 

Krsna- kamdmrta , a devotional poem, 
by Bilvamangalasvami alias Lila- 
Suka, 688 
Krsnalilasuka, 689 

Krsnan Raman, Senapati of Aman- 
gudi, 188 

Ksatriya-Sikhamani, title of Raja- 
raja I, 186 

Ksatriya-sikhamani-kongalva. title 
bestowed on Manija by Rajaraja I, 
172. 227 
C. 99 


Ksat true udamani of Vadibha-simba 
ved. by T. S. Kuppuswami Sastri), 
666 

Ksemisvara, author of Canda Kau- 
sikavi y 229 
Ksetrapala, 186 

Kublai Khan, (exchanges of missions 
between him and S. India), 609 
Kudakko Nedunjeral-Adan, 50 
Kudal, the seat of Tamil learning, 149, 
379 

Kudal-alappirandar alias Kadava- 
rayar, 404 

Kudali, at the junction of the Tunga 
and Bhadra, 265 

Kudal-Sangamam, Virarajendra vic- 
tor, 246; the battle of Mudakkaru 
identical with Kudal-Sangamam, 
262-66; 267; Somesvara’s absence, 
268-70; 274; 303, 683 
Kuda-malai-nadu (=Coorg, Kielhorn 
identifies it with Malabar), 171, 174 
Kudalur, 350, 353, 402, 404, 405, 419 
Kudavayir-Kottam, west gate prison 
in Kumbakonam, 51. 72 
Kuda-volai, use of. 496, 505 
Kudi (cultivators), 577 
Kudimai, 502, 522, 523, 532, 582 
Kudinaikal, 618 
Kudinikka-devadanam, 582 
Kudinikki, 578 
Kudiraic-cettis, 607 
Kudiraiccevagar (Cavalry), 454 
Kudlur. plates of Marasimha, 138n 
Kudumbu (ward). 496. 502, 517n 
Kudumiyamalai (Pd.), 457 
Kuhur (Tj.). 480 
Kulam, 320. 321, 328; 578 
Kulamurram. 40, 43, 44 
Kulasekhara (alvar) 658 n. 13. 687 
Kulasekhara. Jatavarman. Pandya, 
acc. 1190 A.D., 385, 393 
Kulasekhara I, Maravannan, Pandya 
King, 1260-1308. 674; his minister, 
Vanan is the hero of the Tanjai- 
vtinan Kovai, 674 

Kulasekhara Pandya (of the civil 
war), 366-371, 278-379, 383, 385 
Kulasekhara-Pandya-Kulantaka, title 
of Kul. I, 330 

Kulottunga I, 1070-1120, 2. 11, 13, 14. 
100, 131, 177. third Cola mission to 
China in 1077, a.d. 219; 228, Ceylon 
became independent of the Colas 
under K., 253: 261; married Ma- 
dhurantaki. 265; land revenue as- 
sessment in Kollimalai-nadu in 
Rajamahendra's days, 266; 269, 274, 
accession of K. 285-298; relations 
between him and Vijayaditya, 289; 
his position in 1063-70, 290; evidence 



786 


INDEX 


of his early Tamil inscriptions, 291, 
literary evidence, 292; recognised 
the legitimacy of Adhirajendra, 293; 
was K. adopted into the Cola 
family? ib; his share in the troubles 
of Adhirajendra, 293-5; Summary, 
297-8; acc, marks a new era 301; his 
historical introductions, 302; his 
early wars, 303; anarchy at acces- 
sion, 304; his war with Vikramaditya 
VI. 305-3; Vengi, 309; loss of 
Ceylon, 310; the Pandyan war, 311- 
13; Velaikkara revolt, 314-15: rela- 
tions with China, 316; with Kada- 
ram, 317; his Viceroys in Vengi; 319; 
1st and 2nd Kalinga wars, 321; ex- 
tent of his empire, 323; extensive 
Indian connections, 325; loss of 
Gangavadi, 325-7; trouble in Vengi, 
328; Titles, Sungadavirtta, 330-1; 
Capital, Family, 332; his feudatories, 
333, 342, 345, 346, 352, 365, 373, 387, 

393, 403, 419, 452, 456, 457, 472, 478, 

492, 504. 511, 538, 549, 556, 560, 561, 

582, 599, 606, 614, 615, 616, 618, 656, 

663, 664, 668, 676, 682, 686, 695, 701 
Kulottunga II, 12; Ula on 14; his acc; 
his works at Cidambaram, growth 
of sectarian intolerance; his remo- 
val of Govindaraja shrine from 
Cidambaram, 348, 644-5; his Capital, 
titles, 349; his feudatories, 350; 351, 
402, 403, 474, 478, 490, 516n, 586; 
Pillaittamil on, 669, 676, 682, 717 
Kulottunga ill, 143, Cola empire holds 
well together till his time, 301, 351, 
354, 360, 365, 371, 372; his reign, 
375-407; his accession, his Prasastis, 
375-76; disruption of the empire- 
delayed, 377; Pandyan war, three 
campaigns, 378-386; his northern 
war, 386; relations to Telugucodas 
and the north, 387-90; conquest of 
Kongu, 391; Pandyan invasion of 
Cola country, 393-95; Hoysala inter- 
vention, 396; his death, 397; his 
building activities, 398; famine and 
famine relief, administration, 399- 
400; his feudatories, 401-407; Gangas 
401; Kadavas, 402-4; Malaiyamans, 
Adigaimans, 405-6; decay of central 
control, 407, 417, 418, 419, 425, 436, 
452, 479, 490, 499, 527, 551, 535, 616, 
619, 640, 641; Guhai-idi-kalaham in 
his reign, 652, 674, 684; (the Nannul 
was composed in his reign), 684, 
715, 716, 719, 720, 722 
Kulottunga-Cola-Caritai by Tiru- 
narayana Bhatta, also called Kavi- 
kumuda Candra, a Pandit from 
Manakulasaniscceri in Tribhuvani, 
6S4 


Kulottungan Pillaittamil, a > n 
poem on Kulottunga II, 13, 14, • 
669 

Kulottunga-sola-Cuturvedimango : . • : : 
(Nandaiur in Cuddapah dist.) ■ 
Kulottunga-solak-kacciyarayj!!, . >0 
Kulottunga-sola-kadavar-Adittaa. Z'y 
Kuiottunga-soIak-kSdavarayan, 349 
Kulottungasoja-Perilamalainadu, 49 
Kulotttmgasdlan-uld, 14; 348 
Kulottungankovai, 360, 376, 391, 675 
Kulpak, identified with Kollippakk 
197, 198, 343 

Kulutesvara, a feudatory of Vimala- 
ditya, 231 

Kumara-Ganam, 489 
Kumara-Kaccanam (a small ces.o 
531, 613 

Kumara(komara) Kulottunga, 372 
376, 397, 675 
Kumara-mahidhara, 376 
Kumara-manga lam, 493 
Kumara-mattandapuram, 509 
Kumarankusa, Cola Maharaja, 104 
Kurabakonam, 19; treasury of Co« 
Kings of the Sangam, age 67: de-f&si 
of the Colas as the allies of t l r 
Pallavas in a battle near K. \vi h 
Sri Mara Sri Vallabha, 105, 112 
227 

Kumbhapanjara, The, 718 
Kuudalakesi, a Buddhist Mahakavi^- 
667 

Kunclamayan, 257 

h undavai, elder sister of Rajaraja ' 
162n; daughter of Vanavan Mah»- 
devi, 156; Rajaraja’s affection to- 
wards her, 169; K-ceri, 186, 226, 228. 
449, 579, 643; K. matha at Uttara- 
merur, 647; her gifts to the temple 
at Tanjore, 653, 656 
Kundavai, the younger daughter nt 
Rajaraja I, and younger sister of 
Rajendra I, marriage with Vimala- 
ditya, 182, 186, 285. 

Kundavai, sister of Kul I, 333 
Kunderu, river, 103 
Kundukala, 366 

Kumvalanallur (Chingalpet dist.). 

Kunjiramallar (elephant corps), 454 
Kunnandarkoyil (Pd.), 490 
Kunrai-valanadu in Tondaimandalam, 
675 

Kunrak-kurram, 503 
Kunrattur (birth pace of Sekkilar), 
675, 676 

Kunra -vattanak-kottam, 548 
Kuraik-kasu, 531 
Kurakam-padi, 534 
Kunris. 525. 620, 624 
Kuntalas, 257 , 303, 422 



INDEX 


787 


Kuppama. daughter of Narayana, 
makes a gift to the Bhimesvara 
temple of Draksarama in 1055-6, 
225 

Kupakas, King of the, a local chieftain 
of South Travancore, 222 
Rural, on Polity, 66-68; no mention 
of Kulus and Ayams, 69; 71, 92; 522 
Kuram grant, of Paramesvara- 
varman I, 105 
Kurappalli, 40, 49 

Kurava, women (regular sacrifice cf 
goat by), 646 

Kuravan Ulagalandan alias Rajaraja 
Maharajan of the Revenue Survey, 
189 

Kuri, 502 
Kurram, 465 
Kurran-dosam, 530 
Kurruva-Nayanar, 105 
Kurugaippiran Pillan, Ramanuja’s 
disciple, 681 
Kurundogai, 667 
Kusumanjali of Udayana, 688 
Kuttalam, Rajendra II's inscription. 

Kuttarn, 472, 499, 501, 502 
Kuttan, 669-670, 686 
Kuttapperumakkal, 472 
Kuvalalam (Kolar) , 160 
Kuvalala-nadu, 352 
Kwantan river, 217 
Kyanzittha, ruler of Pagan, 325 


Lada, southern, Ranasura of, 209 
Lada, Uttara, 208 

Laksadhyaya Iravalar of the Kolla- 
matha, 642 
Lambakarnas, 350 

Lambri of Marco Polo (= Ilamuri- 
desam), 217 

Lampsacus, silver dish of, 87 
Tanka (-Ceylon), 200, 223, 248, 311 
Lankapura, Ceylonese dandanayaka — 
his part in the Pandyan civil war, 
366, 367, 368, 369 
Lankasoka, 211 
Lankasuka, 218 
Lan-wou-li of Chau Ju-kua 
(= Ilamuri-desam) , 217 
Lata, 327 

Lata chiefs, 188. See Hadaraya 
Lepaksi, Paintings in, 737 
Leyden (Larger) grant, 8, 116, 131, 
135, 141, 147, 149, 151, 153, 157, 185, 
189, 213, 217, 220, on offices of ad- 
ministration, 466, 467 ; 483n, 504, 505, 


Leyden grant, smaller, 316, 318, 656 
Lilfi-suka alias Bilvamangalasvami, 
688 


Lilavati, queen Pf Vijayabahu and 
daughter of Jagatipala of Kanauj, 
311 

Lingapuranadeva, 646 

The Lingaraj temple (of Bhuvanes- 
var), 710 

Lingodbhava, image of 728 

Ling-ya-sseu-kia of Chau Ju-kua, 
216, 217 

Lcboe Toewa (Sumatra) , 319, 596, 608 

Loka-mahadevi alias Danti Sakti 
Vitanki, queen of Rajaraja I, 186, 
453 

Lokamahadevi, queen of Rajamahen- 
dra, 266 

Lo-ts’a-lo-ts’a (= Rajaraja) first 
Cola mission to the Song rulers of 
China in 1015: 219, 605 

Laxmi, Tiru, 201 


Ma’bar (Coromandel coast). 608, 609 
Mada-adimaigal, 556 
Madai, 614-617 
Madam (NA.), 375 
Madappuram, 505 
Madavilagam (S.A.), 456 
Madevadigal, a daughter of Rajaraja, 
the Great, 187 

Madhava, son of Venkataraya and 
Sundari, author of Bhasya on the 
Rg Veda, 686-687 

Madhavi, mother of Manimekalai, 23, 
77, 91 

Madhurantaka, donor of Rajapura 
plates from Bastar, 208 
Madhurantaka, title of Parantaka I, 
122 

Madhurantaka, title of Rajendra I, 
202, 206 

Madhurantaka, title of Sundara Cola, 
140; Udaiyar Madhurantakan Sun- 
dara Solan, 145 

Madhurantaka, alias Colendra son of 
Virarajendra, 267 

Madhurantakan-mddai, 586, 614, 616 
Madhurantaka Pottappic-Cola alias 
Eramasiddha, 389, 430, 505 
Madhurantakan Gandaradittan, son of 
Madhurantaka Uttama Cola? 158; 
188 

Madhurantaka Uttama Cola, 142, 614 
Madhurantaki, daughter of Rajendra 
II and wife of E. Calukya Rajendra 
II, alias Kulottunga I, 265, 285, 288, 
293 332 

Madhurantaki, sister of Kul I, 333 
Madhurapura (Southern), claim of 
capture by Visnuvardhana, 327 
Madhyasthas, 510-511, 517n 
Madras 547; quarrels between the 
Valangai and Idangai classes in. 550 



788 


INDEX 


Madura 43, 75, 83, 89, 106; raided by 
P *T ta * a 1 121 122 ’ J24-5; captur- 
ol b L? ajaraja J > 170 > 366, 367, 368- 
372, 378, 382, 383, 385, 393 398 399 
547, 583, 617, 618,’ 66S,’ 6 74,’677 ’ 

Maduraikonda, title to Parantaka I, 

Maduraikonda Parakesari, 145 
M ?^ raikonda ^iaiesari, 140 142 
144; identified with Sundaracola 
Parantaka n, 145, 153, 463 
Maduraimandalam. destroyed by 
207: part of 

Maduraiyum ilamumkonda, title of 
Parantaka I, 122 

Maduraiyum Pandiyan mudittalaiyum 
Kondaruliya, Kul in’s title, 377, 


Madurantaka, title of Sundara Cola, 
Madurantakan title of Uttama Cola, 
158,’ 1*88 Ued ArUmol - i as Yuvaraja’ 
Maduvanan, Calukya general, 263 
Magadai-mandalam, 401 
Magadha, 347 

Magadha country 36; artisans 88- no 
evidence of the rule of the Rastra- 
kutas, 229 

Magara Kingdom, 423 
Mahabalipuram, 604. 641, 736 

™^ rata Q , 1I L,° risin of h uman 
marriage, 93, 512, 629, 687; Panels 

Mahadandanayaka, for the Ganga and 
Vengunandalas, 177 
Mahadeya, temple at Tiruccendurai 
by Bhuti Aditya Bhattarika, 

Mahaganga Mahawaeliganga) , 24 
Mahalanakitti, the mighty, 250 
Mahalingasvami, The, temple of 
Tiruvidaimarudur, (910 a.d.), 706 
Mahamandalesvara-Gururaja Rudra- 

deva-sola Maharaja (1554 A.D.), 438- 
Mahamatra, 472 
Mahamddi, 646 
Mahanagakula, 311 

Maharaja, the powerful chief of Jata- 
coda Bhima, killed by Saktivarman, 

Maharajadhiraja, title of Virarajendra, 

Maharajasimha, 422. See Kopperun- 
jmga 

Maharajavadi (7000). 259; (Padi), 390 
Mahasabha, 489, 500, 501. 502 532 


a, Xvlahasabhai Elaimbadinmar. 550 

0. Mahatittha, 121, 173, 311. 315; (Mafi-- 

tam), 369 

V Mahavamsa, 3; on the early inter- 
course between the Cola count— 
!- and Celyon, 23-25. 53-55, 121-24. lr, ] 

9, 174, 199, 213, 216, 223, 249-53, 273 

310, 314, 350, 365, 366. 367, 368, 37 ' 

1, Mahaveliganga, 311 
Mahavratins. 648, 649 
Mahawaeliganga, ancient Mahagans 

?, 24 

a Mahendramangalam (battle betweei 
the Pandyas and the Hoysalas), 424 

y 495, 536 

Mahendra mountain. 321 
Mahendra Varman. Pallava, 105. 64 i. 
f 723 

Mahendra-Vikrama-Varman. Telug’.;- 
i Coda, 103. 

, Mahesi, 251 

Mahesvaras, 427, 491. 526, 556. 603, 645 
, Mahinda IV, Ceylon King, 154 

Mahinda V, Ceylon King; expedition 
, of Rajaraja against Celyon in the 

reign of 172; invasion of Rajendra I. 
199; deportation of, by Rajendra 200, 
249 

Mahinda VI, 384 

Mahipala, the Gurjara ruler, 229-34 
Mahipala, Pala King, 207, Rajendra's 
victory over 208, and 229-34 
Mahodai, Conquest by Rajendra B 
196 

Mahodaya, 233 
Mahratha smiths, 88 
Mahrathas, feudatory of Vikramacola. 
347 

Maikal range, 228 

Malabar (Coast), trade with Malaya 
in the hands of the Tamils, 85 
Malada chieftain, a feudaotry of 
Colas, 161 

Malainadu (= Malabar) 7; (moun- 
tain country or Kudamalai-nadu or 
Coorg). 172; 592. 601, 607 
Malaiyalis, their influx into the Cola 
country, 134 
Malanad, 458 

Malayaman chiefs, 43; sons of 17 tried 
in the manram of Uraiyur, 70, 156 
Malaiyamans of Kiliyur, 405, 534 
Malaiyaman Tirumudikkari, 43 
Malaiyanur, 406 
Malaiyur, 211; 215 
Malakka, straits, 217 
Malamadesvarasa, 430 
Malambi (Coorg), 272 
Malari (Kuttan’s birth-place), 669, 



INDEX 


789 


Malaya archipelago, South Indian in- 
fluence in the 319, 459, 604 
Malaya mountain, abode of Agastya, 
201 

Malaya Peninsula, trade with India, 
85-6, 194, 215, 216, 218, 220, 382 
Malaya river, 215 

Maldives, Rajaraja’s conquest of old 
Islands of the sea numbering 
12,000, 183. 194, 202, 459. 

Malepadu plates, 15n, 36, 101; genea- 
logy of the Telugu Colas, 103-4 
Maleya (Malabar), 172 
Maligai-kol, 621 

Malkhed (Manyakheta) , 198, 231 
Mallai, Kopperunjinga ruler of, 424 
Mallapadeva, 328 

Malli Coda, a Mahamandalesvara Tri- 
bhuvanamalla, of Hemavati, 400-401 
Mallikarjuna of the Kalamukha sect, 
648 

Malurpatna (Bangalore), 601 
Malwa, 175, 198, 232 
Mamulanar, a Sangam poet on Mori- 
yar, 20. 21 

Manabharanam, 221, 252; Pandyan M. 
decapitated by Rajadhiraja I was, 
according to Hultzsch, the ancestor 
M., the nephew and son-in-law of 
Vija.vabahu I. 276n; 370 
Ma-nagaram (of Kanci), 503 
Manai-irai (house tax). 532 
Manai-irai-soru, 532 
Manaik-katcip-peru. 531 
Manakkavaram, 213 (= Nicobar), 217 
Manali, assembly of, 471 
Manalur. 307, 308 

Manavasasan-gadandar of Tiruvadi. 


680 

Manavil, 333 
Mandalams, 177, 186 
Mandala-mudaliyar, 472 
Mandala-Purusa, 685 
Mandara-gauravanar Kundadeviyar. 


Mandaran-jeral-irumporai. Cera, 48 
Mandira olai, 467 


Mangaiyark-karasi, 105 
Mangalam (agrahara), 492, 493, 494 
Mangalam (S. A.), 424: (Sm.) 480 
Mangalambika shrine the (Kandi- 
yur) . 715 

Manigramam, 459, 488 
Manija, his heroism in battle of Pana- 
soge rewarded, 172; title of Ksatri- 
yasikhamani Kongalva conferred on 


Manimangalam inscription of Raja- 
dhiraja I, 253. 256. 261; of Virara- 
iendra, 267, 269, 270 
Manimekalai , 3, 31, 37, 55, 46 on five 
modes of disposing of the dead. 64; 


on Kulus and Avams, 69, 78, 86, 88, 
90-92, 94, 95, 107n, 238n; 667 
Manimekhala, sea-goddesses after 
whom the heroine and the poem 
Manimekalai are called, 23 
Maiijadi, 525, 572, 599, 624 
Manmasiddha (alias Nallasiddha), 388 
Mannarkoyil (Tin), 511 
Manrtidis, 588; Kalanai of, 490 
Mantra-Brahmana, knowledge of, 
qualification of members of the 
Variyam, 497 
Mantris, 463 

Manumasiddharasa, (his title of Ca- 
lukya-Narayana), 430 
Manumasiddhi, Tikka’s son, 435 
Mannaikkadakkam (Manyakheta) , 
197, 198 

Mannaikonda-sola, a mandapa at 
Tiruvorriyur, 199 

Mannandippai, its palace was burnt 
by Colas, 254 
Mannar-kovil (Tin,), 203 
Manr am, hall, 70, 71, 79 
Mantota. 173 

Manu (Cola) legend of the calf, 8 
Manur, (assembly of), 486, 495, 506 
Manyakheta identical with Mannaik- 
kadakkam (= Malkhed), 198 
Mappalam, 211, 216 
Marakatadevar, 458 
Maramaraiyar, 114 

Maranjadaiyan, Trichinopoly inscrip- 
tion of, 105 

Maran Paramesvaran, an officer of 
Parantaka I, 127; raid on Nellore, 


Marasimha, father of Prthvipati II, 
114 

Maravan Narasimha Varman, a Bana 
prince, 188 
Maravadai, 533 

Maravas (Samantas), 370, 379, 386 
Mara-Vijayottunga Varman Sri, Lord 
of Sri Visaya, 185, 213, 219 
Marayam. 226 
Marayan, 263, 462 

Marayan Arumoli alias Uttama Sola 
Brahmarayan. 226 

Marco Polo, 15; his Lambri (Ilamuri- 
desam). 217, 455, 460, 607, 609 
Marijadi (customary dues), 531 
Markanam. 22; salt pans at, 593 
Marathi, inscription of, 1803, Tanjore, 


Mari Venko, Cera, 48 
Marokattu Nappasalaiyar, 43, 44 
Marudattur-udaiyan, 664 



790 


INDEX 


Maruvur-pakkam, one of the two 
parts of Puhar, 81 
Masanam, 70 
Maski, The battle of, 206 
Masattanar, of Aduturai, 45 
Masuni-desa (=the land of the 
snakes), 207, 208 

Matangesvara, temple of. in Kanci- 
puram, 697 

Mathas, 400, 452, 595, 628. 629. 632, 
633; Vaisnavite, M. 647; M. of the 
Kalamukhas at Kodumbalur, 648. 
650, 651 

Mattikavatatatittha, 315 
Mattiyur, 382, 385 
Matottam, 455 
Ma Tuan-lin, 317 
Maula (hereditary), 457 
Mauryas of Konkan, 101 
Mavalattan, younger brother of Na- 
langilli, 36, 37 

Mavankilli alias Nedungilli, Killi- 
valavan, 37 

Mayilai-nathar, on the N annul, 685 
Mayirudingam, 211, (= Ji-lo-ting the 
the region of Jaiya in the centre 
of the Malaya peninsula), 215 
Mavuranatha temple of Mayavaram 
(Tj.). 696 

Medava Mahadevi, wife of Vimala- 
ditya, 285 

Medini-Vallaba. title of Virarajen- 
dra, 274 

Melappaluvur (Tri.), 187 
Melpadi (N.A.), 132, 142, 154, 153, 
187 

Melvaram. 539. 585, 586 
Merkelundarulina-devar. name o. 

Gandaraditya, 152 
Mer-padi-kaval, 534 
Mevilimbangam, 211; not possible to 
identify, 216; sought in Perak by 
Rouffaer and Karmaranga by S. 
Levi, 242n 
Meykandar, 679 
Meyk-kirttikal, 5 
Meypporul-nayanar, 646 
Mihindu, Vessagiri slab inscription of, 
155 

Milada(u) (2000), 266 
Milinda-Panha, 216 
Mimamsa, provision for study ot, b29, 
630 

Miraj grant (1024 aj>.), 205 
Mithila, 209; the Kamatas of, 210 
Mitta. sister of Vijayabahu— married 
a Pandyan Prince, 311 
Mitaksara, 549 
Mi-yalun-ganam, 494 
Miyatci, 577 

Mohan Alappirandan, Kudal alias 
Kadavarayan, 404 


Mohur (South Arcot dist.) chieftains 
of, 20, 21 

Moriyar ( =: Mauryas) , 20, 21 
Mosi, the lame (Mudamosiyar). 49 
Mt D’Eli, 222 

Mucukundesvara. The, temple ft 
Kodumbalur (C. 912). 707 
Mudaliyars. The santanas of, 650 
Mudakkaru, battle of, same as Kuo 
Sangamam, 262, 264, 274, 281n 
Mudaligal, 355, 501 
Mudamosiyar, 49 
Mudar-padai -kalanaiya r. 595 
Mudigondacola, title of Rajendra I, 22 j 
M udigonda-solapuram, confused with 
Gangai-konda-colapuram, 227 
Mudikonda-solan, 267 
Mudikonda-sdiapuram, 332: (Palai- 

yapu), 346; (alias Ayiraitali). 386. 
393, 421 

Mudikonda-sola-caturvedi- 
mangalam, 490 

Mudikondasolamandalam (alias 
Gangapadi), 472, 483n 
Mudit-talai-konda-solapuram 
(Maduia), 382 

Mudittalaik-kopperu-narkilli Cola, 1 
Mudi-valangu-sola, title of Kul. II 


Mudi-valangu-sola- 
caturvedimangalam, 398 
Mudi-valangu-solapuram (alias 
Karuvur) , 398 

Mudukannan Sattanar, Uraiyur, 39, 9o 
Mulam-kilar of Avur, 42, 66, 92 
Mukavetti (Sri-mugavetti), 467, 463. 
470 

Mukkokkilan, queen of Kul. II, 349 _ 
Mukkokkilan, queen of Rajendra 

228 „ , C1 
queen Mukkokkilan, of Rajaraja U, 
Mukkokkilanadigal, queen of 
Vikrama-cola, 346 
Mukutesvara, temple of, 697 


Mulaparudai, 599 

Miila-parisat (Mula-parusai), 500 

Mulaparusai(dai) (yar), 489, 494, 500, 


Mulasthanam-udaiyar, Sri (at 
Ennayiram), 646 

Mulgund inscription (1053 a.d ), 25b 
Mullai flower, 75 
Mullaiyur, ancient, 221 
Mummadi-cola-deva, title of 
Gandaraditya, 142 

Mummadicola-deva, title of Rajaraja 

I, 169, 172, 186 , , nrl 

Mummadi-sola, a title of Ambalava 
Paluvur-nakkan, 160 
Mummanik-kovai, of Kamban, 
Mummudi-sola-mandalam, Northern 

Ceylon, a Cola province, 173 



INDEX 


791 


Mumrnudi-sola-pdsan alias Irayiravan 
Pallavaraiyan, an Officer of Raja- 
raja I, 189 
Munaiyar, 347 
Munisandai record (on the 
Ainnurruvar) , 596 
Munnur. 353 

Munrukai-Manasenai, 455, 456 
Muraippadu (plaintiff’s case), 474 
Muruga(n), 32, 80; the favourite 

deity of the Tamils, 94 
Musakavamsam, a Kavya on the 
Musaka Kings, 222 

Musaka Kings, 222; Musaka country. 


Musaka hill, 222 

Musangi, Jayasimha turned his back 
at M. 204; 205; 224 
Musiris, 83 

Muttamilkkut-talaivan, title of Raja- 
raja n, 351 

Mutta-nambirattiyar, queen of Utta- 
macola, 160 

Muttaraiyar (s) . 112, 113 
Muvadi-cola-Rajaditya. 131 
Muvarkovii, Vimantrayam at Kodum- 
balur, built by Vikramakesari, 648; 
description of 707-709, 717, 721 
Muyangi, 204. See Musangi 
Mysore, Rajaraja I’s expedition into 
Mysore, 174, 177; 194, 198. 204. 226 


Naceinarkkiniyar on Vellalar, 87; 

(Kalagam=Kadaram) , 218, 666, 685 
Nadaka-magalir, 78 
Nadalvan, 477 

Nadu, rastra, 66, 465, 477, 489, 490, 491, 
503, 504, 505, 507, 527. 531, 538, 646 
Nadukal, stone planted to mark the 
spot of a hero’s death, 47 
Nadu-kilavan, 466 

Nadu-kuru (Settlement Officer). 472 
Nadu-vagai, 456, 472, 555 
Naduvirukkai, 467, 468 
Naga, family, 20 
Nagadipa, 154 

Nagalai, daughter of Camundaraja, 


Nagamangala Taluk (Mys.), 326 
Nagapadams (motifs), 721 
Nagaram, 492, 503, 505, 506, 508, 522, 
527, 598-599 
Nagarangal, 507 

Nagarattar, of Kaccippedu. 166n, 526 
Nagavamsi King, 292 
Nagavamsi, copper plates (1065 a.d.), 
208 


Nagavamsi ruler Dharavarsa, 303 
Naga-vamsodbava, Kings of the 
Chindaka family, 208 


Nagesvara, temple of, at Kumba- 
konam, 703, 706, 723, 724, 735 
Naippur, battle of, 125 
Nakkannai, 50 

Nakkavaram, 213; (= Nicobar), 217, 
See Manakkavaram 
Nakkirar, 43 

Nalangilli, the foe of Nedungiili, 19 
36; a sketch of, 37-9; 40 
Nalavenba of Pugalendi, 673 
Nalayirakkovai, 669 
Nalikais, divisions of time, 82 
Nalkote, 132 

Nalladikkon, son of Senganan, 53 
Nallaman, 376 

Nalla-siddha, son of Madhurantaka 
Pottappic-cola Eramasiddha, 388 
Nallasiddha alias Manmasiddha, 388- 
390; 412-413n 

Nallasiddha, brother of Erasiddha. 390 
Nalodaya, of Vasudeva, 688 
Nalur, Saba of, 509 
Nallur (Tj.), 296 
Nalluruttiransolan, 50 
Nalmadi Bhima, title oi Araiyan 
Rajarajan alias Vikramacola Coliya- 
varaiyan, the general of Rajendra I, 
205 

Nal-vayalur, 504 

Namanaikkonam, part of Masuni- 
desam, 207, 208 

Nambi Andar Nambi, 12, 13. 51. 106; 
author who arranged the Saiva 
Canon, 637, 638, 675. 677 , 678 
Nambi Aruran (Sundaramurti) , 475 
Nambihalli (Mys.), 225 
Nambikada Nambi, 678 
Nambi Nedunjeliyan, 50 
Nambaya, Mahamandalesvara. Lord of 
Kollipaka, 343 
Nambillai, 681 

Nambiraja, son of Malla, 330 
Nambiyahapporul of Narakaviraja- 
nambi, 674, 684 
Nammalvar, 638, 681 
Nanadesis, 595-597 

Nanadesiya-dasamadi eri-virappat- 
tina (Siravalli), 597 
Nanartharnava-samksepa. a Sanskrit 
lexicon, 686 
Nanasambandar, 6, 53 
Nanasambandar, 636, 637, 678 
Nanasivadeva alias Umapatideva, 373 
Nandalur alias Kulottunga-sola-ca- 
turvedimangalam, 323, 350 
Nandas, 20, 233 
Nanda-vilakku, 6 

Nandipura(m) Sundaracola, King of, 
157, 187 

Nandivarman, Kasyapa gotra, 

Renadu Cola, 103 
Nandivarman HI, Pallava, 104 



792 


INDEX 


Nangaivaraguna Pemmanar, sister of 
the Cola King, 155 
Nangili, 307, 327 

Nangur, 35; brick temple at, 697 
Nanjinad, 203 

Nandan, the Pariah saint, 568, 647 
Nandikkalambakam, 662 
Nannamarayar, Vaidumba chief, 188 
Nannayya Bhatta, the composer of 
Andhra Bharata (1051-2), 225 
Nannilam, 53 

Nanni-Nulumban, Calukya leader 
killed at Koppam, 257 
Nannul, of Pavanandi, 401 
Naralokavira, 314, 333. 334, 345; 

(Arumbakkilan Ponnambalakkuttan 
alias N.), 347 

Narasimha, Calukya chief, 233 
Narasimhavarma, a Colasamanta, 327 
Narasimhavarman I, 105 
Narasimhavarman, a feudatory of 
Rajendra II, and chief of Miladu, 
266 

Narasimha-varman alias Kari-kalasola 
Adaiyur Nadalvan, a Malaiyaman, 
405 

Narasimha II, Vira (Hoysala) (his 
intercession in Cola affairs), 378, 
423-425, 428, 429. See Vira Nara- 
simha 

Narasinga-munaiyadaraiyar, a con- 
temporary of Sundaramurti, 405, 
727 

Narasinga Vikkirama Virar, 457 
Naravahana, son of Udayana, 665 
Narayana, author of the Sanskrit 
Prasasti of the Tiruvalangadu plates, 
195 

Narayana Bhatta, a Minister of 
Somesvara, 256 
Narayana-kramavittan, 539 
Narayanapuram, merchant communi- 
ties of 595 

Narkaviraja-nambi, author of Nam- 
biyahapporul, 684 
Natakasalas, 506, 512 
Nataraja temple at Cidambaram, 
Parantaka I, covered it with gold, 
152; Vikrama Cola’s gifts to, 342, 
344, 345; Kul II’s works at 348; 643; 
icon of N. 728-731 

Nathamuni, who arranged the Vais- 
nava canon, 638, 639 
Nattar, 467, 504, 507 
Nattarasa, 471, nattaraja, 478 
Nattuk-kandu-katci, 472 
Nattukkon, 466 
Nattuppadai, 457 
Navacola-caritra, 14 
Navarama, 103 
Navile-nad (Navilai), 308 
Nayavivekadipika. by Varadaraja. 688 


Nedumudikkilli, 37 
Nedumpirai, merchant communiti-.-.-, 
of 595 

Nedungilli, Kariyarruttunjiya, 38 
Negapatam, 19 (Nikama of Ptolemy i 
22; Buddha image of solid gold 
looted by Tirumangai Alvar 10 1 
Buddhist monastery at N.. 137 
Cudamani Vihara, 185, 220, buildia 
of two Buddhist Viharas by th 
King of Kadaram, 318, 504, 656 ^ 
Nellore, northern limit of Parantak; 

empire, 121; 152, 178 
Nellur, merchant communities of. 53) 
Neminadam (of Gunavirapandita- ■ 
called after the tirthankara Nenu- 
natha), 684 
Nenjuvidu-tutu, 680 
Neriyan Madeviyar, Nambirattiyar, 
queen of Vikramacola, 346 
Nettur battle of, 380, 384 
Niccapattalagan, (the sculptor), 72 '• 
Nicobars, 213, 217 
Neydalanganal, 49 
Nidubrolu, 343 
Nigamana, 55 
Nigantu-cuddmani, 685 
Nigarili-sola, title of Rajaraja I, 186_ 
Nigirili-sola-Caturvedimangalam, 53' 
Nikama (= Negapatam), 22 
Nilakanthesvara temple (at Laddi- 

Nimbaladevi, wife of Indaladeva, 22!' 

Niranjanaguru, 649 

Nirvacanottara Ramayanam u by TiK- 


kana, 434 
Niskas, 613 

Nissankamalla of Ceylon, 384 
Nissankamallesvara, 385 
Nisumbhasudinl Durga, 110 
Nittapperaraiyan (grand-master ol 
the dance). 462 

Nittavinoda-Sambuvarayan, feudatory 
of Rajaraja II, 353 
Nityavinoda, title of Rajaraja I, 186 
Nivandam, 557 
Niyamam, 112 
Niyayattar, 491, 494, 513 
Niyogam, 502 

Nolambadhiraja, Corayya, 175 
Nolambas, 120, 127, their relation with 
the Gangas, 175; 224; see Nulumbas. 
Nolambavadi, 174, 224; see Nulumba- 
padi. 

Nrpa-kama (Hoysala), 325 
Nrpatunga, Kopperunjinga’s title, 424 
Nrpatungavarman, 113 . 

Nulambadhiraja (Kul m, official). 400 


Nulambadaraya, 499 
Nulumbapadi, 176; see Nolambavadi 
Nulumbas, 268, 430; see Nolambas. 
Nungama, queen of Nallasiddha, 388 



INDEX 


793 


Nuniz, 168 

Nurmadi Cola Rajendra Vidyadhara, 
son of Rajaraja Nityavinoda ad- 
vanced against Satyasraya, 176 
Nuruganda, vassal of Somesvara, 255 
Nuvaragiri, 311 
Nydyapravesa, 55 
Nyayattar (judges), 467, 473, 491 


Odda- (visaya), 207; (= Orissa), 208 

Oddas, 205, 206 

Olai, 468, 469 

Olai-nayagam, 467, 469 

Olai-eludum, 467 

Oliyar, a Naga tribe, 35 

Olugu, 536 

Omkaradeva, Iravalar, 642 
Omkarasundari, Goddess of, 646 
Oppu (comparison), 468 
Orattanan (Urattayan) Sorabbaiyar 
Agramahadeviyar or Muttanambi- 
rattiyar or Tribhuvanamahadeviyar, 
160 

Oratti (Chingleput) , 420. See Uratti 
Orissa, 208, 231 
Orungallu, 391 

Orthura regia Sornati (=Uraiyur), 
22 

Otta King, 207 Rajendra’s victory- 
over, 231 

Ottakkuttan, 13. Kaviccakravarti, 14. 
il6, 137, 351; his Parani on Vikra- 
ma-cola’s Kalinga war now not 
available. 664. 669, 670, 672, 673, 684 
Ovada-kuttar, the grand -son of Otta- 
kkutan (set up Saraswati shrine), 
670 

Ovikula, 548 


Pabhuparru, plates of Saktivarman, 
180 

Paccur, 423 
Padi-kappar, 534 
Padaipparru, 505 
Padai-vldu (camp), 356 
Padaiyilar (the military). 537 
Padavikonda Narasinga Pottaraiyar, 
111 

Padaviva, 191n 
Padi, 572 

Padikaval (village watch), 533-534 
Padmakosa, 718 
Paes, 168 

Pagan, King of 216: embassy from, to 
China, 317, 318; Burmese story of 
the conversion of a Cola Prince to 
Buddhism by Kyanzittha of, 325 
Pahang, 217 

Paisaca, form of marriage, 6-1 

c. 100 


Paki-nadu, conquered by the chief of 
Karu-kudi, 178, 458 
Palaiyan-Maran, 43 
Palaiyanur, 466, 507 
Palaiyaru, 227, 449 
Palaiyanur-Udaiyan, Vedavanam 
Udaiyan, Ammaiyappan alias Annan 
Pallavarayan, 369, 373 
Palam-pulli-madai, 616 
Palangasu, 537, 619 
Palembang, on the east coast of 
Sumatra, 214-16 
Paliyili-ainnurruvar, 457 
Pailavaniccaram, 25n 
Pallavas, their inscriptions. 4; 156, 170, 
404, 459, 486, 662 

Pallavarayanpettai (Tj.); P. inscrip- 
tion of the 8th year of Rajadhiraja 
a, discussed, 354-60, 368 
Pallavarayar of Karigai Kulattur, 
355-59, 367, 371; (Tiruccirrambalam- 
Udaiyan, Perumanambi), 373, 376 
Pallavatilaka, race, 114 
Pallaravayar Kalappalarayan of Kun- 
rattur, younger brother of Sekkilar, 
676 

Palli (a revenue term), 572 
Palii (Jain or Buddhist temple). 452, 
460, 655, 657 

Pallic-candam, 318, 493, 505, 507, 655 
Paliip(p)adai, 143, 153, 453 
Paluvettaraiyar chieftains, 125, P. 
Princess, 187 

Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Amudanar, 
122 

Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Maravan, 
AdigaL, a feudatory of Rajaraja I, 
187 

Paluvur, 187 

Pamalur, a Cera fortress, 49 
Pampa, The, 322 
Panai, old Pannai, 215 
Pancavanmadevisvara in Ramanathan 
koyil, 453 

Pancavan Mahadeviyar, 451 
Pandikkovai, 662 
PSnan, 50, 382 
Panar, 76, 82 

Panca-ganga: Fleet’s identification of 
its confluence with Krishna as 
Kudal Sangam, 281n 
Pancapandavamalai, 188 
Pancapalli, part of Masunidesam, 207, 
208 

Pancavan-madeviyar. wife of Pillaiyar 
Sola-Vallabadeva, 259 
Pancavan-Madeviyar, queen of 
Rajendra I, 228 

Pancavanmaraya, title of Rajendra I, 
172; Mahadandanayaka ruled over 
Ganga and Vengimandalams, 187 
Pancavas, the race, 49 



794 


INDEX 


Pandian, of the Periplus, 22 
Pandimandalam, 312, 368, 382 
Pandita Cola, title of Rajendra I, 227, 
254n. 

Pandiyanaic-curam-irakkina, 140; title 
of Sundara Cola, 145 
Pandiyanai-ven-kanda-sola-catm, 
Idavai, 117n. 

Pandiyan-talai-konda (Vira) Para- 
kesari, 140, 148 

Panduranga, in Campa: Roufiaer’s 

identification of Valaippanduru, 
242n 

Pandya-cola, the Mahapataka Tami- 
lian devastated the Belavola coun- 
try, 258 

Pandya, country, 7, 32, 196, 221-3, 245, 
253 

Pandyakhandana, title of Narasimha 
n, 396 

Pandya-kulantaka, title of Vlrara- 
jendra, 274 

Pandya - kula - Samraksanadaksa - 
daksina-bhuja, title of Vira Somes- 
vara Hoysala, 432-433 
Pandya-kulasani, title of Rajaraja I, 
186 

Pandyan inscriptions, 9 
Pandya-raja, royal official, 400 
Pandyas, The 20, 169-171, 199; Kul. I’s 
reconquest of 310; his war with 
P. 311-13; 347; civil war 354, 355, 
358, 359, 360, 365-372, 376; Imperia- 
lism of the P. affected the Colas, 
377; P. war under Kul. Ill, 378-386; 
invasion of Cola country, 393-397; 
424-25, 428. 429; Rajendra Ill’s wars 
against, 432-433, 435; Pandyan ex- 
pansion, 437; 486, 662 
Panei, 215 

Panimakkal, 463, 465 
Pan-mahesvarar, 489 
Pannai, 211, 215 

Pannan, the lord of !§irukudi; friend 
of Killivalavan, 40, 77 
Papphalam, a Port in Ramanna in the 
Talaing country of Burma, 213, 216. 
See Mapappalam. 

Paradavar, 79 
Paraicceri, 535 
Parakesari, 503, 655 
Parakesaripuram, 503 
Parakkama, Ceylonese Prince slain in 
the Cola war, 251-2 
Parakramabahu I, of Celyon, 216; 311, 
366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 378, 383, 
384 

Parakramabahu II of Ceylon (1236 
aj>.), 423 

Parakkamabahu, ally of 
Kop-perunjinga, 423 


Parakrama Pandya 327; (of the civi. 
war), 366. 371, 378 
Paraman Malapadiyar alias Munir: ; 
disolan, conquered &Itpuli-nadu f : 1 
Pakinadu, 178, 187 
Paramesvara-varman I, 105 
Paripadal, 686 
Parivaras, 450 

Parmaras, hostility between the V- . 
Calukyas and the P. 175; their attack 
of the W. Calukyas, 178, 198 
Paranar, 33, 50 

Parandur, record of Parthivendra- 
varman, 150 

Parankorranar, a Sangam poet, 26n 
Parantaka, son of Vikramakesari by 
Karrali, 155 

Parantaka, title of Kul I, 330 
Parantaka I, delay between royal orde. 
of grant and time of engraving, 9. 
Gramam, inscription of, P. 16n; dat ■ 
of his acc. fixed by Kielhorn, 11- ■ 
113, 114; reign of P. 120-139; extern 
of the empire under P. 120; Pan- 
dyan war, 121-23; Ceylon war, 124; 
allies of P., 125; war with the 
Banas, 126; war with the Vai- 
dumbas, 127-8; policy of P., 
Rastrakuta invasion, 129-33; close 
of reign, 133-34; 140, 142, 144; Ma- 
duraikonda Parakesari, 145; the 
Tiruvisaippa refers to his conquest 
of Madura and Ilam and to his 
covering the temple of Nataraja 
with gold, 152, 155; Cola expan- 
sion up to Nellore, 178, 187, 200, 
345, 379, 453, 466, 486, 489, 496, 507, 
678; patron of Venkata Madhava, 
author of Rg Veda bhasya, 687, "03, 


705, 706 

Parantaka-deva; three inscriptions of 
the ninth year, 161n. 

Parantaka II (Sundara Cola), 141, 
142, 153, 155, 168, 174, 638, 648 

Paranjoti— his Tiruvilaiyddal-Puri- 

nam, 677 

Parantaka Ilangovelar, a title of 
Vikrama Kesari showing his sub- 
ordinate relation to Parantaka U. 
Sundara Cola, 155 

Parantakan Kundavai Pirattiyar, 226 
Parantaka-Pandya. contemporary of 
Vikramacola, 321. 366 
Parantakan Siriyavelar of Kodumba- 
lur, his expedition to Ceylon and 
his death, 154, 155 
Parantaka Viranarayana, Sri, Pandya 
king Aditya I’s contemporary, 115, 
120 


Parasurama, 31, 201, 222 
Parigi, ancient Parivi, 126 



INDEX 


795 


Parimelalagar: on Poyya Vilakkam, 
16n; on origin of the name Cola, 
19, 70; on Uruporul, 96n, 686 
Parivi, later capital of the Banas, 126 
Parthivendra Aditta Parumar, per- 
haps identical with Aditya II, 149 
Parthivendradhipati- Varman, 141 
Parthivendra Aditya Varman, Vice- 
roy of Tondaimandalam and a 
prince of the royal family, 148; 
Parthivendra, a title of Aditya II, 
149 

Parthivendra Varman, 140, 142, 147, 
perhaps identical with Aditya or 
Karikala Parakesari, 148-49; the 
date of his Parandur record dis- 
cussed, 150-51, 155, 156, 159, 497 
Pasi, 367, 368 
Pataliputra, 20 
Pati-pada-mulattar, 489 
Pattadakal, temples in. 699 
Pattinak-kurram. 467, 504 
Pattasalins, (weavers), 594 
Pattinam (= a port town), Cola 
capital, 22 

Pattinap-pakkrm, one of the two 
parts of Puhar. 82 

Pattinappala i, 22, S3, on early rural 
life, 65, 71, 75, 80, 82, 218 
Pattinavar (fishermen), 555, 556 
Pattolai, 468, 470 
Pattuppattu, 54, 242n 
Paura, 505 

Pavanandi, author of Nannul, 401 
Pedda-Tippasamudram, 248 
Pedekallu, (Kumool dist.), 179, 180 
Pegu (Ramanna), 311 
Pegu, alleged conquest by Rajen- 
dra I, 213, 216 
Penang, 218 
Pennadam (S. A.), 331 
Perak ( = ancient Mevilimbangam) 

Perambalam (at Cidambaram) , Kul. 

II, covered it with gold. 349 
Perarayan, 462 
Perasiriyar, 686 
Pereyil Muruvalar, 51 
Perilamaiyar. 489 

Periplus (Mans F.njthraex), 3 21. 

23, 54, 83; on different types of In- 
dian ships 85; Uraiyur, a great 
centre of cotton stuffs, 88, 459 
Periya-nattar, 490 

P eriya-Purdnam of Sekkilar, 12, 51, 
53 105, 106, 635, 655, 667, 674-676, 
678, 717, 718. 735, 739 
Periya-Vaccan Pillai, 681 
Perumbarrap-Puliyur Nambi, author 
of Tiruvilaiyadal Puranam, 674, 
677 

Persian Gulf, The, 459 


Perumakkal, 502 

Perumanadigal, Western Ganga king, 
129 

Perumanadigalu, title of Kul. I, 330 
Perumanambi, 373, see Pallavarayar, 
Perumbanappadi, the big Bana coun- 
try, 129 

Perumbanarruppada’-, 83 
Perum Tiruma Valavan, who died at 
Kurappalli, 49 

Perunarkilii, of Rajasuyam fame, 48 
Perundaram (= nobles), 146, 160, 187, 
189; 455, 463 

Perundevanar, author of Bharata- 
venba, 662 

Perundevanar, his commentary on 
Vlrasoliyam, 682, 683 
Perundinai, abnormal lcve. 64, 65 
Perungadai, the Tamil version of the 
Brhat-katha, 665 
Perun-guri (Sabha), 502 
Perungurimahasabhai. 502 
Peruvaludi, Pandya who died at Velli- 
yambalam. 49 
Peru-virar-killi. 56n 
Peutinger, chart of, 83 
Phanrang ( = Panduranga - Valaip- 

panduru). 242n. 

Philip of Macedon. 183 
Pidarttalai, rendered help to Kari- 
kala, 57n. 

Pillaiyar, a term applied to junior 
members of the royal family, 142 
Pingalam. an old lexicon. 218 
Pipilikesvara, The. temple of Tiru- 
verumbiyur (T. poly). 706 
Pirudigangar-Valanadu, 172 
Pithapuram grants, 288 
Pithapuram inscription of Mailapa- 
deva, 328 

Pithapuram Plates of Vira Coda, 319, 
320 

Pittan (Siva), 475 

Pliny, the elder, 21; on Indo-Roman 
trade, 84 

Podiya mountains, 80 
Podiyil, common place, germ of a 
popular assembly, 70; mountain. 312 
Polonnaruva, capital of Ceylon under 
the Colas, 173, 200, 310; renamed 
Vijayarajapura, 311, 316, 507 
Pon-kalanju, 560; (P. same as Ka- 
laiiju) , 561 

Pon-maligait-tunjina-deva, title of 
Sundara Cola, 156, 187 
Ponmukhari, The, S22 
Ponnamaravati, fight at, 367 
Ponni (Kaveri), 304, 393 
Ponparappina-Isvara, image set up at 
Kugaiyur, 401 

Ponparappina Magadesan. 401 



796 


INDEX 


Pon-parappinan, a Malaiyaman of 
Kiliyur, 405 

Ponperri, Buddhamitra, chieftain of, 
275 

Pon-variyam (gold-committee), 496 
Porrippahrodai, a short work of 100 
lines, 680 

Porulani (arthalankara) , 683 
Porunar arruppadai, 70, 88, 90 
Porvaik-kopperunar-Killi, 50 
Pottappi, king of; killed by Virara- 
jendra, 267 

Pottappi, (in the Pullampet Taluq, 
Cuddapah dist.), 388, 400 
Pottappicola, Madhurantaka, the first 
ruler among the Telugu-Codas, 387 
Pottiyar, 45, 46, 70 
Pon-kan (Pagan), 317 
Poygai (yar), author of Kalavab, 
same as Poygaialvar. 51, 52, 74, 94 
Poyya-moli Pulavar 674 
Prabhakara school cf Mimamsa. 686 
Prabodha-Candrodaya, 239n, 641 
Pradhanis, 368 

Prajapatya form of Aryan marriage, 
65 

Prambanam, 709 
Prapanna-gayatri, 681 
Prayogavivekam, 684 
Prithvipati II Hastimalla, 8. 110, 114, 
115, 121, 125-29, same as Parthiven- 
dra?, 148 

Prthivipati, Ganga king, 110, 113 
Prthivi Vallabha, a title of Punya- 
kumara, 104 

Pritipatiyar, son of Maramaraiyar; 
(= Prthvipati n, son of Mara- 
simha), 114; see Prthvipati II. 

Prola of Anumakonda Kakatiya 
chief, 329, 386 

Ptolemy, 3; on the Cola country 22- 
3, 54, 85, Takola, 216 
Pudi Adicca Pidari, wife of Arikula 
Kesari and daughter of Tennavan 
Ilango Velar, 125 
Pudoliyarasa, 430 
Puduppakkam, 467 
Pugalaccola-Nayanar, 105 
Pugalendi, 673, 684 
Pugalvippavaragandan, Udayiar Ilada- 
rajar; VIra-£olar, the son of, 188 
Puhar, 22, 30, 31. 36, 78, 79, as 
described in Sangam literature, the 
great emporium of the kingdom, 
80-82; rows of boats in the port of, 

P., 86, 95. See Kaveripatnam. 
Pulaicceri, 369 

Pulaiyas, a low class of people. 88 
Pulakesin, Calukyan leader killed at 
Koppam, 257 
Pulakesin II, 105 


Pulatthinagara, 200, 250, 271, occupa- 
tion by Vijayabahu, 310, 315 
Puligere, (300), 256 
Pullarrur Eyirriyanar, 46 
Pundur; described as a Kadakama- 
nagar or cantonment city, 253, 254 
Punganur, 126 
Pungoyil, Nambi, 664 
Punjai, Siva temple at, 704, 721, V.’c 
Punjarrur, 92 
Punyakumara, 36, 103, 104 
Puramalai-nadu, 504 
Purambadi (outer city), 449, 461 
Pura(m) -nanuru, 37, 43, 50 51. 

57-60n, 72, 88, 92, 95-99n. 
Purantaka (= Siva), 135 
Pu rusakara, a commentary by Krsiu - 
lilasuka, 689 

Purvadesam (= Purvarastra, southern 
Kosala country), 228, 292 
Purvadesam, Gangai, and Kadaram 
conquered by Rajendra Cola, 228, 
246 

Purva-Phalguni, star of RajadhirajaV 
nativity, 259 

Puravu-vari, 467; (P. Varippottagam ' 
469, 504 

Puravuvari-tinaik-kalam, 467, 469 
Puravuaritinaik-kalattuk kankani, 

467 

Purvacaram, 509 
Puspabodhtkas, 722 
Puspaka, elephant, 264 


Qais (or Kish) entrepot of Indian 
trade, 606 

Questions of King Milinda mentions 
Kola Pattana, 23 
Quilon, Ku-lin, 219. 384 


Racamalla, 128 

Radha (= Lada, part of Bengal) 259 
Raichur doab, 197, 198, 224, 272 
Raja-droham (in ) . 427, 480 
Rajadhiraja I, 11018-1054); appointed 
yuvaraja by Rajendra I, 195-197. 
221-226, 228, inflicting a studied and 
barbarous insult on the Calukyas, 
224; his reign, 245-260; his Prasastis, 
247-248; his Ceylon war, 249-53; 
second Calukyan war, 254-58; title 
of Anaimerrunjina, his queens, 
titles and feudatories, 258-59, 273, 
293, performed asvamedha, 451; (his 
gurudeva), 452, 528, 531. 558, 562, 
585, 597, 616, 619, 622, 631 
Rajadhiraja II, 351; Pallavarayanpet- 
tai Inscription of R., 354-60; date 
of his accession discussed, 360; h'-s 



INDEX 


reign, 365-375; his Prasasti, 365; 
Pandyan civil war, 365-372; extent 
of empire, titles and feudatories, 
372-73, 375, 376, 464, 473, 490, 556, 
616, 622 

Rajaditya, Aditya's grandson, 119n, 
also called Kodandarama, Paran- 
takas eldest son; lost his life in 
the war with the Rastrakutas, 121; 
part in resisting the invasion of, 
Krsna in, 129-134, 141, 144, 649 
Rajagambhira, title of Virarajendra, 
272; title of Rajaraja II, 353; Anju- 
kottainadalvan, 370 
Rajagurus, 452 

Rajakesari — measure, 561, 585, 623 
Rajakesarivarman, 495, 509, 561, 640 
Rajakkal-tambiran, (title of Kul. Ill), 
397. 

Rajakunjara, title, 454 
Rajamahendra-deva, Rajakesari, acc. 
before Virarajendra, caused Aha- 
vamalla to tum his back; probably 
son of Rajendra II, 246, 247; Rajen- 
drasolan, 261; heir-apparent c. 1059; 
262, 264, 265, his gifts to Srirangam 
temple; land revenue assessment in 
Kollimalai-nadu; his queen Loka 
Mahadevi, 266 
Rajamahendran-tiruvidi, 266 
Rajamartanda, title of Rajaraja I, 
186 

Rajamayan, Western Calukyan gene- 
ral, 270 

Rajanarayana, a Sambuvaraya, 353 
Rajapura, capital of Bastar, 22 miles 
N. W. of Jagadalpur, 208 
Rajapura, Plates, on Chindaka family. 
208 

Rajaraja I (985-1014), initiated the 
practice of engraving on stone an 
account of the leading events of 
the reign, 4; Ceylon type coins 
appear, 11; conquest of Vengi, 100; 
gloom for four decades before his 
acc., 121, 127, 140, 142, 147, 148, 
built a Pallipadai to Arinjaya, 153, 
156, 157. 158, 160, reign, 168-193; 

his acc., star of nativity Satabhisak, 
his reign a great epoch, 168: Kerala 
war and war against the Pandyas, 
169-70; his southern campaign, 170- 
1: his invasion of Ceylon, 172-3; 
conquest of Ganga country, 174: 
war with the W. Calukyas, 175- 

178; conquest of Vengi, 179-82: 

conquest of the Maldives, and 

Rajendra made yuvaraja, 183; the 
Tanjore temple. 183-4; his adminis- 
tration and religious policy, 185: 
titles and family, 186; his officials 


and feudatories, 187-189; 194, 198, 
202, 208, 214; first Cola mission to 
the Song dynasty, 219; 226, 231, 
243n; the real founder of the Cola 
empire, 245, 285, 313, 318, 321, 325, 
353; his Byzantine royalty, 447-448, 
449, 450, 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 458, 

459, 465, 475, 480, 489, 497, 504, 521, 

522, 525, 527, 528, 530, 534, 535, 539, 

550, 553, 555, 581, 599; (mission to 

China), 605, 618, 622, 630; (perhaps 
Nambi Andar Nambi was his con- 
temporary), 637, 639; (slate of Sai- 
vism), 642; (his toleration), 643, 
650, 678, 682, 695, 696, 697. 703, 710, 
724. 726, 733, 736 

Rajaraja, Eastern Ganga, or Kalinga 
king, 289, 319, 323, 395, 408 

Rajaraja I, Narendra, Eastern Calu- 
kya king. 228, 260, 264, 285, 286, 287, 

Rajaraja II, ula on, 14; 279n; his 
reign, 351-4; peaceful reign, his 
Prasastis, his queens, 351; extent of 
empire: growing weakness of the 
central govt., 352; his capital, titles, 
his feudatories, 353; his successor 
Rajadhiraja, a grandson of Vik- 
rama Cola, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 
359-60, 372, 373, 376, 386. 406, 490, 
595, 686, 717 

Rajaraja III, the tribulations and relief 
of, 5: 7, 391, 407; his acc. and rela- 
tion to Kul. III., 417; his Prasastis, 
417-18; epoch of great political 
changes in South India, 418; dis- 
turbances and conflicts, 418; Pan- 
dyan invasion, 421; Kopperunjinga’s 
part in the overthrow of Cola 
power, 422-23; defeat of the Pan- 
dyas by the Hoysalas, 424: disorder 
and weak government. 426-7; Hoy- 
sala influences in Cola country, 428; 
his feudatories, 429-30; 431, 432, 
433. 435, 436, 457, 468, ^79, 500, 501. 
532, 559, 580, 585. 587 , 616, 715 

Rajaraja Brahmadhiraja, ruler of 
Maharajavadi (7000), 260 

Rajaraja-Caturvedimangalam (Enna- 
yiram) , 630 

Rajarajadeva, Cera, 581 

Rajarajadevan alias Adiyaman of 
Tagadur, 406 

Rajarajadevan (alias Ponparappina 
Magadesan), 401 

Rajaraja Kadavarayan alias Kudal 
Elisai - mogan - mana - valap-peru- 
mal, alias Vanilai-kanda-perumal, 
405 

Rajaraja Karkudi-maraya. 370 

Rajaraja-madai, 614, 618 



798 


INDEX 


Rajaraja-madas, gold coins of the 
Vengi Kingdom, 260 
Rajaraja Maharajan alias Senapati 
Kuravan Ulagalandan, 189 
Rajaraja-mummadi Coda, son of 
Kulottunga I, made Viceroy of 
Vengi, 288, 304, 319 
Rajarajan Kasu, 614; (stone used for 
weighing, at Tiruvarur), 620 
Rajarajapura (Talakad), 327 
Rajarajap-perumballi, a Buddhist 
Vihara at Negapatam built by the 
King of Kadaram, ?18 
Rajarajap-peru-nlrdviyom, 595 
Rajarajapura, new name of Mahatittha 
or Mantota, 173 

Rajarajapuram, (Dadapuram). 643 
Rajardj a-solan-ula, on Kulottunga 
II’s work in Cidambaram, 348; on 
the titles of Rajaraja IT, 353 
Rajaraia-vijayam, 663 
Rajarajendra, title of Virarajendra, 
274 

Rajarajesvara, temple at Mahatittha, 
173 

Rajarajesvaram, temple built by Raja- 
raja I, at Tanjore, 8, 158, 173, 175, 
183, 184, 382; (of Darasuram), 399, 
448, 449, 653-654, 678 
Rajarajesvara-natakam. a drama, 663 
Rajarattha (Northern part of Ceylon) , 
173, 200, 310 

Rajasimha, Cera King, 203 
Rajasimha, Pandya King, his exile at 
the hands of Parantaka 121; 122-124, 
200 

Rajasimha, Pandya, 379 
Rajasraya, title of Rajaraja I, 186 
Rajasraya, title of Virarajendra. 274 
Rajasraya, place at Tanjore, 460 
Rajasraya-Caturvedimangalam, 549 
Rajasundari, daughter of the Cola 
King Rajendra Cola and chief 
queen of Rajaraja, eastern Ganga- 
ruler, 289, 322 
Rajasvam, 599 

Rajavidyadhara Sri Samanta, envoy 
sent by the King of Kadaram to 
Kul. I, 318 

Rajendra I (1012-44), 15n, 51, 124, 127, 
168, 170, as crown prince, his 

southern campaign, and then Maha- 
dandanayaka of the Vengi and 
Gangamandalas, 172; 173, his capture 
of Manyakheta, the Calukyan capi- 
tal, 176; his Rattapadi invasion in the 
time of Rajaraja I, 176; made Yuva- 
raja 1012 A.D., 183; confirmed the 
grant of Anaimangalam by his 
father, 185; 186, reign, 194-244; 
accession of R; extent and organisa- 
tion of his empire, 194; his Prasastis, 


195; Rajadhiraja Yuvaraia, I'fi 
early conquests, 197-8; Cevlor, w, 
199-200; Kerala war, 201; Col 
Pandya Viceroy at Madura and 
date of appointment 203; the 
Calukyan war, 204-5; the Ganges 
expedition, 206-10; capture of 
Sakkarakottam, Madurai-mandalare. 
Namanaikkonam, Paneapalli, Ma - 
sunidesam, Odda country, Southern. 
Kosala and war against Dande. - 
bhukti, 208; Ganges campaign his- 
torical, 209; its effects, 210; tlu 
Kadaram campaign, 211-20; unity 
of the above campaign, 214; Sn 
Vijaya (=Palembang in Sumatra); 
other identifications, 215-18; inter- 
course between the Eastern Islands 
and S. India; embassies from Cola 
Kings to China, 219-20; remaining 
years of reign not peaceful, 221; 
suppression of the rebellions in the 
South by Rajadhiraja, 222; mildness 
of Cola imperialism; Ceylon inva- 
sion, 223; war against Calukya 
Ahavamalla, 224; the closing years, a 
splendid period, 225; Feudatories, 
228; Birudas; his new capital Ganga- 
puri, 227; his queens, 228; note on 
Mahipala, 229-33; Gangaikonda- 
colapuram, a 19th cent description 
(1855) 234-35; the Victorious tiger- 
banner carried far into the norih, 
245, 247, deportation of Mahinda V, 
and annexation of ilamandalam. 
249-50; 272, 285, joy at the birth of 
Prince Kulottunga, 293; 318, 408, 448. 
449, 452, 453, 455, 458, 459, 466, 529, 
530, 548, 551, 573, 575, 588, 599, 600; 
(mission to China) 605, 606, 621, 
623; endows College at Ennayiram, 
630-631; (perhaps contemporary 
with Nairibi Andar Nambi), 637; 638, 
639, 642. 683, 695, 696, 715, 717, 736 

Rajendra II (1052-64), 223, 228, crown- 
ed himself on the field of Koppam, 
246 and 247, 248, 253, 254, 256-59, 
his reign, 260-266; his Prasastis, 260: 
his part at Koppam, 261; battle of 
Mudakkaru same as Kudal Sangam- 
262; close of his reign and his feuda- 
tories, 265-66 ; 267, 270, 405, 473, 477. 
586 

Raiendra II, Calukya-cola Kulottunga 
I. 245, 265; 285-302, 325, 330 

Rajendra III, 400, 407; recognised as 
heir apparent, 426, 431; his succes- 
ses, 432-33; alliance with Coda 
Tikka, 433; Victory over the Vira 
Raksasas of Uttara Lanka, 434; 
Kanci not recovered, 435; relations 
with the Hoysalas, 436; final con- 



INDEX 


799 


quest of Cola power by Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya I, 437; end of his 
reign, 437-38, 468, 616, 619, 715 
Rajendra Coda, son of Gonka II, 329; 
387 

Rajendra-cola Rajakesari, a spurious 
inscription of, 7, 561, 585 
Rajendra-Peruvilai, 539 
Rajendrapuram, 655 
Rajendrasimha, title of Eajaraja I, 
186 

Rajendra-sola Brahmamarayan alias 
Senapati Sri Krsnan Raman of 
Amankudi mentioned in the larger 
Leyden grant, 189 

Rajendra-sola Mavali-vanarajan, a 
throne in Gangaikonda-solapuram, 
274 

Rajendrasolan madai, 614 
Rajendrasolan (Keralan) alias 
Nisadarajan, 375 
Rajendrasolap-periya-eri of 
Punganur, 583 

Rajendra-solap-perumballi (a Bud- 
dhist Vihara built at Negapatam by 
the King of Kadaram), 318 
Rajendra-sola Mavali-vanarayar, an 
official under Rajadhiraja I, 260 
Rajiga, lord of Vengi (Kulottunga I), 
Somesvara combined with him 
against Vikramaditya VI, 294 : 296, 
306, 335n 

Raksasa, a form of marriage, 64 
Ramaghata (— Iramakudam) Princi- 
pality round Mt, D’Eli or Musaka 
hill, 222, 223 
Ramagrama, 333 
Ramanatha, Hoysala, 436, 687 
Ramanathan koyil, 453 
Ramanna (desa) , the Talaing country 
of Burma, 213; 216; 311 
Ramanuja, 13, his persecution con- 
nected with the extinction of the 
direct line of the Colas, 295, 296, 
297, 636, 639 (persecution of), 644- 
645, 648, 681 

Ramdnu]abhasya (provision for 
expounding), 629, 631. 640 
Ramanuja-nurrandadi, 681-682 
Ramayana 11, 90, 629, 631, 681; 

(Kamban’s), 670, 671-672; scenes of, 
735 

Ramesvaram, Krsna Ill’s march to 
132, 156; 327, 366 384, 425 
Ranabhima-mangalam, 505 
Ranastapundi grant of Vimaladitya, 
286 

Ranasura, Rajendra I’s general cap- 
tured the treasures of, 207-9; 232 
Ranganatha, Lord, 106, 266 
Ranganatha temple at Srirangam, (its 
fifth wall, a temple of Rama, etc.. 


built by Vikrama Cola), 345; 638; 
Tirumangai’s part in its construc- 
tion, 656 

Rastrakutas, 10, 100, 113, 114, 120, R. 
invasion of Cola empire, 131-34; 152, 
156, 159, 168, their disappearance 
about 973 a.d. 175; 178, 198 and no 
evidence of their rule over Maga- 
dha, 229, 447, 467 
Rastrskuta (inroad), 600, 641 
Rathakciras, 527 

Rattapadi 7! 2 lakh country, captured 
by Rajaraja, 175 and Rajendra’s in- 
vasion, 176; the ancestral territory 
of the W. Calukyas, 178; invasion by 
Rajendra I, 197, 205, 206; 226, 256, 
268, 272. See Irattapadi, Rattapadi, 
attempt to extend Cola-empire into 
R. given up, 301 
Rattiga, 172 

Ravi-deva, dandanayaka. 433 
Ravikulamanikya, title of 
Rajaraja I, 186 

Ravitadanakoppa, Narasimha's camp 
at, 424 

Rg-veda Bhasya of Venkata Madhava, 
687 

Renadu, Telugu Cola country, 101; 
genealogy of R. Colas, 103; 104, 105, 
106, 127 

Revaka, sister of Krsna III, 128 
Rohana, hill country S. E. of Ceylon, 
124, Mahinda V, took refuge here, 
173; independent of the Tamil Pro- 
vince and ruled by Vikramabahu I, 
200, 250, 251, 253, 271; freed by Kitti, 
310 

Roman coins (finds of), 10, 59 
Rsisamudaya of Jina Kanci, 656 
Rudramahesvaras, 490 
Rudrangannanar, Kadiyalur, 75, 86 
Rum (Byzantium) , 460 
Rupavatara, 630, 686 
Ryali plates of Vijayaditya VII, 286, 
289, 291 


Sabha, 477, 490, 492-493, constitution 
and working of 494-503. 504, 505; 
Procedure 506-507, 508-511, 513, 514, 
527, 529, 536, 645 
Sabhaip-podu, 586 
Sabhaivilai, 602 

Sabhaviniyogam (local cesses) , 502, 
524 

Saciva, 465 

iSadagopar-andadi; work of Kamban, 
672 

6adaiyam, festival, 171 
Sadaiyan, Patron of Kamban, 671, C72 
Sadgurusisya (Pupil of six gurus) 687 
Sahyadri mountain. 113. 115. 202 



INDEX 


Sailendra King, 185; builds Cudamani- 
Vihara, 219 

Saivas, the 640, 643, 644, Saiva Sid- 
dhanta Sastras, 679-680 
Saivaparibhasa of Jnanasivacaiya, 688 
Saiva Siddhanta, 688 
Saivism, 4, 12, 452, 453, 635, 636, 637. 
639, 641, (state of S. under Raja- 
raja I), 642, 647; literature of Tamil, 
S. 677-680 

Saiyya mountain, 312 
Saka, era, 9 

Sakala-bhuvanasraya, title of Vira- 
rajendra, 274 
Sdkkai-kdni, 575 

Sakkarakkottam seized by Rajendra I, 
207, identified with Cakrakotya, 208; 
292, 293 

Sakkasenapati, 121, 122 
Saktibhadra, 687 

Saktivarman I. Eastern Calukya, 180; 
war with Coda Bhima; his exile and 
restoration, 181, 182 
Saktivarman II, E. Calukya. 286, 287, 
289 

Sakyaraksita of Orissa, 325 
Salabhoga, 570. 571 
Salai, 170, 174, 313, 459 
Saliyanagarattar (tom) , 503 
Samantas, 143, 226, 368 
Samanta Bhoja, 435 
Samantasena, taken to be the founder 
of the Sena dynasty, 210 
Samantan Adiyaman, 406 
Samarakesari title, 454 
Sambanar koyil, 371 
Sambandar, 52, 185, 636, 637, see 
Nana S. 

Samburaja, 434, 435 
Sambuvarayas, The, of the Sengeni 
family, 347, 375, 401, 430 
Samudragupta, 104 

Samudra Gopayyadandanayaka, 423, 
424, 428 

Sandayan Tiruvayan, Vaidumba chief, 
conquered by Parantaka I, 127 
Sandimattivu, 201, 202 
Sandu-vigraham, 472 
San-fo-tsi ( = Che-li-fo-che, 

Sri Vijaya), 214, 215, 217, 219, 317 
Sangam age, 2, 3, 8, 11, Cola Kings of 
the Sangam, age 31; 40, 48, 55, 63-99, 
100-109; 447, 451, 458, 662, 666, 667, 
668 

Sangamaraja, 376 

Sangappai, Somesvara’s queen captur- 
ed by the Cola Rajendra II, 257 
Sangamayya, 224 

Sangara, vessels made of single logs 
bound together, 85 
Sangili-Kanadarava, 252 
Sangrama Raghava, title of 
Parantaka I, 122 


Sangrama -Vij ay ottimga-Varm an . 
King of Kadaram, 211; a succe-.. 
of Maravijayottunga- V arman, 2'.:. 
214, 272 X 
Sankara, 63|A647, 662 
Sankaran, chieftain of Puduvai, 689 
Sankarappadiyar, 489 
Sankarasolan, 376 
Sankarasolan Via, 376 
Sankarpa-nirakaranam, 680 
Sanulu, 490 

Saptamatargal, Sri, shrines of, 646 
Saptapadi, 90 

Saradatanaya, of Bhava Prakasa. 683 
Saradlya, 688 
Sarasvati, image of, 729 
Sarasvatiyandadi of Kuttan, 670 
Sariradandam (Corporal Punishment' 
511 

Sarvalokasraya, title of 
Visnuvardhana-Vijayaditya, 287 
Sarvalokasraya (title of Kul I), 330 
Sarvalokasraya Sri Visnu Vardhan 
Maharaja alias Calukya Vijayaditya 
Vikkiyanna, 203 
Sarvanukramani, 687 
Sarva Siva, raj a -guru of Rajendra I 
452; 642 

Sathakopa (alias Nammalvar), 639, 
672 

Sati, 91-2, 553-554 
Satiyaputa, 21 

Satru-bhayankarat-terindavelam, 451 
Satsahasra coimtry, 330 
Satta-ganam, 489 
Sattamangalam, 493 
Rattan, author of Manimekalai, 23 
Sattandaiyar, 50 

Sattiyawai, queen of Somesvara 
captured by the Cola King, 257 
'Satyasadha Sutras , Provision for the 
study of, 631 

Satyasraya, W. Calukya, King, his 
accession and war with Rajaraja I. 
175; the ‘slayer of the Tamil’; he 
rolled back the tide of Cola inva- 
sion, 176, 177-8, fight with Rajendra 
I, 197-8 

Satyavacakas, the 595 
Sava -muvap -peradu, 6 
Savers, 312, 313 

Sekkilan Ammaiyappan Parantaka- 
devan alias Karikalasola Pallava- 
rayan, 676 

Sekkilar, 12, 51, 53, 106, 349, 474, 475; 
his account of Adanur, 568-369, 
655, 672; his life and work, 674- 
676, 717, 718 

Sekkilar Nayanar Puranam, by Uma- 
pati Slvacarya, 674 

Sellinagar (now Panaiyur in Tinne- 
velli dist.), Nambi’s birth place, 677 



INDEX 


801 


Sembiyan, applied to the king who 
rescued the dove from the falcon, 
20, 31; Ranadhira (Pandya) as- 
sumed the title of, 105 
Sembiyan Mahadevi (Tj.), 453, 500 
Sembiyan-mahadeviyar, queen of 
Gandaraditya and mother of Ut- 
tama Cola, 142, 152; village bearing 
her name, 160,169, 187,453, 641. 643 
Sembiyan Tamila-Vel, title bestowed 
on Vikki- Annan, 115 
Sembon (red gold), 620 
Semponmari (Ramnad dist.) battle 
of, 313 

Sena, Senapati of Mahinda IV, 154 
Sena dynasty, 210 
Senapatis, 456, 463 
Sendan Divakaram , 685 
Senganan, 52, 53, 55, 72; see Koc- 
cenganan, 

Sengeni line, 347, 373, 375, 401 
Sengundar, 669 
Senjiyar, 347 

Senjiyar-kon Korrandai, 673 
Sennipperaraiyan, his fight with the 
Pandya and Ceylon troops at Velur, 
123 

Seralan (Cera), 381 
Sermadevi (Tin.), 455 
Seraman Perumal, 106 
Seris (= wards) named alter the 
titles of the king and other members 
of the royal family, 186, 489, 496; 
gods of, 646 
Seruppali-yerinda, 49 
Setcenni-Nalangtlli, 37 
Seunas, The, 419 
Sevai-kavalar, (Sekkilar), 675 
Seven mothers, The, (sapta matar- 
gal), 646 

Sevur, battle of, Aditya IPs part in, 
151, 153-4; 404 see Cevur 
Shi-lo-lo-cha yin-to-lo-chu-lo, Sri 
Raja Indra Cola; 2nd mission to 
China in 1033 A.D., 219, 606 
Shiyali (Tj.), 427 

Sholingur rock inscription, 125, 145 

Sho-po (Java), 219 

Siang-fu period. 606 

Sibi, Cola legend of the dove, 8. 20, 

90 

Siddhalingamadam (S.A.), 130 
Siddhanta Ratnakara , 399. 

Siddhanta Saravali of Trilocana Siva, 
642 

Siddhanta Siromani, 623 

Siddhi (1000), Sidhout country 104 

Sihalas, 311, 314 

Silappadikaram. 3, 31, 36, 54, 64, on 
kulus and ayams, 69, 77, 78, 80, 90. 

94, 665, 683, 686 

Sllavatf, mother of Kopperunjinga, 402 

C. 101 


Simhaias, 169, 249 

Simhavisnu, 100, conquers Cola 

county ifi5 

Simhavisnu (Renadu Colas), 103 
Sinakkan of Araisur, 674 
Sindas, used the tiger-crest, 20 
Sinda, the eponymous ancestor of the 
Nagas, 20 
Sinddmam, 666-667 
Sindavadi (1000), 255, 258 
Sindhu-yugmantara desa, identified 
by Hultzsch with the land between 
the Krishna and Godavari, 320 
Singalantaka, title of Rajaraja I, 1S3 
S ingalas, 172 
Singalavan, 380 

Singan, the king of warlike Kosalai, 
263 

Singanam, 307, 308 
Singana Dandanayaka, 433 
Singanan, 263, 307 
Sinnamannur Plates, 105, 121, 125 
Sippuli nadu, 458 
Siraf, 459, 460, 604-605 
Sirranaiccur, 510 
Sirriyarrur, 466 
Sirudanam, 455, 463, 464 
Srudanattup-perundaram. 483 
Sirukottai, 405 

Siriyavelar, Parantakan, his part in 
Ceylon war, 154 
Sirukudi, 40 
Sirukulattur, 127 

!§Itpuli-ni>du, 127, 123- conquered 

by the chief of Karu-kudi, 178 
Sittannavasal, 736, 737 
Sitti, 268 

Siva-brahmanas, 427, 489, 507 
'Siva Devale’ — the Siva temple in 
Polonnaruwa, 173 
Sivadharma, 629, 640 
Siva-droham. 427, 479 
Siva-j na-bodha, commentary by 
Jnanasivacarya of Suryanarkoyil, 
688 

Sivakama Sundari temple, (Ci- 
dambaram), 715 
Sivaka-sindamani, 672 
Siva-Nana-Bodam of Arunandi, 679 
Siva-Nana-Sittiyar, 679 
Sivapadasekhara, title of Rajaraja I, 
186 

Sivappirakasavi, 680 
Sivapuri (Rd.), 375, 503 
Siyagangan. Amarabharana, Ganga 
patron of Pavanandi, 401 
Siyyali (Shiyali), princes of Cola 
descent, 101 
Skandasisya, 111. 696 
Smrtis. (influence of), 477, 487 
Sola-Gangan. a feudatory of Rajen- 
dra III, 438, 574-575 



802 


INDEX 


Sola-Kannakuceiyan, 261 
Sola-Kerala(deva) — (title of Kul. Ill), 
382, 398 

Soia-Kerala-maligai, a palace in 
Gangaikondacolapuram, 274 ,449 
Soia-Xeiala-mandaiam, (Kongu), 398 
Sola-kula-madeviyar, queen of Ra- 
jendra III, 438 

Solakon, a leudatorv of Vikrama 
Cola, 347 

Sola-kulavalli-pattinam, (Negapatam) 
318 

Sola-madevi-Caturvedimangalam, 597 
Sola-maligai near Palaiyaru, 449 
Solamandalam, 368 
Solamuvenda-Velan, 467 
Sola-muvenda-Velar Adigarigal, 539 
Solan-Nalluruttiran, 50 
Solan Sorudaiyal alias Kadavan 
Mahadevi, Kul. I, queen, 333 
Solapuram record, 129, 130 
Soliya Kasus, 619 
Sollani, 684 

Somadeva, 306; see Somesvara II. 
Somaladevi, Narasimha’s queen, 429 
Somanatha-Caturvedimangalam, 576 
Somasiddhanta (provision for ex- 
pounding), 629, 640 
Somesvara I, Calukya Trailokyamalla 
Ahavamalla, war with Rajendra I, 
224-5, 248; second Calukyan war 
of Rajadhiraja I, 253-58; Virarajen- 
dra’s war with S., 267,-70, 272, 237, 
290, 393 

Somesvara II, elder brother of Vik- 
ramaditya VI, his war with Vira- 
rajendra, 272-4; Rajiga induced 
him to combine with him and tight 
against Vikramaditya VI; loss of 
the throne, 294, 305, 3C6, 308 
Somesvara III, Viceroy of Vikrama- 
ditya VI, at Kollipaka, 197-8 
Somesvara, Vira, Hoysala protector 
of the dynasty of the Pandyas, 
defeat of Cola Rajendra III, 432-433, 
435, 436, 437 
Somur, 456 

Sonadu-valangiyaruliya, title of Sun- 
dara Pandya, Maravarman, 393 
Song, dynasty of China, 214; 1st mis- 
sion to China from Chulien or Cola 
in 1015 A.D., 219 

Sopatma of the Periplus, same as §o- 
pattinam of Tamil literature — iden- 
tical with Markanam, 22 
Sorai nomads, 22-3 
Soremati, The battle of, (850 aj».), 
127 

Soringae, 22 

Sravana Aslesa, asterism of Virara- 
jendra’s birth, 274 
Sreni (militia), 457 


Sribhoja, wrong form for San-fo-tsi, 
215 

Sri - bhujagavara - bhusana - Mian,.. - 
rajulu, a title of one of the Chin- 
daka family, 208 
Sri-Culamani-Varmadeva, 214 
Srikantha of Brahma mimamsa bhv - 
sya, 688 

Sri-Kantha (a deity), 646 
Srikantha-Caturvedimangalam, Sabna 
of, 477, 509, 540, 620 
Srikantha Sambhu, father of Isvara- 

Sri Mara Sri-Vallabha, (815-862 A.O.). 
105 

Sri-muga-vetti, 470 
Sri-mukh(g)am, 466, 469, 496 
Sri-Mulavasam, in Malabar, centre cf 
Buddhism, 657 
Srinatha (Nathamuni), 638 
Srinivasanallur (Tri.), 495, 697 
Sri Purambiyam battle of, 110, U 2, 
113, 120 

Sri-Purana of Aludaiyanambi, 640 
Srirangam, 345, 380, 381, 382. 386, 389. 
396, 422, 423, 438 

Srirangam Koyilolugu, on Vikrama 
Cola’s gift to the temple of Ranga- 
natha at Srirangam, 345 
Srirangam temple, 639; Tirumangai 3 
part in building it, 656 
Srivaisnavas, 489, 639 
Sri Vailabha of Ceylon, 369, 370 
Srivallabha, Pandya king, his queens 
gift to the Tiruvisalur temple, 2t6; 
his son killed by Virarajendra, 2b7, 
314 

Srivijaya, 211-17; mission to the Cm- 
nese govt, of the kings of S., 219. 
272, (= Palembang), Kul. I’s con- 
nection with 316-18, 458 
Sri Visaya, 185 

Sruti-sukti-mald by Haradattacarya, 

Sseu-li-ma-lo-pi (= Sri-Mara-Vija- 
yottunga-Varman) , 214 
Sthanapati, 490 
Sthanattar, 490, 514, 556 
Sthanu-Ravi, Cera king, 115 
Stri-Rajya, 596 
Subhadeva, 53 
Subhadra-Dhananjaya, 688 
Subrahmanya, image of, 646 
Sucindram, 331, 378 
Sudi Plates, the ‘spurious’, 132 
Sugatur (Mys.), 343 
Sukhasanamurti, image of, 728 
Sukranitisara, on portraits, 724 
Siilamani, 662, 682 

Suiamani-Padma-Vihara, 460, (Cuda- 
mani Varma), 466 



INDEX 803 


Sumati. a disciple of Buddhadatta. 
101 

Sumatra, trade with Malabar in the 
hands of the Tamils, 85, 86, 214-5, 
217, Tamil inscription of 1088 a.d.. 
220, 318, 596, 608 

Sundara-Cola-Catm. (= Sucindram) 
203 

Sundara Cola Pandya, Jatavarman, 
Cola-Pandya Viceroy, 228 
Sundara-Cola-Pandya, Udaiyar, 573 
Sundara Cola Parantaka II, 141, had 
title of Madhurantaka, 145; 146-7, 
made his son Aditya II co-regent 
soon after his acc.,149; reign 153-5S; 
a domestic tragedy — the assassina- 
tion of Aditya II, 157; his son was 
Arumolivarman, alias Rajaraja I, 
168, 448, 453, 465, 577 
Sundara-Colavinnagar-atulasalai — a 
hospital at Tanjore endowed by 
Kundavai, 450 

Sundaramurti, 51, 53, 106. 185, 405; 
his dispute with Siva, 474-475, 476, 
675, 678 

Sundara Pandya, contemporary of 
Rajadhiraja I, chief of the con'e- 
deracy to throw off Cola yoke, 222, 
225 

Sundara Pandya I, Jatavarman face. 

1251 a.d.), 429, 430, 432, 436, 437 
Sundara Pandya, Maravarman, ace. 
1216 A.D.. carried fire and sword into 
the Cola country — and performed a 
virabhiseka at Ayirattali, 386, 390, 
393, 395-397, 398, 4C0. 419, 421, 425, 
432 

Sundara Pandya II, Maravarman acc. 
1238, 432 

Sundari, mother of Madhava, 687 
Sungam, its meaning; its abolition 
by Kul. I, 331, 599 
Sungamum Karaiyum Seygira, 472 
Sungandavirtta, title of Kul. I, 331 
Sung government of China, 605; (S. 
annals). 606 

Sura Nayaka (alias Amarabharana 
Siyaganga), 401 
Surram, the eighteen, 69 
Surya, image of, 646, 729 
Suryasiddhanta, 623 
Surya Varman I, (1002-1050), the 
illustrious king of Kambuja, 220 
Suttamalli — daughter of Kul. I, 316, 
333 

Svamidevar (a holy man), 368; (Udai- 
yar S, the guru of Kul. Ill), 452 
Syria, 460 

Ta-Chung period, 606 
Tadigaipadi, conquered by Raiaraja I. 
174: attack on, 175 


Tagadur (Dharmaouri). 326. 391. 400. 
406 

Taila II, Ahavamalla, restores the 
ancient Calukya line; claims vic- 
tory against the Cola King; his 
death, 175; 177, 205 
Takkanaladam, conquest of, 195; 207 
Takkayagapparani of Ottakkuttan, 14, 
266, 272, 343, 348, 463, 669 
Takkola of the Milinda-Panha in the 
Malay peninsula (= Talaittakko- 
lam). 216 

Takkolam (N.A.) temple of, 114; 

battle of, 130-34; 159, 503 
Takola of Ptolemy (— Talaitak- 
kolam = modem Takuapa) , 216 
Takuapa, Tamil inscription at, 459 
Tala II, 179-80 

TcUaccemmai (fineness prescribed by 
the royal treasury), 529 
Talai, Pandanus, 71, 79 
Talaiccangadu (Tj.), 490 
Talaikonda, meaning discussed, 143 
Talainavar (Tj.), 499 
Talakad, 115, 175; captured by (he 
Hoysalas from the Colas, 326, Raja- 
rajapura, 327 

Talakadu-gcnda, title of Bittiga 
Visnu-Vardhana, 326 
Talaing country of Burma, 213, 216 
Talaittakkolam, 216. See Takola, 
Takkola 

Talavakara Sama, 630, 633 
Taliccens at Tanjore, occupied by 
hetaerae, 450 
Tamappal-kannanar, 36 
Tambalagama, 311 

Tamil civilisation, its high water- 
mark under the Cola empire, 2; 63; 
influence of Arya ideas on, 89 
Tamil-navalar-caritai, 672, 684 
Tammusiddha(i), son of Erasiddhi, 
388, 389. 390, 595 
Tamralinga, 217 
Tandabutti, 207 
Tandal. 494 

Tanduvan (Collector), 499 
Tanjai (Tanjakkur in Maranadu, near 
Madura), 674 
Tanjai, 125; 394, 649 
Tanjai-mamani-temple at Tanjore, 450 
Tanjai-vanan-kovai, 673, 674, 685 
Tanjakkur; the Tanjai of the Kovai, 
674 

Tanjavur, Patnam, 114; 116, 132, 

Kurram 178; not consecrated by 
Uevaram hymnists, 184, 449-450, 461, 
537; (T. Peruvali), 594; Tanjore, 2, 
8; capture of, by Vijayalaya III; 12C; 
‘taken’ by Kr$na III, 132; 134, 152, 
image of Vanavan-mahadevi set up 
in the temple, 156; 173, the T. tern- 



INDEX 


<?04 


pie was enriched by treasures cap- 
tured in the war with the Calukyas, 
175; inscriptions of the 29ih year of 
Rajaraja I, 183: description of T. 
temple. 184; decorative sculptures on 
the walls cf T. temple, 185; 187. 18S. 
189, 230, 275; 345. 398, 400, 430. 448, 
450, 453. 556, 558, 638. 642, 642, icons 
presented to temple of, 646; great 
temple at, 652-654; description of T. 
temple, 710-713, 722, 728, Painting 
in T. temple, 737-742 
Tanic-cevagam of Udaiyar 
Kodandarama, 451 
Taniyur, 465 
Tan-ma-ling, 215, 217 
Tapatlsamvarana, 688 
Taranath. the Tibetan historian, 21 
Tarkika-Raksa, 688 
Ta-shi, Arabs, 219 

Tattarakkani (goldsmiths’ holding) , 
575 

Tayatonga, title, 454 
Tchou-lien (Cola), 317 
Teki, plates of Rajaraja Coda-ganga, 
288, 291; 319 

Telingakulakala, title of Rajaraja I, 
186 

Telinga Viman of Kulam, 320; 
(Bhiman), 342; 366 

Tellaru (battle of, defeat of Rajaraja 
III, by Kopperunjinga), 424 
Telugu Academy plates of Sakti- 
varman II, 286, 289 

Telugu-codas, The, 3, 36, 102-105, 387- 
390, 400, 419, 430, 433, 434, 435, 436. 
437, 438, 505, 616 
Telugu Vidya, 388 
Tembeling (Temiling), 217 
Temple, as a religious institution, 641- 
642; the role of 652-654; origin of 
694-695; classification. 697; main 
features of C. temples, 703-704 
Tennavan Apattudavigal. 455 
Tennavan Ilangovelar of the Kodum- 
balur line, 125, 155 
Tervanmalaiyan, a chieftain. 48 
Tigulas (Tamils), 327 
Ti-hua-kia-lo, King of Chulien, 316, 
317 

Tikka I (alias Gandagopala) Tikkanr- 
pati (alias Tirukkalattideva) , 389; 
430, 433-434, 435, 436 
Tikkana Somayaji, 434, 435 
Tillainagar (Cidambaram), 348 
Tillaisthanam, 503 
Tinais, the five, 64 
Tiraimur, 506 
Tirappu, 505 
Tirimalakke, 366 
Tirthamalai, 504 

Tiruccalal of Manikkavasagar, 638 


Tirnccirrambilik-kovai. 667 686 
Tiruccirrambalam-Udaiyan Pervc ■ 
nambi, the elder Pallavarayar. >7.-' 
Tiruccurralai, 189 
Tiru-Nana-Sambandar. 105. See 
Sambandar 

Tirukkadaiyur (Tj.) , 380 
Tirukkalar (Tj.), 491 
TirukkaHrruppadaiyar, 679 
Tirukkalattideva (Tikkanrpa of 
literature) , 389 

Tirukkalukkunram inscription of ti.e 
27th year of Rajakesari, 111; 114 
Tirukka.Tnakkdtta.rns, 719 
Tirukkannappadevar Tirumaram. 6.3 
Tirukkarrali-piccan, earliest date-, 
portrait of the Cola period, 725, 72 
Tiruk-korra-vasal, 522 
Tirukkattalai, temple at, 701-702 
Tirukkovai of Manikkavasagar. 642 
668, 674 

Tirukkovalur, 302, 405 
Tirukkoyilur, 490 

Tiruk-kuda-mukkil (Kumbakonam) . 
489 

Tiruk-kural, 680. 686 
Tirumadai-vilagam (temple premises' 1 , 
532 

Tirumalavadi (Tri.), 196, 228, 349; 

temple of 697 
Tirumalai (hill), 406 
Tirumalai rock inscription of Rajendra 
I, 229, 231 

Tirumaligaittevar, 678 
Tirumaluvadi (Tri.), 332; see Tit" i - 
malavadi. 

Tirumandiram of Tirumular, 678 
Tiru-mandira-olai, 322, 427, 468, 499 
Tiru-mandira-olai-nayagam 468 
Tirumangai Alvar, 35, 51, 52 54, 106- 1 . 
636, 643, 656 

Tirumanjana Salai (coronation haUh 
318 

Tirumanianattarvelam, 449 
Tirumanikuli (S.A.), 381, 384, 406, 7” 
Tirumannivalara, introduction c : 

Rajendra I, 195, 197. 200, 203,^ 231. 
cited in the commentary on Vtr«- 
soliyam, 683 

Tirumavalavan, Perum, 49, 50 
Tirumayam, cave temple of, 736, 737 
Tirumeykappar, 450 
Tirumugam (royal letter), 467, 469 
Tirumukkudal, (inscription of Vira- 
rajendra), 468, 472, 557; (Provision 
for a College and Hospital), 632; a 
mandapa named after Sembiyan 
Mahadevi at, built by Rajaraja I, 
187 

Tirumular — author of Tirumandiram, 
678 

Tirumunaippadi (nadu) , 129 



INDEX 


805 


Tirurr.urai-kanda-purdnam. 675. 678 
Tirunagesva.'gni (Tj.), 153, 489; 

SekkJar devoted to the deity of, 
675 

Tirunamanallur, 267, 274 
Tiru-nana-ssmbar.dar, 678, see Sam- 
bandar 

Tirunaraiyur, the Sabha of, 491 
Tirunarayana-bhatta alias Kavi- 
kumuda-candra. author of Kulot- 
tunga-cola-caritai, 664 
Tirunedundandagam. 640 
Tirunavukkarasu, 160 
Tirunlrruc-cola, (Kul. I’s surname), 
331; a title of Kul. II, 349 
Tiruppadiyam. singing of, 558, 559, 
633; (sung by a choir of 50 persons 
to the accompaniment of musical 
instruments). 653 

Tiruppalaivanam (Chingleput) , 388 
Tiruppalanam (Tj.), 458. 503 
Tirupparkkadal. 497 
Tiruppavitram, supply of. 642 
Tirupper, 344 
Tiruppugalur, 397 
riruppurambiyam (Tj.), 348 
Tiruttakkadeva, Jain poet author of 
Sivahasinddmani, 666 
Tiruttindisvara, The, temple of Tin- 
divanam (S.A.), 706 
Tiruttondar puranam. ( Periya 
puranam), 674 
Tiruttondattogai 

675. 678 

Tiruttorram-Uclaiya-mahddeva, brick 
temple of, built by Paluvettaraiya 
chieftain, Randan Maravan. 696 
Tiruttottam-Udaiyar, temple in Me- 
lappaluvur, 187 
Tiruvadi (S.A.), 333, 344 
Tiruvadiyar, 502 

Tiruvaduturai, medical school at, 632 
Tiruvaiya-Isvara, temple of 
Tiruvallam, 188 

Tiruvaiyan Sankaradeva of Ganga 
descent, built Tiruvaiya Isvara at 
Tiruvallam. 188 

Tiruvalangadu (N.A.) , grant or plates 
8 51, 53. 113, 116, 131. 154, 141, 
143 144. 148, 151, 154, 158, 168. 169. 
172^ 176, 195, 201, 203, 204. the 
Ganges expedition under Rajendra 
I 206- 208-9, 211, 227. 229, 231, 373, 
466, 470. 507, 541, 587, 600, 602. 664 
Tiruvalanjuli (Tj.). 186, 187 
Tiruvallsvaram (Tin.), 455, 456, icons 
of 728 

Tiruvallam (N.A.) Tiruvaiya Isvara 
temple built, 188 
Tiruvalundur- (nadu) , 372 
Tiruvalluvar, author of the Rural 


Sundaramurti, 


connected with Elela Singa. 29n. 

66-7, 71, 76 

Tiruvannamalai, 159, 397. 399. 401, 404, 
405, 603 

Tiruvarangattu Amudanar, disciple of 
Ramanuja, 681 

Tiruvarur, stone monument of the 
story of the Calf and the Prince, 
29n; the Periyapuranam. localises 
the calf legend here, 57n; 295, 345, 
383, 473 

Tiru-varut-payan, 680 
Tiruvasagam, The, of Manikkavasa- 
gar, 678 

Tiruvayk-kelvi, 460 
Tiruvaymoli,' 559, 637, 638 
Tiruvayan Srikantha, Vaidumba king, 
127 

Tiruvembavai of Manikkavasagar, 638 
Tiruvendipuram, 5, 397; T. inscription 
on the Hoysala intervention in the 
Cola kingdom, 422-424, 428 
' Tiruvenkadu (Tj.), 142, 267, 427 
Tiruvennainallur (SJC), 402, 474, 475, 
476 

Tiruverumbur, 477, 509 
Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj.). 357, 380. 506 
Tiruvidaimarudil, 456 
Tiruvidaiyattam, 490, 505, 511 
Tiruvidaivayil inscription containing a 
new Devaram hymn, 6, 637 
Tiruvilaiyadal Puranam of Perum- 
barrap-puliyur Nambi, 674, 677 
Tiruvisaippa of Gandaradittar, 188 
Tiruvisalur, performance of tulabhara 
and hiranyagarbha by Rajaraja 
and his queen, 186; the sculptural 
representation of a king and queen 
may be of Rajaraja. 189n; 202, tem- 
ple, 226 

Tiruvorriyur, 127-8, 146, limit of Cola 
rule under the successors of Paran- 
taka I, 178; 199, 226, 248, 331, 353, 
381, 473, 490; Vyakarana school at, 
632-633 

Tiruvottur (N.A.), 344 
Tiruvundiyar, 679 
Tiruvunnaligaik-kanapperumakkal, 

489 

Tiru-vunnaligai-sabhai, 489 
Tisaiyayirattu-Ainnurruvar, a Mer- 
cantile Corporation of South India, 
319 

Tittan, 50 

Tittu (document), 467, 469 
Tolkappiyam, 64, 93, 462 
Toludagaiyur, held by Solakon, sacked 
by the Hoysalas, 423 
Tondaimanad near Kalahasti, place of 
Aditya’s death, 115 
Tondamanad, 453 
Tondaman-nallur, 423 



INDEX 


Tondaimandalam. settlement of agra- 
rian colonies in, by Karikala, 36; 
Cola conquest of 111; 113, 128-31, 
145, 148-9, 151, 267, 404; Kopperun- 
jinga ruler of, 424; 465, 467, 674, 675 
Tondaimandalangonda Pallavandar 
alias Kadavarayar, 404 
Toiidai-mandala-satakam, 673 
Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan, ruled over 
Tondai-nad, 36 
Tondai-nad, 36, 113 
Tondamanallur, 423 
Tondar-sirparavuvar, title conferred 
on Sekkilar, 676 
Tondi, 367, 368 

Trailokya-mahadeviyar, Perumanadi- 
queen of Parthivendravarman, 149 
Trailokya-mahadevi, queen of Kul. I, 
332 

Trailokyamalla title of Vikram- 
ditya VI, 273 

Trailokyamalladeva, Somesvara I, 255 
Trailokyam Udaiyar, title of the queen 
of Rajadhiraja I, 259 
Trailokyasara, a fine ruby presented 
to Nataraja of Cidambaram, 274 
Tranquebar, 19 

Tribhuvana-Cakravartin, title of 
Kul. 1, 302, 330 

Tribhuvana Cakravartin, Karikala- 
coladeva, the title of Rajadhiraja II, 
372 

Tribhuvanacoladeva, title of Kul. Ill, 
398 

Tribhuvana -mahadeviyar, 160. See 
Orattanan Sorabbaiyar 
Tribhuvana-Mahadeviyar, queen of 
Rajendra I, 186, 228 
Tribhuvana-madevi (alias Kampa- 
madevi), Kul I’s queen, 333 
Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar, big bazaar 
of, at Tanjore, 449 
Tribhuvanamalla Mallicoda, Maha- 
mandalesvara of Hemavati, 400-1 
Tribhuvanamalla Pandya, 306 
Tribhuvanaviradeva, title of Kul III, 
382: T. Coladeva, 397; Periya-devar 
T., 400 

Tribhuvanesvara, temple at Tribhu- 
vanam, 381-2, 398; Ramayana reliefs 

Tribhuvani (Pondy.), 302, 492, 511; 
College at, 631 

Trichinopoly rock, 105; T. inscription 
of Maranjadaiyan ib; 198 
Trigarta, 347 

Trilocana Sivacarya, 210, 642-643 
Trilokasundari of the Kalinga royal 
race and queen of Vijayabahu, 311 
Trinetra Pallava, 36 
Tripura (the three cities) burnt by 
Siva, 99 


Tripurantaka. icon of, 727 
Tripurantakam (Karnul), 323, 4i‘J 
4d2, 437 

Tripurasundari, image of, 727 
Tripuri, 309 
Trisanku, 201 
Trisulam, 331 

Tukkarai, father of Nannamarayar, 15: 
Tulabharas performed by Parantaka i 
135; performed by Rajaraja I, -■ 
Tiruvisalur, 186, 451-2 
Tundira (Tondaimandalam), 274 
Tunga, 265 

Tungabhadra, 176; the boundar; 
between the Colas and the Calukyas 
in the days of Rajaraja, 177, 197-6. 
205, 224, 245, 255, 265, 268, 272, £73 
295; 304, 306, 307, 308, 323, 448 
Tungeyil-erinda-todittotcembiyan, £1 
Turaigal (departments), 355 
Tuttan, Calukyan leader, 257 
Tuvarai (Dvaraka), 350 
Tuvarapati-velan alias Kandan 
Mangalattevar, 375 

Tuvarapati-velan (Rajendrasola) alias 
Kandan Sundarattolan, 375 
Tyagapataka, Vikrama Cola's queen, 

345 

Tyagamavinodan, a title which recalls 
the surname of Kulottunga III, 672 
Tyagavalh, (with title of Puvana- 
mulududaiyal, chief queen in the 
later years of Kul I), 332 
Tyagavalli alias Bhuvanamulu- 
dudaiyal, queen of Kul. II, 349 
Tyagavarakara, Vikramacola’s title, 

346 

Tyndis, 83 


Uccangi, the Pandyas of, 101 
Uccangidroog (Uccandi), 455 
Uccangidrug (= Musangi?), 204 
Udagai, 171, 267-8 

Udaipur inscription re: Bhoja r " 

Dhara, 208 
Udaiyan, 464 

Udaiyargudi record of Rajakesari, 15/- 
8 

Udankuttam (Council of Officers). 
357, 468, 472-73 

Udaya IV, Celyonese king, 124, 128 
Udayakumara, 86 
(Jdaiyanambi, 726 
Udayanankadai ( Perungadai ) by 
Kongu-velir, 665 , 

Udayendiram, Plates of Prthivipati 
Hastimalla, 8, 110, 114, 120-1, 125- 
6, 655 

Ugra, his rising, 120 
Ugrapperuvaludi, Pandya, 48 
Ujjapuri (Ujjini), 388 



INDEX 


807 


Ukkal, (N. A,), 189 
Ulagalanda-Sola, perhaps a title of 
Rajadhiraja I, 259 

Ulagalanda-Sola Brahma Marayan 
ahas Adhikarigal Parasarayan Va- 
sudeva-Narayanan, 259 
Ulagudai Mukkokkilan, queen of Ra- 
jaraja II, 351, 352' 

Ulaguyyavanda-Ferumal, Parakesari 
Tnbhuvana Cakravartin, 418 
Ulas, the three. 13-4, 116, 171 
Ullalai (inner city), 449 
Ulvari (disguise), 501 
Umai-nangai, mother of Trailokya- 
mahadevi, 333 

Umapati Siva Acarya, 637, 674. 676, 
677, 680, 688 

Uma Prasada, image of,_ 709 
Uma Sahita, aspect of Siva. 646 
Unmdda Vasavadatta of Sakfibhadra. 
687 

Unmai-neri-vilakkam, 680 
Unniai-vilakknm ol Manavasagan- 
gadandar, 680 

Un-Podi-Pasungudaiyar, a poet, 49 
Upanaya, 55 
Upasagga (plague), 121 
Ur, 247, 477, 491, 492; relation to Sabha, 
493; constitution of, 494, 501, 502, 
503, 505, 507, 508, 509. 601 
Oragam, 489 
Uragapura, 102 

Uraiyur, capital of the Colas, 19, 22, 
(= Argaru of the Periplus), (= Or- 
thura regia Sornati of Ptolemy) ib; 
30, 36, siege by Nalangilli, 38-40; 
45, 49, 50, 53; manram of, 70; a 
great centre of cotton trade, 88, So. 
100, 102, 1C4-5, 106, 110, 120, 152 
Uraiyur-nacciyar, 106 
Ur-alvargal, 494 
Urandai (Uraiyur), 394 
Urangai, 382, 386, 390; (Orangallu 
Urangai), 391 

Uratjayan Sorabbaiyar, 160; see Orat- 
tanan. 

Uratti, fight at 420 
Urom, 494 
Urudaiyan. 466 

Uruttirangannanar, author of the P<L- 
tinappalai, 35 
Utkrsta-ayogavas, 549 
Uttama Cola Parakesari. immediate 
predecessor of Rajaraja I, 141; Ma- 
dhurantaka, 142, 146-52; his part 
in the murder of Aditya II, 157; 
installed Arumoli as yuvaraja; his 
son was Madhurantakan Ganda- 
radittan, 158; his acc.; C6la recovery; 
his is the earliest Cola coin, 159; 
his “Madras Museum Plates”; his 
family, 160: he had the title of Vik- 


rama, 161, 187, 466, 467, 489 
Uuama-gandamada, 615 
Uttamasili son of Parantaka I, 134 
Uttama-Solan, a title, 261 
Uttamasola-Caturvedi mangalam 497 
Uttamasola-Pallavan, 675 
Uttara-lada, Mahipala of, 208 
Uttara Lanka, Rajendra Ill’s expedi- 
tion against 434-435 
Uttaramantri (olai eludum), 467 
Uttaramerur. Sabha "of, 135, 159 449 
477, 486, 489, 495-6, 506, 509, 514 ’ 
Uttara Parana of Gunabhadra. 666 
Uttara Radha. 232 
Uttiraladam, 207 
Uvaccar, 507 

Uyyakkondan-Tirumalai, The. temDie 
of, (T.P.), 696 


Vaccanandi (Vajranandi) , of Kalan- 
dai, 685 

Vaccarumdi-malai of Gunavlra, 685 
Vacciya-Marayan, 462 
Vadibhasimha, author of Ksatracu- 
damani, 666 
Vadugar, 20, 21 

Vadugapperuvali (Andhra road), 594 
Vadugu (Telugus) , 382, 386, 390, 455 
Vagbhata, author of Astangahrdaya, 
632 

Vagai-seydal (settlement operations), 
571 

Vaidumbas. 120, 125, 127-9, 142, 153, 
188, 268, 430 

Vaidyanatha, image of, 703 
Vaigal, 53 

Vaijayanti of Yadava Prakasa, 688 
Vaikhanasas (priestly group of Vais- 
navas), 489, 523; (V. sastra), 631 
Vaikunthaperumal temple at Kanci- 
puram, 693, 695 

Vairamegha-tataka of Uttaramerur, 
495, 583 
Vaisnavas, 94 

Vai§navas, Sri, 636; (V. hymnology), 
638-639, 640, 644, 647, 656, 681 
Vaisnavism, 4, 13, 636. 637, 638, 645, 
655; paucity of Tamil works of V. 
681; four V. bronzes, 733-734 
Vajasaneya, provision for, 513, 630 
Vajra, country, 36 

Vakaipparandalai, battle of, Karikala 
defeated a confederacy of nine 
minor chieftains, 33 
Vakkur (Bahur) , 473 
Valadeva, Dandanayaka, 262 
Valagiri, 394 

Vajaippanduru, 211; not possible to 
identify, 216; Rouffaer identifies it 
with Panduranga in Campa. 242n. 
Valaij/apati. a mahakavya. 667 



808 


INDEX 


Valaka-Kamaya, 438 
Valanadu, 465 

Vaiandanar, Kadava chieftain, 403 
Valangai-idangai-mahanmai, 531 
Valangai-mahasenai, 538 
Valangai, (velaikkarar) , 454, 550-552 
Valanjiyar, 448, 595, 598 
Valavan (- Cola), 19, 44-5 
Vaihala of the Tamils, 73 
Vallabha (Calukya), 303 
Vallabha Sri, 249 

Vallabha Vallabha, title of Virara- 
jendra I, 274 
Vallai-andadi, 664 
Vallala, fight at, 125 
Vallaladeva (Hoysala Ballala II), 400 
Vallam, tableland, 18 
Vallan (Calukya), 455 
Vallavan Sri, 223, 248-9 
Vallavarayar-nadu, 226 
Vallavarayar Vandya devar, the hus- 
band of Kundavai, the elder sister 
of Rajaraja I, 186; a feudatory of 
Rajendra I, 226 

Vallaya Dandanayaka. a Pradhani of 
Hoysala Narasimha. 428 
Vallikamam, 369 
Valli, dancing girl, 671 
Valluru, capital of Maha^aiavadi 7000 
in Cuddapah dist.. 260, 390 
Valmikesvara at Tiruvarur (gopura 
Valperra Kaikkolar (swordsmen) . 454 
built' by Kul. Ill), 399 
Valuvur (Tanjore), 296 
Vamana, author of Kasikd, 688 
Vanadhiraja, Kulottunga’s official, 499 
Vanagappadi, 504-5 
Vanakovaraiyars, 534 
Vana-Kovaraiyan, Malaiyaman, 405 
Vanakularayan, a Kiliyur Malaiya- 
man, 405 
Vanan, 347 

Vanan of Tanjai, hero of the Kovai, 
perhaps minister of Maravarman 
Kulasekhara I. 674 
Vanapati, The Dirghasi Inscription 
of, 289 

Vanavan Mahadevi, mother of Raja- 
simha Pandya, 124 

Vanavan-Mahadevi, a princess of the 
line of Malaiyamans, and queen of 
Sundara Cola, 156; mother of Raja- 
raja I, 168 , 

Vanavan-Mahadevi, alias Tribnu- 
vana-Mahadevi, mother of Rajen- 
dra I, 186 

Vanavan-Mahadeviyar (or Tribhu- 
vana). queen of Rajendra I. 228 
Vanavasi, 197 455 
Vancivel, 15 

Vanduvanjeri, old Vandainagar, 333 
Vangala-desa 207. Govinda Candra of. 


208, 209 
Vanidasan, 671 
Vaniyan Tadan, 671 
Vaniyar (oil mongers), 532 
Vanji, 44, 95, 125; garland of V. flc w 
221, 674 

Vanniyapparru, 505 
Vanniya-Revan, perhaps same 
Revarasa, 257 

Varadaraja (12th cen.) author r. 
Tarkika-raksd, 688 

Varadaraja-Perumal, shrine at Tiru- 
vakkarai, 643 

Varadayap-Pulavar of Kuratti, 66- 
Varaguna (Perumanar), queen - 
Bhuti-Vikramakesari, 155 
Varaguna (Varman), lord of Panay. ; 
110; defeat at Sri Purambiyam; t;u 
Muttaraiyars threw in their lot wh 
the Pandyas, 112, 120 
Varaha-avatara, panel, 735 
Varahamurti, image of, 702 
Varanam, 494 
Varatikai, 254 
Varavaigal, 509 
Varendra, 209 
Vari, 468 
Varippadu, 522 

Varippottagak-kanakku, 467, -168, ‘ n 
Varippottagam, 467, 468, 469. 470 
Variyams, 494-496, 497-498, 502 
Variyapperumakkal, 495 
Variyar, 494 

Variyilidu, 467, 468, 470 
Variyur (salt pans at), 593 
Varya, 494 

Vasal- tiraman (door-tax), 532 

Vasanta-Pori-Cola-Mahadev;. queei - 

of Punyakumara, 104 
Vasistha (sage), 732 
Vasudeva, race of, 596 
Vatagiri, 311 
Vatapi, 455 

Vatatlrthanatha, The, temple of A"' 
danallur (T. ply.), 707 
Vatika, 621 
Vatsyayana, 87 
Vattava 347 

Vatteluttu (script), 7, 223 
Vatti (teacher), 628 
Vayirakaram, 293 
Vaykkelvi, 467, 468 
Vedanai (forced labour) 530 
Vedanta, its influence on Indian out- 
look, 446; provision for study 
513 629-32 

Vedanta Desika (Venkatanatha) , 688 
Vedas, (provision for the study ° r 
recitation of), 630-632, 647 
Vedavanamudaiyan of Paiyyur, 664 
Vedic sacrifices rare in Cola times. 
513, 629-32 



INDEX 


809 


Vedura II, Velananti Prince, 320 
Velai, 454 

Velaikkara, a division of troops, their 
revolt, 315; suppression, 316, 454, 
455 

Velams — the female part of the palace 
establishment, 380, 449, 450, 456 
Velanadal, 94 

Velanandu (chiefs), 343, 352, 386 
Velananti, Prince Vedura II, 320; 

(Rajendra), 329 
Veli, 505 , 585 
Velik-kasu, 531 
Velir, 35; chiefs, 125 
Vellai arisi (white rice), 526 
Veiiaikkudi-nakanar, 40 
Veiialars rich, and poor, V. 87-8, 473, 
478, 672, 675 

Vellangumaran, Kerala general of 
Rajaditya, 129, 134 
Vellan-vagai, 531, 571-574 
Veliaru, the northern and the south- 
ern, 18, 234 

Velli-yambalam, Peruvaludi, who died 
at 49 

Vellur, battle of, 122, 123 
Veikulattarasar (Calukya king), 307 
Velpulattarasu, (Calukya king), 307 
Velurpalaiyam Plates of Nandi Var- 
man III, 104 

Vembarrur, Ghatika of, 633 
Venad (South Travancore), 314, 347, 
379,' 384 

Venbappattiyal of Gunavlra, 684 
Vendradivarman, other name for 
Parthivendra Varman, 141 
Vendu-kol, 531 

Vengai-mandalam, 320, 382, 386 
Vengi, 100, 152, 172, 174; Vengi-man- 
dala, Rajaraja I’s intercession in, 
177; causes of war with Vengi 
under Rajaraja I, 179; 180-1; Raja- 
raja’s claim of the conquest of; not 
an integral part of the Cola empire, 
but perhaps a protectorate, 182, 
187; Vengi affairs under Rajen- 
dra I, 205; in close alliance with 
Colas, 207; 224-25, 228, 256, 260; 
Vengai-nadu, 263, 264-65, 269-70, 
287-92, 294, 297; ruled by Kulot- 
tunga’s sons as Viceroys, 301; its 
loss and recovery ib.; restored to 
Vijayaditya, 303, 304, 305, 308; Ya- 
sahkarna’s invasion in, 309; Vice- 
roys of, 319-20, 321; Vikramaditya's 
activity in, 328-30. 342-43. 352, 359, 
366, 382, 386, 390 

Vengi-mandalesvara, title of Visnu- 
vardhana- Vijayaditya, 287 
Vengipura-Varesvara, title of Somes- 
vara’s feudatory, 225, 256 
Venhudasa, monastery, 102 
C. 102 


Venkata-Madhava, author of Rg Veda 
bhdsya. 687 

Vennai, the place of Meykandar, 679 
Venni, battle of, 32 
Vennikkuyattiyar, a poetess, 33 
Ver - pahradakkaip - peru - vjrar 
(nar)k - killi, 50 
Vessagiri Slab Inscription, 155 
Vetti, 529; (V. Kasu), 574 
Vetti-muttai-yal (free labour on spe- 
cified occasions), 532 
Vettipperu, 507 
Vettippudavai, 532 
Vettuvar, 94 
Viccaya, 254 

Vicitra-citta (Mahendra Varman) . 641 
Vidaiyil adigari, 468 
Videl-vidugu-kal, 620 
Vidividangan (measure), 623 
Vidukidalagiya Perumaj Adigaiman, 
son of Rajaraja-adigan. 393, 406 
Vidvan (learned), 499 
Vidyadhra-torana, 211 
Viharas. Bauddha, 452 
Vijaya, Arjuna, 160 
Vijayabahu I. coronation at Anura- 
dhapura, 173; acc. of V. in 1058, 254, 
271; ruler of Ceylon. 309; Kitti 
assumes the name V., 310; ruler of 
‘all Ceylon’ ib. 311, 314, 315-16 
Vijayabhiseka, 377, 385. 391 
Vijayaditya II Prabhameru, Bana 
king, 126 

Vijayaditya III, Pugalvippavar-ganda, 
Bana king, 126 

Vijayaditya VII, Eastern Calukya 
Vengi king, restoration to Vengi, 
269, 270, 282n, 285-6, in Western 
Calukya inserr. I, 224, 258, 287; 
relation between him and Kulot- 
tunga, 289-90, 291 and 297, 303-4, 
309, 319 

Vijayalaya, 2, 4, his legendary ances- 
tors found in the Udayendiram 
Plates, 8; 12, 100; rise of 110-13; 
conquest of Tanjore, 110; his poli- 
tical position. 111; his success meant 
the weakening of the Muttaraiyar, 
112, 445, 448, 449 

Vijayalaya Colesvara temple of Nar- 
ttamalai, 698, 699-700, 704, 719, 

734; Paintings of 742. 

Vijayalaya line, 2, 4-5, 30. 100, 101; 
the kings were ardent Saivitgs, 116, 
168, 225, 687 

Vijayalayan, a title, 261 
Vijayamamudi (great Crown of vic- 
tory), 382. 

Vijayamangalam, shrine built of 
stone by Ambalavan Paluvumak- 
kan, 160. 



810 


INDEX 


Vijayanagara rulers, 645, 687, 716. 

Vijaya - Nandi - Vikrama - Varman, 
Pallava, 637. 

Vijayarajapura, new name of Polon- 
naruwa, 311. 

Vijayarajendra (deva), 247, title 
assumed by Rajadhiraja I, after 
sacking Kalyanapura, 255; 259, 562 

Vijayarajendra Parakesari, two doubt- 
ful inscriptions of V., 247-8. 

Vijigisu, 331. 

Vijnanesvara, Jurist, 549 

Vijnapti, 104 

Vikkalan, 262-3, 307; 381. 

Vikkamabahu I (Ceylon), made 
Rohana independent of the Tamils 
and ruled over it, 200; 223, Raja- 
dhiraja 1 took the crown of V. 248; 
Rohana asserted its independence, 
250; 252. 

Vikkama Pandu, (1044-47), the only 
son of Mahalana Kitti, 250-52. 

Vikki, afterwards Vikramaditya VI, 
224. 

Vikkiyanna, son of Prithivipati, 
figuring in a Ganga inscription, 
115, 128. ’ 

Vikrama, a title of Uttama Cola, 160 

Vikrama Cola, title of Kul. I, 330. 

Vikrama Cola, a surname of Rajen- 
dra I, 206 


Vl iSa ma C '°* a ’ Para kesari, Ula on 14- 
26 $ 320, 321, 328-30, fourth son 

St S S/o eS , S °" ° f KuL 1 33 2. 333, 
reign 342-7; Prasastis, 342; Litera- 
ti 6 under ib.; recovery of Vengi, 
443; of Gangavadi ib.; flood and 
scarcity, 344; gifts at Cidambaram, 
344-5; royal tours, 346, titles and 
queens ib.; feudatories, 347, 349 
354, 357, 365, 366, 375, 403 435 ’ 

Vikrama-Colapperaru, 528 
Vikramaditya II, Bana king, 126-7 
Vikramaditya Satyaditya, Colamaha- 
rajadhiraja, Sri, 104 
Vikramaditya III, Vijayabahu. Bana 
king, friend of Krsna III, 126 
Vikramaditya V, acc. 1008 A.D.. W Ca- 
lukya king, 197, 204 
Vikramaditya VI, 198, 224, 255, 264 
266-70, 272-3, his intervention in 


Cola affairs; proclaimed the ruler 
of the Dekkan, 294, 295-297; his 
digvijaya described by Bilhana 
303; fight with Kul. in the nortlr 
war with Kul. I, 305-10, 326; his 
peace with Virarajendra, 304; his 
activities in Vengi, 328-30, 561 


Vikramakesari, Bhuti, of Kodum- 
balur, 155-6; builder of Muvarkovil 


at Kodumbalur, 648 


Vikramankadeva Carita. 369, 272 . 2-7 

291, 292, 294, 295, 296 

Vikrama Pandya, seeking Cola help, 
379, 383, (probably his son was Ja ' 
varman Kulasekhara) , 385 
Vikrama-Pandyan, 248, 250, 251-2 
Vikrama Sola Maladudaiyar, a Co. 
feudatory, in the hilly tract of Sout'i 
Arcot in the days of Uttama Co 1 1, 
161 

Vikramasola-marayar, title bestows J 
by Uttama Cola on Ambalavan Pu- 
luvur-nakkan, 160 

Vikrama-sola-puram, 332; palace at 
353, 398 

Vikramasolan-tengu-tiru-vidi, one ti 
the main streets of Cidambaram 
345 

Vikramasolan-tirumaligai, first p" e- 
kara of Cidambaram temple, 345 
Vikramasolan-ula, 14, 31, 51, 261. 23C. 

292, 297, 308, 313, 333-4, 342, 346-7 
Vilinam, 170, 171, 313, 455 
Vilinda, 169 

Villavan Cera, 221 

Villavan Mahadeviyar, Udaiyar-devd- 
yar, queen of Parthivendra Var- 
man, 149 

Villigal (bowmen), 454, 456 
Vimaladitya (E. Calukya), acc., 181; 
marriage with Kundava, daughter 
of Rajaraja I, 182, 187, 285-86 
Vimaladitya, the king of Kuluta, 231 
Viman, Telinga of Kulam, 320 
Viman Kundavaiyar, queen of Arin- 
jaya, 15 2 
Vinai, 78 
Vina-Venba, 680 
Vinayaditya (Hoysala), 326 
VinayaViniccaya by Buddhadatta, 101 
Vinayaka, the spiritual guru ol 
Perumbarrappuliyur Nambi, 677 
Vindanur, 511 
Vinnandayan, 92 
VTrabahu, Uparaja, 315 
Virabhiseka of Rajadhiraja I, 255: 
377, 385, 386, 394 

Vira Campa (son of Vira Coda), 438 
Vira Coda, king of the Udayendiram 
Plates, 438 

Vlra-Coda, title of Parantaka I, 687 
Vira Coda, son of Kul. I, Viceroy of 
Vengi, 319, 320 

Vira-Cola, Karikala ( = Virarajen- 
dra); (and in Calukyan inscrip- 
tions Vira); 246, 262 
Vira-Cola, title of Virarajendra, 274 
Viradhara, Rajaraja II’s title, 353 
Vira-Ganga (Visnu-Vardhana), 327 
Vira Kerala, 380, 381, 384 
Vira-Keralan, 221 
Viraliyar, 75, 76 



INDEX 


811 


Vlramadevi, queen of Govindavalla 
varaiyar, daughter of Parantaka I, 
134 

Vira-madevi, the queen of Rajen- 
dra I, who apparently performed 
sati at the king's death, 228 
Virame tunai (followed by Pugal 
madu vilanga), Kul. I’s Prasasti, 
302 

Vira Narasimha, Hoysala, 296, 417, 420 
Viranarasingadeva Yadavaraya, 420 
Viranarayana - Caturvedimangalam, 
(Kattumannarkoyil) , 346 
Viranarayana-Catur, Sri, Sabha of, 
157 

Viranarayana Krsna, 639 
Viranarayanapuram, 639 
Viranukka-Vijayarn, a poem in praise 
of Vira-Sola-Anukkar, 664 
Vira Pandya, ‘whose head was taken’ 
by Aditya II, 143-4, Parakesari who 
took the head of 147, 149, 153, 154-5 
Vira Pandya, son of Parakrama Pan- 
dya of the civil war, 367; set up on 
the throne of Madura by the Colas, 
371, 378, 379, 380, 381, 383, 384 
Vira Pandya (13th cent.), Semapillai, 
a feduatory of, 437-38 
(Vira) Pandyan-talai-Konda Parake- 
sari, 140-147 

Virapperumal, Sinhalese prince (mar- 
ried Suttamalliyar, daughter of 
Kul. I), 316 

Virarajendra, title of Rajendra I, 227 
Virarajendra, Rajakesari 1063-9; Ka- 
nyakumari inscription, 8; Buddha- 
mitra lived in his days, 13, 31, 116, 
141. his claim of Kadaram conquest, 
220, 227-8, 245; victor of Kudal- 
Sangamam, 246, 253, at Kudal- 
Sangamam, 262-65; his reign 266- 
75; his early wars, 267; his biruda— 
“who saw the back of Ahavamalla 
three times” ib.; Kudal-Sangamam 
again and the absence of Somesvara 
I. 268, Vengi affairs 269; battle of 
Bezwada, 270; Ceylon war, 271; 
Kadaram expedition, 271-2; war 
with Somesvara II, 272; alliance 
with Vikramaditya VI. 273; his titles, 
death, 274; Buddhism in his reign, 
275; 285, 290, 291-2, made Kulot- 
tunga crown-prince. 293-4; 295-6; 
his Prasastis coupled with that of 
Kul I: 302; his challenge to the 
Vallabha (Somesvara I), his war 
with Vikramaditya, 303; death of 
304, 306. 310, 468, 472; Tirumuk- 
kudal ins., 632 

Virarajendradeva (title of Kul III), 


Virarajendravarman, title of 
Rajadhiraja I, 259 

Vira Ramanatha, Hoysala, 436, 437, 

687 

VIrasaiva Vira Pratapa Cola Raja, 438 
Virasalameghan, 249, 251, called king 
of the Kalingas, 252; 260 
Vira-sasana, 596 

Virasekharakadava, also called Arasa- 
narayanan Alappirandan, 404 
Vira Sola, the street ot, at fanjore, 
449 

Virasola (Dangovelar), 553 
Virasola Anukkar, 664 
Vira-sola-mandalam (Kongu), 391 
Virasolar, Udaiyar, Rajaraja I’s 
feudatory, 188 

Virasoliyam, 13, contains a poetic eu- 
logium of Sundara Cola’s reign, 157; 
a Tamil grammar on ultra-sanskri- 
tic lines, 275, 525, 668, 683 
Vira Somesvara, Hoysala, 424, 425, 428, 
429, 432, 433, 434, 436, 437 
Virata-desa, country round Hangal, 
226 

Virodaya, title of Rajaraja II, 353 
Virudaraja or Vikramaditya, 303 
Virudarajabhayankara (title of Kul 
I), 303, 330 

Virundangal (wives,), 358 
Visalur, temples of, 701 
Visayams, 489 

Visnu, 525; (temple at Tirumuk- 
kudal) , 632, 663; image of 702, 733 
Visnu Citta, Commentary on Vmu- 
purana, 687 

Visnuism, 635, see Vaisnavism 
Visnukundins, 103 
Visnupurdna, 94 
Visnuvardhana-deva, Pillaiyar 

(= Rajaraja I, Eastern Calukya 
King), 260 

Visnuvardhana Maharaja (Kul I), 323, 
330 

Visnu-vardhana Bittiga, 326; (Vira 
Ganga), 327, 396, 405 
Visnu-vardhana-Vijayaditya, Western 
Calukya, 224, 258, 287 
Vivekatilaka of Udali, 687 
Vizagapatam plates of Anantavarman 
Codaganga, 289 
Vrtti, 570 

Vyaghralanchana, 20 
Vyaghra-Padesvara temple at Siddha- 
lingamadam, 131 

Vyakarana, Provision for study of, 
513, 629-32 

Vyakarana-dana- (Vyakhyana) 
mandapa at Tiruvorriyur, 632 
Vyaval mrnnirnaya , a treatise on law, 



812 


INDEX 


Vyavasthas of local associations. 461 
496, 497, 500, 501, 502 


Wairagarh, Kulottunga I’s campaigns 
in, 294 

Walawe Ganga, 311 

Wassaf, 607 

Western Calukyas, 10, 100, 104, revival 
under Taila II, 175; 176, 177-8, 198, 
war with the Colas in the days of 
Rajendra I, 224-5; 245, 267 


Yadava king, of Devagiri, his help to 
Viler amaditya VI, in his war against 
the Cola, 306 

Yadava Bhima alias Uttama Cola 
Miladudaiyar, a feudatory of 
Rajendra I, 226 
Yadavaprakasa, 681 
Yadavarayas, The, 348; 430 


Yajnavalkyasmrti , 549 
Yakkhas, 200 
Yal, 78 
Yalis, 734 
Yamunacarya, 681 
Yanamadala, 182 

Yapparungalak-Karigai of Amita- 
sagara, 13, 102, 682; 685 
Y apparu nga lain . of Amitasagara, 13, 
682 

Yasahkarnadeva, Haihaya ruler, in 
Vengi, 309 

Yatiraja-Vaibhavam, 295 
Yavanas, 82, Y. Carpenters, 88 
Yelusevira country in N. Coorg, 227 
Yuan-chwang, his visit to the 
Kingdom of Cu-li-ya ( = Colas), 
102; 104 


Zayton, 608; 722 






PLATE n 









Kodumbalur, 



























PLATE XI 



Fig. 20. (C) Cow worshipping a 


i-linga. 






PLATE XII 



Fig. 21. Koranganatha temple — 
A panel of male figure in the niche 
on the south. Srlnivasanallur, 
Tiruchirapalli Dist. 

















Koranganatha temple — A Fig. 50. Sculpture of Gajahamur 

Daksinamurii in the niche Vallivara temple, Tiruvalisvarair 

south, Srinivasanallur. Tirunelveli Dist. 

'iruchiranalli Dist. 




sculpture of G 


T 





PLATE XXI 







Fig. 56. Brhadisvara temple — A Fig. 57. Candesanugrahamurti on 
panel of Harihara in the niche on the the north side of sanctum of Siva 
south side of Vimana, Gangaikonda- temple, Gangaikonda-colapuram, 

colapuram. Tiruchirapalli Bist Tiruchirapalh Dist. 










I 





% 



PLATE XXVIII 



Fig. 70. Sukhasanamurti (late), 
Pudukkottah museum. 



Fig. 71. Bronze statue of Kirata- 
murti — Tiruvetkalam near Cidarr 
baram. 



tarjunamurti, Radhanarasimha- 
puram, Tanjore Dist. 



Fig. 73. Metallic image of Alingana- 
murti at Tiruvaduturai. Tanjore 
Dist. 











>ck by Laksml ar 
(Shiyali Taluk), 







Fig. 84. Dvarapalaka, Vijayalaya- Fig. 87. Detail of sculptured elephant e 

colesvara, Narttamalai. lion fighting in the open court, Airavatesvi 

temple, Darasuram, Tanjore Dist. 



Fig. 86. Narttamalai — platform before Fig. 85. Female door-kee] 

Samanakudagu. Kampaharesvara temple 

Tnbhuvanam, Tanjore Dis 






Fig. 89. Tribhuvanam — 
Ornamental niche, north base- 
ment of Vimana. 


Fig. 90. Tribhuvanam — 
Ornamental niche, south wall 
mahamandapa basement. 




¥ «*fc~*5* 





PLATE XXXVII — COINS 









* 

Central Archaeological Library, | 

NEW DELHI. I 

Call No ft2>*i'0 ft I 

Author— | 
Title— 

- - «-■ - - t 

V 

j 

i 



